The purpose of this thesis is to give a formal definition of quantum
Kolmogorov complexity and rigorous mathematical proofs of its basic
properties.

Classical Kolmogorov complexity is a well-known and useful measure of
randomness for binary strings. In recent years, several different
quantum generalizations of Kolmogorov complexity have been proposed. The
most natural generalization is due to Berthiaume et al. [ 5 ] , defining
the complexity of a quantum bit (qubit) string as the length of the
shortest quantum input for a universal quantum computer that outputs the
desired string. Except for slight modifications, it is this definition
of quantum Kolmogorov complexity that we study in this thesis.

We start by analyzing certain aspects of the underlying quantum Turing
machine (QTM) model in a more detailed formal rigour than was done
previously. Afterwards, we apply these results to quantum Kolmogorov
complexity.

Our first result, based on work by Bernstein and Vazirani [ 4 ] , is a
proof of the existence of a universal QTM which simulates every other
QTM for an arbitrary number of time steps and than halts with
probability one. In addition, we show that every input that makes a QTM
almost halt can be modified to make the universal QTM halt entirely, by
adding at most a constant number of qubits.

It follows that quantum Kolmogorov complexity has the invariance
property, i.e. it depends on the choice of the universal QTM only up to
an additive constant. Moreover, the quantum complexity of classical
strings agrees with classical complexity, again up to an additive
constant. The proofs are based on several analytic estimates.

Furthermore, we prove several incompressibility theorems for quantum
Kolmogorov complexity. Finally, we show that for ergodic quantum
information sources, complexity rate and entropy rate coincide with
probability one.

The thesis is finished with an outlook on a possible application of
quantum Kolmogorov complexity in statistical mechanics.
