# Part I String Compactifications and Effective 4D Actions

### Chapter 2 String Compactifications and Moduli Stabilization

#### 2.1 String Compactifications

At present, String/M-theory is formulated in six weakly coupled limits.
There are five superstring theories in ten dimensional spacetime, called
Type IIA, Type IIB, Heterotic @xmath , Heterotic @xmath and Type I, and
an eleven dimensional limit, usually called M-theory. These all are
unsatisfactory from a phenomenological point of view for (at least) one
main reason: the number of spacetime dimensions is greater than four.

The standard way of solving this problem is what is called
Compactification : one assigns the extra-dimensions to an invisible
sector, by choosing them to be small and compact and not detectable in
present experiments. To preserve four dimensional Poincaré invariance,
the ten(eleven) dimensional metric is assumed to be a (possibly warped)
product of a four dimensional spacetime with a six(seven) dimensional
space @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the usual four dimensional Minkowski metric, while @xmath is
the metric on the compact internal subspace. @xmath is the so called
“warp factor”, i.e. a @xmath -dependent function in front of the four
dimensional metric. In what follows, we will consider the case in which
it is equal to @xmath .

Thus far we have only required @xmath to be compact and of sufficiently
small size. Another important constraint on @xmath comes from requiring
to have an @xmath supersymmetric effective theory at low energy. There
are many reasons to focus on this kind of compactifications.

The best reason is that supersymmetry suggests natural extensions of the
Standard Model (SM) such as the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model
(MSSM) and non Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (nMSSM) with
additional fields. These models can solve the hierarchy problem, can
explain the gauge coupling unification, can contain a dark matter
candidate and have many other attractive features. All this is only
suggestive, because these models have other problems, such as
reproducing precision electroweak measurements. However these reasons
have been enough to concentrate on @xmath models in string
compactifications for twenty years. Another reason is the calculational
power that supersymmetry provides, since String Theory on supersymmetric
backgrounds is under a much better control than on non-supersymmetric
ones.

The requirement of @xmath supersymmetry at compactification scale
constraints the compactification manifold @xmath . We consider the
Heterotic case as an illustrative example. At low energy it is described
by a ten dimensional @xmath supergravity with a Yang-Mills sector. We
want a background that leaves some supersymmetry unbroken. The condition
for this is that the variations of the Fermi fields are zero. In
particular the variation of the gravitino is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The spinor @xmath is the ten dimensional supersymmetry parameter; it is
in the @xmath spinorial representation of @xmath . Under the
decomposition @xmath , the @xmath decomposes as @xmath . So one can
write @xmath , where @xmath are arbitrary four dimensional spinors,
while @xmath are the solutions of @xmath . The number of solutions
@xmath gives the number of four dimensional supersymmetries.

The condition that these variations vanish for some spinor @xmath can be
solved to obtain conditions on the background fields. What we want to
stress here is that the variation ( 2.3 ), in the case of null @xmath
field, implies that there exists a six dimensional spinor satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. @xmath is a covariantly constant spinor on the internal space. This
condition implies that the holonomy group @xmath must be reduced to a
subgroup, as the @xmath spinorial representation of @xmath must contain
the singlet representation of the reduced holonomy group. Since under
@xmath we have the splitting @xmath , in order to have @xmath in four
dimension the holonomy group must be @xmath . This implies the
compactification manifold @xmath to be a Calabi-Yau (CY).

The reduction of the holonomy group is the requirement that leaves some
supersymmetry unbroken also for the compactifications of the other
corners of string/M-theory. The first studied were Heterotic
compactifications, because the Type II theories seemed to lead to @xmath
supersymmetry in four dimensions, while M-theory compactifications on
smooth seven dimensional manifolds cannot lead to non-Abelian gauge
fields and chiral fermions. As we will see, these problems have been
recently solved. The @xmath Heterotic compactifications were the first
studied as they provide a natural GUT setup, contrary to @xmath
Heterotic and Type I theories.

The lower dimensional theory is obtained by expanding all fields into
modes of the internal manifold @xmath . As an illustrative example, we
discuss the Kaluza-Klein(KK) reduction [ 3 , 4 ] of a ten dimensional
scalar satisfying the ten dimensional equation of motion @xmath .
Because of ( 2.1 ), the Laplacian splits as @xmath . Since @xmath is
compact, @xmath has a discrete spectrum: @xmath . The ten dimensional
scalar can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Putting this into the equation of motion gives the four dimensional
equations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

One ends up with an infinite tower of massive states, with masses
quantized in terms of the eigenvalues of the Laplacian on @xmath . The
Laplacian @xmath depends on the metric of @xmath , so the low energy
spectrum depends strongly on the geometry of the internal manifold.
Roughly speaking the scale of the masses is given by @xmath Vol @xmath .
So the KK scale is strictly related to the compactification scale ¹ ¹ 1
However, if there are some dimensions that are much larger than others,
there could be a hierarchy between the KK masses.A simple example is
given by compactification on factorisable 6-torus with one radius, say
@xmath much larger that the other two, say @xmath ; in this case there
are modes that lead to four dimensional fields with a mass @xmath much
smaller that the fields with mass @xmath . . Choosing the volume
sufficiently small, the massive states become heavy and can be
integrated out. So the effective four dimensional theory describes the
dynamics of the fields @xmath related to the zero modes @xmath of the
six dimensional Laplacian.

What we have described for a scalar field happens also to the other
fields of the ten dimensional theory (for a review see [ 45 ] ). The
surviving modes in the low energy effective theory are zero modes of
some suitable six dimensional differential operator. Among these fields
there is the metric, too. In particular, the massless fluctuations
@xmath of the internal components @xmath correspond to scalars in four
dimensions. These massless scalars fields are called geometric moduli of
the compactification.

##### CY Compactifications

We consider the case in which the ten dimensional spacetime is of the
form @xmath . Due to this ansatz the Lorentz group of the ten
dimensional space decomposes as @xmath , where @xmath is the structure
group of a six manifold. Demanding @xmath to preserve the minimal amount
of supersymmetry gives the condition that the structure group of @xmath
can be reduced to @xmath . So @xmath admits a globally defined spinor
@xmath , since the @xmath spinor representation @xmath decomposes as
@xmath . Further demanding @xmath to be covariantly constant tells that
@xmath must have also holonomy group (with respect to the Levi-Civita
connection) equal to @xmath . These spaces are called Calabi-Yau
manifolds and are complex Kähler manifolds, which are in addition Ricci
flat (see for example [ 46 ] .

The existence of one covariantly constant spinor on a six dimensional
manifold is equivalent to the existence of one covariantly constant
2-form @xmath , the Kähler form, and one covariantly constant 3-form
@xmath , the holomorphic 3-form. @xmath defines a complex structure
@xmath on the six manifold; @xmath and @xmath defines a CY metric
through @xmath . In particular @xmath holonomy implies these forms to be
harmonic.

The moduli parametrize continuous families of nearby vacua. Since a
background consisting of a CY metric and zero field strengths for R-R
and NS-NS fields is a solution of the equations of motion, the moduli
parametrize the space of topologically equivalent CY manifolds. In other
words, if @xmath is a CY metric, one has to find deformations @xmath of
this metric, such that the metric @xmath is a CY metric too, with the
same topology. By working out the linearized equations of motion, one
finds that each modulus becomes a massless field.

A CY is a Ricci flat Kähler manifold. Therefore @xmath must be Ricci
flat too ( @xmath ). This implies that @xmath satisfy the Lichnerowicz
equation [ 47 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For Kähler manifolds the solutions to this equations are associated with
either mixed ( @xmath ) or pure ( @xmath ) deformations and are
independent. These are in one-to-one correspondence with harmonic (1,1)
and (2,1) forms respectively ² ² 2 A ( @xmath , @xmath )-form on a
complex manifold is a ( @xmath )-form with @xmath holomorphic indices
and @xmath antiholomprphic ones. :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and likewise for @xmath and (1,2) forms. As the structure of harmonic
differential forms is isomorphic to that of tangent bundle cohomology
classes, the number of geometric moduli in compactifications on @xmath
is determined by the cohomology of @xmath .

This is a general feature of string compactifications: the light
particle spectrum is determined by topological considerations and the
number of particles of given type is equivalent to the dimension of
appropriate cohomologies.

Let us introduce a basis for different cohomology groups by choosing the
unique harmonic representative in each cohomology class. We denote the
basis of harmonic 2-forms as @xmath and their dual harmonic 4-forms as
@xmath , which form a basis of @xmath . The harmonic 3-forms @xmath give
a real, symplectic basis of @xmath . The non-trivial intersection
numbers are given by:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

The Hodge decomposition of the second and third cohomology group are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For a CY, @xmath ( @xmath ), so the basis @xmath is also a basis of
@xmath . The same happens for @xmath . As regard @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ; @xmath has @xmath basis elements that we call @xmath . The
dimension of @xmath is @xmath , so the index @xmath runs from @xmath to
@xmath , while the hatted index @xmath runs from @xmath to @xmath .

The other non-trivial cohomology groups of a CY are @xmath with @xmath
(constant function) and @xmath with @xmath (volume form).

The moduli associated with (1,1) harmonic forms are called Kähler moduli
, while those associated with harmonic (2,1) forms are called Complex
Structure moduli . This is because the former modify the Kähler form of
the manifold whereas the latter alter the complex structure. This can be
seen easily for the fist case, since under the transformation @xmath ,
the Kähler form transforms as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The deformations of the Kähler form can be expanded in the basis @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a KK compactification the @xmath are four dimensional scalars, whose
expectation values give the Kähler form of the compact manifold. These
real deformations are complexified by the @xmath real scalars @xmath
arising in the expansion of the @xmath -field present in all closed
string theories. Its massless fluctuations are the harmonic 2-forms, so
the KK expansion is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The complex fields @xmath parametrize the @xmath -dimensional Kähler
cone. By the way, the moduli coming from antisymmetric form fields
characteristic to string theory are called axions.

The second set of deformations are variations of the complex structure.
To understand this, we first note that @xmath is a Kähler metric. So its
pure components can be put to zero by a change of coordinates. This
cannot be a holomorphic change of coordinate, because this does not
alter the pure components of the metric. Hence the complex structure
under which the pure components are zero is different from the complex
structure associated with the original metric @xmath . These
deformations are parametrized by complex scalar fields @xmath , where we
expand the pure deformations on the forms @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Together, the complex scalars @xmath and @xmath span the geometric
Moduli Space of the CY manifold. Its geometry has been nicely described
in [ 47 ] . Locally it is a product of two spaces @xmath ; the first
factor is associated with the complex structure deformations while the
second with the complexified Kähler moduli. Both spaces are special
Kähler manifolds of complex dimension @xmath and @xmath respectively.

The metric on the space @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is related to the variation of the 3-form @xmath via
Kodaira’s formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this expression, one can show that @xmath is a Kähler metric, since
we can locally find complex coordinates @xmath and a function @xmath
such that:

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

where the holomorphic periods are defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

or equivalently:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Kähler manifold @xmath is also special Kähler, since @xmath is the
first derivative with respect to @xmath of a prepotential @xmath . Hence
the metric @xmath is fully determined in terms of the holomorphic
function @xmath .

@xmath is only defined up to a rescaling by a holomorphic function
@xmath , which changes the Kähler potential by a Kähler transformation:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

This symmetry makes one of the period (conventionally @xmath )
unphysical, as one can always choose to fix a Kähler gauge and set
@xmath . The complex structure deformations can thus be identified with
the remaining @xmath periods, by defining the special coordinates @xmath
.

The metric on @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the six dimensional Hodge- @xmath on @xmath and @xmath
is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the volume of @xmath , and the intersection numbers are:

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

Also the manifold @xmath is special Kähler, since @xmath can be derived
from a single holomorphic function @xmath .

As we have said, all these moduli represent massless uncharged scalar
particles. The existence of such massless scalars is inconsistent with
experiments. Moduli couple gravitationally to ordinary matter and so can
generate forces due to particle exchange. For a modulus of mass @xmath ,
the characteristic range of such force is @xmath . As fifth force
experiments have probed gravity to submillimetre distances, this
requires that @xmath [ 48 ] . Consequently the experiments require the
existence of a potential giving mass to the moduli. In conclusion, given
that massless moduli are a generic feature of string theory
compactifications but are experimentally disallowed, we need techniques
that will create a potential for these moduli, giving them mass. Fluxes
are a powerfull example of this. In the next section we will describe
their contribution.

#### 2.2 Flux Compactifications

Each of the weakly coupled limits of string/M-theory has p-form gauge
potentials in its spectrum, that are sourced by the elementary branes.
For example, all closed sting theories contain the NS 2-form potential
@xmath . Just as the 1-form Maxwell’s potential can minimally couple to
a point particle, the 2-form @xmath field minimally couples to the
fundamental string world sheet. At least in a quadratic approximation,
the spacetime action for @xmath is a direct generalization of the
Maxwell’s action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the field strength of @xmath . The resulting equations
of motion are @xmath , where @xmath is a source term localized on the
worldsheets of the fundamental strings.

The analogy with Maxwell’s theory goes further [ 6 ] . For example, some
microscopic definition of Maxwell’s theory contain magnetic monopoles,
particles surrounded by a 2-sphere on which the total magnetic flux is
non-vanishing. The monopole charge must satisfy the Dirac quantization
condition ( @xmath ). In the same way, closed string theories contain
5-branes (the so called NS5-branes), which are magnetically charged
under @xmath . A 5-brane, in a ten dimensional space, can be surrounded
by a 3-sphere, on which the magnetic flux @xmath is non-vanishing. As in
Maxwell’s theory, this magnetic flux must be quantized in units of the
inverse of the electric charge.

Beside the NSNS 2-form, the Type II theories contain @xmath -form fields
@xmath coming from the RR sector and sourced by the Dirichlet @xmath
-branes, with @xmath for Type IIA theory and @xmath for Type IIB theory.

The Type I theory has a RR @xmath , but not a NSNS @xmath -field, while
M-theory has a 3-form @xmath coupled electrically to the M2-branes and
magnetically to the M5-branes.

Now, suppose we compactify on a manifold @xmath with non-trivial
homology group @xmath , and take a non-trivial @xmath -cycle @xmath . In
this case, we can consider a configuration with a non-zero flux of the
field strength, defined by the condition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

To understand what is happening, we will follow [ 6 ] and review what
happens taking six dimensional Maxell’s theory and compactifying it on
@xmath . In this case @xmath , and we can take as an element of it the
sphere @xmath itself. There is a field configuration that solves the
equations of motion and that integrated over @xmath gives a non-zero
result: it is the ordinary magnetic monopole in @xmath restricted to
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that we have defined a flux which threads a non-trivial cycle in
the extradimensions, with no charged source on the @xmath . The monopole
is just a pictorial device with which to construct it. The formal
analogy with the monopole also allows to keep the Dirac’s argument, to
see that quantum mechanical consistency requires the flux @xmath to be
integrally quantized.

The same construction applies to any @xmath . Moreover, if we have a
large cohomology group, we can turn on a flux for any basis element
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

As in Maxwell’s theory, turning on a field strength results in a
potential energy proportional to the square of the flux. In
compactifications we can turn on fluxes living in extradimension,
without breaking four dimensional Lorentz invariance.

The key point is that since the fluxes are threading cycles on the
compact geometry, the potential energy depends on the precise choice of
the metric on @xmath , generating a potential for the geometric moduli.
If the potential is sufficiently generic, then minimizing it fixes all
the moduli.

A generic @xmath -field strength generates a potential of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

the metric dependence is in the Hodge- @xmath . If we write the CY
metric in terms of @xmath and @xmath , substitute their expansions in
terms of the moduli and do the integral, we obtain the explicit
expression for @xmath that we can minimize.

Let us take Freund-Rubin compactification [ 49 ] as an example of how
fluxes generate a potential for the geometric moduli [ 6 ] . We consider
a six dimensional Einstein-Maxwell theory and compactify it on a
2-sphere @xmath . If one includes a magnetic field on @xmath , this flux
can stabilize the radius of the sphere.

The six dimensional action is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This action is reduced to four dimension, by using a metric:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the metric on a sphere of unit radius, and @xmath is the
radius of @xmath . On @xmath there are @xmath units of @xmath flux:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the four dimensional description, @xmath should be viewed as a field.
After the reduction one has to go to the four dimensional Einstein frame
(in which the four dimensional Einstein term is canonically normalized),
by a Weyl rescaling. The resulting potential for the scalar @xmath has
two sources. One comes from the Einstein term: the positive curvature of
@xmath makes a negative contribution to the potential, which, after
rescaling, is proportional to @xmath . The other source is the magnetic
flux through the @xmath , which gives a positive contribution
proportional to @xmath . Therefore, the potential takes the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

By minimizing this function, one finds a minimum at @xmath . So with a
moderately large flux, one can get radii which are large in fundamental
units, and curvatures which are small, making the found vacua reliable.

##### Calabi-Yau with Fluxes.

The fact that fluxes allow the possibility of fixing (part of) the
geometric moduli, made flux compactifications very attractive and much
studied in the last years [ 5 ] . Fluxes cannot be turned on at will in
compact spaces, as they give a positive contribution to the energy
momentum tensor [ 22 , 50 ] . The first consequence is that one has to
add negative tension sources (such as orientifold plains). The second
one is that fluxes backreact on the geometry, and the CY manifold is no
longer a solution of the equations of motion. However, in many cases it
suffices to work in an approximation where the backreaction is ignored.
One continues to treat the internal manifold as it were a CY, even after
giving expectation values to the antisymmetric tensors along the
internal directions. This situation is usually described as Calabi-Yau
with fluxes even if it does not correspond to a true supergravity
solution.

This approach is motivated partly by the fact that the physics community
has grown particularly confidence of CY manifolds, on which one can use
tools from algebraic geometry. This approximation is valid when the
typical energy scale of the fluxes is much lower than the KK scale: in
this case we can assume that the spectrum is the same as that without
fluxes, except that some of the massless modes acquire mass due to the
fluxes. The energy scale of, for example, 3-form fluxes can be estimated
using the quantization condition and is given by @xmath ; the KK scale
is @xmath . @xmath when the size of the compact manifold is much bigger
than @xmath (where @xmath is the string length), which is in any case
needed from the start in order to neglect @xmath -corrections to the
action.

#### 2.3 Four Dimensional Effective Theory

After compactification, one gets a four dimensional effective theory [ 7
] . It describes the physics that we can observe at low energy, below
the compactification scale. If this scale is below the string scale, the
only surviving string states are the massless ones. While finding all
light states of a given string vacuum can be rather straightforward,
finding their interactions turns out to be really non-trivial. There are
two ways to construct the effective interaction terms. The first is to
start with the effective action of the underlying ten dimensional string
theory and perform a dimensional reduction of all interaction terms. The
second method uses the string S-matrix approach. This gives the relevant
interaction term of the low energy theory at a given order in @xmath and
@xmath . It gives more quantitative results with respect to the previous
method, but it requires the knowledge of the vertex operators and their
interactions within the underlying conformal field theory.

In what follows, we will consider compactifications that give @xmath
supergravity as the low energy four dimensional theory. Any @xmath
supergravity action in four spacetime dimensions is encoded by three
functions: the Kähler potential @xmath , the superpotential @xmath , and
the gauge kinetic function @xmath . The bosonic part is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.32)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The scalar fields @xmath are complex coordinates of the sigma-model
target space with metric:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gauge kinetic functions @xmath has only off-diagonal elements for
abelian factors in the gauge group, otherwise we can write @xmath .
These functions are holomorphic in the @xmath .

The general form of the scalar potential has two pieces which are called
F-term and D-term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two pieces are written in terms of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
@xmath is a holomorphic function of the fields @xmath . The F-term
potential is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The covariant derivative is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

It indicates that @xmath is not a function but a section of a
holomorphic line bundel over the sigma-model space. The @xmath are the
auxiliary complex scalars in the chiral multiplets, and a non-vanishing
value indicates that the supersymmetry is spontaneously broken.

The D-term potential can be written in terms of the auxiliary fields
@xmath in the vector multiplets as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last expression is valid when the scalars transform linearly and the
gauge kinetic function takes a diagonal form. A non-vanishing value of
@xmath means that supersymmetry is spontaneously broken.

The condition for unbroken supersymmetry are hence:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In a supersymmetric Minkowski vacuum, the vacuum energy has to vanish,
implying also @xmath .

By the powerfull non-renormalization theorems, there are no perturbative
corrections to the superpotential, and no perturbative correction beyond
the one-loop to the gauge kinetic function. On the contrary, the Kähler
potential can be corrected both by perturbative and non-perturbative
contributions.

When these @xmath supergravities are effective theories of a higher
dimensional string theory, the three functions @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath usually depend on the moduli field @xmath describing the
background of the string model from which they are derived. It is useful
to split the scalars @xmath into a set of neutral moduli fields @xmath
and into a set of charged matter fields @xmath . While the set of fields
in @xmath refers to the dilaton and the geometric moduli of the
compactification manifold, the fields in @xmath account for all kinds of
charged chiral fields whose vev would change the gauge symmetry. These
must vanish if the gauge symmetry is unbroken. We therefore may expand
the superpotential and the Kähler potential with respect to small @xmath
fields. The coefficients of these expansions depend on the moduli in
@xmath and give the physical couplings of the effective theory. If the
moduli are stabilized at a given value, these couplings takes a specific
value and do not vary continuously over the moduli space.

In the next chapter, we will describe the four dimensional @xmath
supergravities coming from compactification of the Type II theories
(with some BPS objects included) and of the M-theory.

### Chapter 3 Corners of the Landscape

In this chapter we will describe compactification of Type II theories
and of M-theory with fluxes, working in the approximation in which the
backreaction of the fluxes is neglected and the compact manifold is
taken to be Ricci flat. In particular the compact manifold will be a CY
for Type II compactifications and a @xmath holonomy manifold for
M-theory compactification.

In each case we will find what are the effective potential for the
geometric moduli that the fluxes generate and how this potential fixes
part or all of the geometric moduli.

We will start presenting a part common to both Type II theories. Then we
will concentrate on each one. Finally we will describe the very
different case of M-theory.

#### 3.1 Type II: Common Facts

At low energy and small string coupling the Type II theories are
described by Type II supergravities. These theories have 32
supercharges. If we want to preserve the minimal amount of
supersymmetries we must compactify them on a CY manifold. In this case
we get an effective four dimensional theory with @xmath supersymmetry.

In order to get a realistic spectrum, one requires at low energy @xmath
. Hence we must introduce in Type II compactifications other sources of
supersymmetry breaking. Fluxes can spontaneously breaks supersymmetry
from @xmath to @xmath . Another possibility is to introduce some BPS
objects. String theory has objects of this kind, such as D-branes and
Orientifold Planes. In what follows, we will describe what these objects
are and what are the constraints that they introduce. Then we will see
what are the effective theories obtained compactifying Type II theories
on CY with orientifold and fluxes.

##### 3.1.1 D-branes and Orientifold Planes

In the middle of the 90’s, the discovery of the D-brane opened a new
perspective for String Theory [ 51 , 52 ] . On the one hand, D-branes
were required to fill the conjectured web of string dualities [ 1 ] .
Moreover, they led to the conjecture of various new connections between
string theories and supersymmetric gauge theories, such as the famous
AdS/CFT correspondence [ 53 , 54 ] . From a direct phenomenological
point of view, they opened a whole new arena for model building [ 55 ,
56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 ] , since they are equipped with a gauge theory.

More precisely, D-branes are extended objects defined as subspaces of
the ten dimensional spacetime on which open strings can end [ 1 , 52 ] .
Open strings with both ends on the same D-brane correspond to a @xmath
gauge field in the low energy effective actions. This gauge group gets
enhanced to a @xmath when putting a stack of @xmath D-branes on top of
each other. At low energy this induces a Yang-Mills theory living on the
D-brane worldvolume. This fact allows to construct phenomenologically
attractive models from spacetime filling D-branes consistently included
in a compactification of Type II String Theory. The basic idea is that
the Standard Model, or rather its supersymmetric extensions, is realized
on a stack of spacetime filling D-branes. The matter fields arise from
dynamical excitations of the brane around its background configuration.

The D-branes are also charged under the RR form potentials, so they
contribute a source term in the Bianchi identities of these fields [ 1 ,
52 ] . This is similarly true for non-trivial background fluxes. One can
apply the Gauss law for the compact internal space such that consistency
requires internal sources to cancel. In this respect, D-branes are the
higher dimensional analog of charged particles. Putting such a particle
in a compact space, the field lines have to end somewhere and we have to
require for a source with opposite charge. In String Theory these
negative sources are anti-D-branes and orientifold planes [ 52 ] . To
preserve supersymmetry, the second ones are usually chosen for model
constructions.

Orientifold planes arise in String Theory constructed from Type II
strings by modding out worldsheet parity plus a geometric symmetry
@xmath of @xmath [ 61 , 62 ] . In the effective supergravity
description, the orientifolds break part or all of the supersymmetry of
the low energy theory. By imposing suitable conditions on the
orientifold projection and on the included D-branes, the setup can be
adjusted to preserve exactly half of the original supersymmetry.

Summarizing, starting from Type II in ten dimensions, one compactifies
on a CY to obtain @xmath theories in four dimensions. This @xmath can be
further broken to @xmath if one adds to the background an orientifold
plane (and possibly D-branes).

Also fluxes can break form @xmath to @xmath . One can add to a CY
background both orientifolds and fluxes, and if they break the same
supercharges, the resulting background leads to an @xmath effective four
dimensional theory

We now describe more precisely the D-branes and the orientifold planes,
since they have been used in some works reviewed in this thesis.

###### D-branes

String Theory gives a low energy effective action for the gauge theory
living on the D-brane worldvolume, as well as the couplings to the light
closed string modes. More precisely, the gauge theory and the coupling
to the NSNS sector is captured by the Dirac-Born-Infeld(DBI) action [ 1
, 52 ] . In the case of a single Dp-brane, it is given (in string frame
¹ ¹ 1 See appendix A ) by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the brane tension. The integral is done over the @xmath
dimensional worldvolume @xmath of the Dp-brane, which is embedded in the
ten dimensional spacetime via the map @xmath . This DBI action contains
a @xmath field strength @xmath , which describes the @xmath gauge theory
to all order in @xmath . To leading order, the action reduces to the
standard @xmath gauge theory action. The dynamics of the Dp-brane is
encoded in the embedding map @xmath . Fluctuations around a given @xmath
are parametrized by charged scalar fields, which provide the matter
content of the low energy effective theory.

Dp-brane is charged under RR fields, so they couple as extended objects
to the appropriate RR form [ 1 , 52 ] . More precisely, a Dp-brane
couples naturally to the RR form @xmath . Moreover, generically D-branes
contain lower dimensional D-brane charges, and hence interact also with
lower degree RR forms. All these couplings are described by the
Chern-Simons(CS) action :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the Dp-brane charge. The lowest order terms in @xmath in the
RR fields are topological and represent the RR tadpole contributions to
the low energy effective action. @xmath encodes also the coupling of the
gauge matter fields arising from perturbations of @xmath to the RR
fields.

In flat ten dimensional spacetime a static Dp-brane preserves half of
the supersymmetry. In curved background the requirement of the Dp-brane
to be a BPS object gives strong constraints on the possible embedding of
the brane in the spacetime. A Dp-brane in the space @xmath can fill
Minkowski directions as well as the compact ones. The compact directions
of the brane worldvolume must wrap a non-contractible cycle of the
compact manifold @xmath .

The BPS condition demands that the brane tension @xmath and charge
@xmath are equal. This ensures stability since the net force between BPS
branes vanishes [ 52 ] . Moreover, there are conditions on the cycles in
the compact manifold @xmath wrapped by the branes. In a purely metric
background with @xmath being a CY, the only allowed cycles are the so
called calibrated cycles with respect to the invariant forms defining
the CY ( @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ). These forms are actually
calibrations. More precisely [ 63 ] , one says that a closed p-form
@xmath is a calibration if it is less or equal to the volume form on
each oriented p-dimensional submanifold @xmath . If the equality holds
for all points of one submanifold @xmath , then @xmath is called a
calibrated submanifold with respect to the calibration @xmath . A
calibrated submanifold has minimal volume in its homology class. The
calibrated submanifolds are also called supersymmetric cycles , as the
bound in volume becomes equivalent to the BPS bound.

###### Orientifold Planes

Similar to D-branes, orientifold planes are hyper-planes of the ten
dimensional background. They arise when the string theory is divided out
by a symmetry transformation that is a combination of @xmath , the
worldsheet parity, and a transformation @xmath that makes @xmath a
symmetry of String Theory [ 1 , 52 ] . The orientifold planes are the
hypersurfaces left invariant by @xmath . They are charged under the RR
potential and can have negative tension. This allows to construct
consistent configurations with branes and orientifold planes. In
particular, in @xmath orientifold planes wrap cycles in @xmath arising
as fix-point set of @xmath . If these are calibrated with respect to the
same form as the cycles wrapped by D-branes, the brane-orientifold setup
can preserve some supersymmetry.

Let us be more precise on what is @xmath . In the simplest example,
@xmath only consists of a target-space symmetry @xmath , such that
@xmath is a symmetry of the underlying string theory. This is the case
for Type IIB orientifolds with @xmath or @xmath planes. However, Type
IIB admits a second perturbative symmetry operation denoted by @xmath ,
where @xmath is the spacetime fermion number in the string left-moving
sector. Under the action of @xmath RNS and RR states are odd, while NSR
and NSNS states are even. Orientifolds with @xmath and @xmath planes
arise from projectors of the form @xmath . The transformation behavior
of the massless bosonic states of Type II theories under @xmath and
@xmath are:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

With these transformations, one can check that both @xmath and @xmath
are symmetries of the ten dimensional Type IIB supergravity action. This
is not the case for Type IIA. However, orientifolds with @xmath planes
arise if @xmath includes @xmath as well as some appropriately chosen
target space symmetry that ensures that @xmath leaves the effective
action invariant.

#### 3.2 Type IIB Vacua

We start the Type IIB section, by describing the ten dimensional picture
of flux compactifications in the supergravity limits. We will follow the
treatment of Giddings, Kachru and Polchiski (GKP) [ 22 ] (see also [ 6 ]
for a review).

The bosonic supergravity effective action of Type IIB string theory is
given in Einstein frame (see appendix A ) by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

with @xmath . The fields involved are: the metric, an NSNS field
strength @xmath (with potential @xmath ) and RR field strengths @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath (with potentials @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ). @xmath
and @xmath (the axion-dilaton) are the complex combinations

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the dilaton.

The 5-form @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and one has to impose the selfduality condition @xmath by hand, when
solving the equations of motion.

@xmath includes the possibility that we add the action of any localized
sources (such as D-branes and orientifold planes) in our background.

We start by looking for solutions with four dimensional Poincaré
invariance, and so we choose the usual ansatz for the ten dimensional
metric:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath . We have allowed the possibility of a warp
factor. The four dimensional Poincaré invariance imposes constraints
also on the other fields:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a function on the compact manifolds. Moreover we can
allow only compact components of the @xmath flux.

The equation of motion of @xmath forces @xmath and @xmath to be harmonic
forms, which are thus determined in terms of their periods on a basis of
3-cycles:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

Then one should impose the Dirac quantization condition on these 3-form
fluxes, that makes the period to take quantized values (in suitable
units), i.e @xmath .

By taking the trace-reversed Einstein equations for the @xmath
components of the metric, one gets the equation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the tilde objects are computed by using the @xmath metric. @xmath
is the stress-energy tensor of any localized source.

We note from this equation that the first two terms on the right hand
side are positive definite. But on a compact manifold, the left hand
side integrates to zero, being a total derivative. Therefore in compact
models and in absence of localized sources, there is a no-go theorem :
the only solutions have @xmath and @xmath constant. Therefore, Type IIB
supergravity does not allow non-trivial warped compactifications [ 50 ]
. But String Theory allows localized sources such as D-branes and
orientifold planes. In order to evade the global obstruction to solving
( 3.10 ), given by the positive contribution of the first two terms, one
needs:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another constraint comes from the Bianchi Identity for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the D3-brane tension, and @xmath is the local D3-brane charge
density on the compact space. Integrating this relation on the six
dimensional compact manifold, one gets:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total D3-brane charge arising from localized
objects.

Writing ( 3.12 ) in terms of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and
subtracting it from the equation ( 3.10 ), one gets:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.14)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We can restrict our attention to sources that satisfy the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This inequality is saturated by D3-branes and O3-planes, as well as
D7-branes wrapping supersymmetric cycles. It is satisfied by
anti-D3-brane and it is violated by O5-planes and anti-O3-planes.

When we assume the relation ( 3.15 ), from ( 3.14 ) it follows that
@xmath must be imaginary selfdual ( @xmath ) and that the warp factor is
given by @xmath . In this case, the relation ( 3.15 ) is saturated.
Therefore solutions to the tree-level equations of motion should include
only D3, O3 and D7 sources.

Imposing the remaining equations of motion (namely the extradimensional
Einstein and the dilaton-axion equations), one can find that this class
of solutions describes the F-theory models [ 64 ] in the supergravity
approximation, including the possibility of background fluxes.

The simplest example of these solutions are perturbative Type IIB
orientifolds. In this special case the metric @xmath is a CY metric and
so the internal manifold is conformally CY. In this particular class of
solutions, neglecting the backreaction of fluxes on the geometry means
neglecting the warp factor. This can be done if the warp factor is
slowly varying through the compact manifold. This is the approximation
assumed in the following derivation of the four dimensional effective
theory of these vacua.

###### Type IIB orientifolds: Four Dimensional Description

In this section we will give a four dimensional description of the Type
IIB orientifolds vacua. In particular we will give a formula for the
effective potential depending on fluxes and geometric moduli.

If we compactify the Type IIB theory on a CY, this leads to @xmath
supersymmetry in four dimensions. As we have seen at page 2.1 the
geometric moduli of a CY are divided into @xmath Kähler moduli and
@xmath Complex Structure moduli. The first are associated with the
fluctuation of the 2-form @xmath , while the second with the 3-form
@xmath . These moduli fields represent scalar components of @xmath hyper
and vector multiplets respectively. Together with the axion-dilaton
hypermultiplet, they give @xmath hypermultiplets and @xmath vector
multiplets.

The moduli are the coefficients of @xmath and @xmath when expanded onto
a basis of harmonic 2-forms @xmath and 3-forms @xmath respectively.

To arrive at @xmath supersymmetry in four dimensions, one introduces an
orientifold projection @xmath [ 65 ] . As described previously, the
orientifold projection includes a reflection @xmath in the internal
Calabi-Yau @xmath . Consistency requires @xmath to act as an isometric
and holomorphic involution on @xmath . The transformation @xmath leaves
the Kähler form invariant, but may act non-trivially on the holomorphic
3-form @xmath . Due to its holomorphic action, @xmath splits the
cohomology groups @xmath into a direct sum of an even eigenspace @xmath
and an odd eigenspace @xmath . Hence, this splits the @xmath harmonic
@xmath -forms of @xmath into a set of @xmath even forms and into a set
of @xmath odd forms. Since the Kähler form is invariant under @xmath ,
it is expanded with respect to a basis of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The harmonic (2,1) forms are divided in an analogous way into even and
odd. Here we consider Type IIB compactification with O3/O7 orientifolds
planes (and D3/D7-branes). In this case @xmath . The holomorphic 3-form
is odd under @xmath and so it is expanded on a basis @xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can collects the periods of @xmath in the vector @xmath .

As we have said before, the equations of motion forces the field
strengths @xmath and @xmath to be harmonic. From the table 3.3 one can
see that the 2-forms @xmath and @xmath , and consequently their field
strengths, are odd under @xmath . Thus they are expanded on the basis
@xmath , that we rename for simplicity as @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These fluxes generate a superpotential for the complex structure moduli
as well as for the axion-dilaton [ 66 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to write the Kähler potential for the scalars, one needs to
identify the good Kähler coordinates, i.e. the complex coordinates such
that the effective four dimensional action takes the canonical form and
the potential is written as ( 3.22 ). For Type IIB, the surviving
complex structure moduli and the axio-dilaton are good coordinates,
while the surviving Kähler moduli are not. This implies that the form of
@xmath remains the same as ( 2.1 ), with the only difference that the
holomorphic 3-form is expanded on a smaller number of basis elements,
i.e those that survive to the orientifold projection.

The Kähler potential for the dilaton is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the contrary the form of @xmath is sensitively modified and takes two
different forms, corresponding to which orientifold projection is
performed. For O3/O7 projections the good Kähler coordinates for @xmath
are [ 65 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the coefficients of @xmath and @xmath
expanded on the basis @xmath of @xmath , and @xmath are the coefficients
of @xmath expanded on the basis of @xmath dual to @xmath .

In terms of these new coordinates the Kähler potential is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is written in terms of the new coordinates.

Now we are able to write the effective potential for the geometric
moduli and the axion-dilaton. Its expression in four dimensional @xmath
supergravity takes the form ( 2.35 )(we put @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the sum of ( 2.1 ), ( 3.20 ) and ( 3.21 ). @xmath is the
Kähler covariant derivative @xmath , where @xmath . @xmath is the second
derivative of @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

The supersymmetric vacua of this potential are given by the solution
@xmath @xmath .

We note that @xmath does not depend on the Kähler moduli in Type IIB.
Because of this, the piece @xmath in ( 3.22 ) precisely cancels the term
in @xmath where @xmath run over the Kähler moduli. Therefore one can
express the full tree-level flux potential as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath run over complex structure moduli and dilaton. This
potential is positive definite, with minima at @xmath . Furthermore we
see that generic vacua are not supersymmetric, as there are no
constraints on @xmath , with @xmath running over Kähler deformations.
This is precisely a realization of the cancellation that occurs in a
general class of supergravities known as no-scale supergravities [ 67 ,
68 ] . Unfortunately, the vanishing of the cosmological constant for
non-supersymmetric vacua depends on the tree-level structure of the
Kähler potential, which is not radiatively stable.

Let us consider the equations @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ). More
explicitly they are given by:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

These equations have a simple geometric interpretation. For a given
choice of the internal fluxes for @xmath , they require the metric to
adjust itself (by motion in @xmath ) so that the (3,0) and (1,2) parts
of @xmath vanish. It gives a solution where @xmath is imaginary
self-dual. If one imposes also the remaining supersymmetry conditions
@xmath , then the flux @xmath is forced to have only the (2,1) piece.

The system ( 3.24 ) is made up of @xmath equations in @xmath variables
for each choice of integral fluxes. Thus it seems clear that generic
fluxes will fix all of the complex structure moduli as well as the
axio-dilaton. Furthermore one could suspect that the number of vacua
diverges, as we have not given any constraint on the fluxes. But such a
constraint exists. It comes from requiring tadpole cancellation for
@xmath . In fact we have seen that the 3-form fluxes induce a
contribution to the total D3-brane charge:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can check that, for imaginary selfdual flux, @xmath is positive
definite [ 69 ] . Moreover in a given orientifold of @xmath , the
tadpole cancellation condition ( 3.13 ) takes the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some total negative D3 charge which needs to be
cancelled. It arises by induced D3-charge on D7 and O7 planes, and
explicit O3 planes. For an orientifold limit of an F-theory
compactification on elliptic CY fourfold @xmath [ 64 ] , one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Euler number of @xmath .

The allowed flux choices in an orientifold projection compactification
on @xmath , and hence the numbers of flux vacua, are stringently
constrained by the requirement @xmath .

We finally note that in principle also open string fluxes can be turned
on, when D7-branes are involved. This happens in general F-theory
models, where one can turn on background field strength of the D7 gauge
fields, generating additional contribution to the tadpole cancellation
condition and the spacetime potential energy. In this chapter we will
concentrate on vacua where all these open string fluxes are null.

###### Warped Solutions and Stabilized Hierarchy

We conclude this section with the famous example of the compact conifold
. It has been presented in GKP work [ 22 ] , following earlier work of [
70 , 71 , 72 , 73 ] . The starting point is the Klebanov-Strassler
results [ 74 ] : locally in the vicinity of a conifold point, KS have
found solutions with fluxes that generate smooth supergravity solutions
with large relative warpings. GKP extended this work to the compact
case.

CY spaces can develop singularities at special point of their moduli
space. One famous example is the conifold. This can be described as the
submanifold of @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This manifold is singular at @xmath @xmath . This is a good singularity,
i.e. String Theory makes sense in such a space. This singular space is a
cone whose base has the topology @xmath . At the singular point both
spheres shrink to zero size. The singularity can be resolved by
deforming the equation ( 3.28 ) into:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is equivalent to expand the @xmath to finite size. @xmath is the
parameter that controlls the size of @xmath . There are therefore two
non-trivial 3-cycles: the A-cycle @xmath just discussed and a dual
B-cycle extending along the @xmath times the radial direction of the
cone.

This singularity arises locally in many compact CY spaces. In such
manifolds, the B-cycle is also compact. The periods of @xmath on these
cycles are:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the singular point in the moduli space where the A-cycle
@xmath collapses.

We now add fluxes to this geometry:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

These generate the superpotential:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Kähler potential is the one studied above. The equation @xmath
simplifies when @xmath is large:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution is @xmath . This means that there are flux vacua
exponentially close to the conifold point in moduli space. In fact, due
to the ambiguity arising from the logarithm when one exponentiates to
solve for @xmath , there are @xmath vacua, distributed in phase but with
@xmath given by the expression above. The modulus @xmath is strictly
connected to the minimal value that the warp factor takes [ 22 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

In effect the fluxes produce a model similar to the Randall-Sundrum one
[ 33 ] , in which the warp factor does not go to zero but to an
exponentially small positive value. We will come back to this point in a
later chapter.

###### Complete Moduli Stabilization Through Quantum Corrections

At classical level, the Kähler moduli of Type IIB CY orientifolds with
fluxes remain exactly flat direction of the potential. However, quantum
corrections can generically generate a potential for these moduli. There
are two possible sources. The first one comes from corrections to the
Kähler potential which depends on the Kähler moduli.

Here we will describe the second one. It comes from non-perturbative
corrections to the superpotential (it enjoys a non-renormalization
theorem to all orders in perturbation theory). Such type of corrections
can come from Euclidean D3 brane [ 75 ] wrapping some 4-cycle @xmath on
the compact manifold. This can happen when the fourfold @xmath used for
F-theory compactification admits divisor of arithmetic genus one, which
project to 4-cycles in the base @xmath [ 76 ] . The correction to the
superpotential coming from such instantons is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the imaginary part of @xmath is @xmath and where @xmath is a
complex structure dependent one-loop determinant. This superpotential
depends on the Kähler moduli since the volume of the 4-cycle depends on
them.

An analogous correction comes from gaugino condensation in the gauge
theory living on a D7-brane wrapping a 4-cycle in the compact manifold
and filling the four dimensional spacetime (see for example [ 77 ] ).
Since the square of the gauge coupling is proportional to the inverse of
the volume of the 4-cycle, the contribution to the superpotential is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of color of the gauge theory living on the
D7-brane.

As it was argued in the famous KKLT work [ 78 ] , one can check that
such corrections generically allow to find flux vacua with all the
geometric moduli stabilized ² ² 2 One should also note that in order to
stabilize the Kähler moduli at strictly positive radii, one needs a
sufficient number of 4-cycles, which excludes the simplest case of
internal manifold with @xmath . .

The complex structure moduli are fixed by the fluxes at a scale of order
@xmath , while any Kähler modulus potential arising from the above
non-perturbative corrections will be significantly smaller. Thus one can
think to fix all the complex structure moduli neglecting the
non-perturbative corrections in a controlled way, and then integrate
them out. In this way one fixes the Kähler moduli using a potential
where the complex structure dependent objects are substituted with them
evaluated at the fixed point. This is the typical KKLT procedure by two
steps and it leads to moduli stabilization in a supersymmetric minimum.
When the non-perturbative corrections described here are added to the
superpotential, one can find a supersymmetric minimum also for a
non-zero (0,3) component of @xmath .

This procedure has received several critiques. The first one is that the
procedure of obtaining an effective potential for the light moduli via
non-perturbative corrections after integrating out moduli that are
assumed to be heavy at the classical level is not in general correct [
79 , 80 ] . In some cases, this two steps procedure can give rise to
tachyonic directions. One should instead minimize the full potential,
which has additional terms mixing the light and heavy modes. Another
critique is that the corrections to the Kähler potential, both
perturbative and non-perturbative, have not been taken into account. In
[ 81 , 82 ] it is shown that the @xmath corrections to the Kähler
potential are subleading only when the flux superpotential is of the
same order of the non-perturbative superpotential. Otherwise, the
perturbative correction to the Kähler potential must be included when
analyzing the details of the potential. Applying this, one finds a new
minimum at exponentially large volume, that is not supersymmetric,
contrary to the KKLT vacuum described above. Several works followed [ 81
, 82 ] , trying to extract some predictions on the low energies
quantities on this vacuum [ 83 , 84 , 85 , 86 , 87 ] .

After having fixed all moduli, KKLT outline the construction of de
Sitter vacua [ 78 ] . In order to get de Sitter solutions from Type IIB
flux compactifications, one should uplift the AdS vacuum found after
having fixed all moduli. KKLT do this by adding a small number of
anti-D3-branes at the bottom of a region with an extremely non-trivial
warp factor (there regions are called throats ). This de Sitter vacuum
cannot be the true vacuum in a theory of quantum gravity. On the other
hand, the runaway behavior is a standard feature of all string theories.
KKLT showed nevertheless that the lifetime of the dS vacuum is large in
Planck times, and shorter than the recurrence time. Even the fastest
decays have decay time much greater than the age of the universe [ 88 ]
.

#### 3.3 Type IIA Vacua

To derive a four dimensional description of the Type IIA orientifolds
vacua with fluxes, one reduces to four dimension the ten dimensional
action of massive Type IIA supergravity [ 89 ] . In Einstein frame it is
given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath . @xmath is the contribution of localized sources included
in the compactification.

The fields involved are: the metric, the dilaton, the NSNS field
strength @xmath (with potential @xmath ) and RR field strengths @xmath
that is not dynamical, and the 2-form @xmath and the 4-form @xmath (with
potentials @xmath and @xmath ). The physical field strengths with their
Bianchi Identities are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gauge transformations which leave the action invariant are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as @xmath and @xmath .

Here we consider the compactification with orientifold O6-planes [ 90 ]
. The introduction of orientifold planes cut the spectrum of Type IIA in
a different way with respect to what happens in Type IIB. In Type IIB
the orientifold projection cuts part of the complex structure moduli and
part of the Kähler moduli; the former remain good Kähler coordinates
while the latter are not the one appearing in the canonical form of the
effective four dimensional action. For Type IIA the situation is
different. The projected Kähler moduli are good Kähler coordinate, while
the complex structure moduli @xmath are not.

In Type IIA, the complex structure moduli are promoted to quaternionic
multiplets by combining them with the RR axions. The expansion of @xmath
on the basis of harmonic 3-forms is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We get @xmath complex axions. The axions coming from @xmath join the
axion-dilaton, while the other @xmath axions quaternionize the @xmath .
The orientifold projection cuts this quaternionic space and the Kähler
potential is changed sensitively. Let us see the details.

The orientifold projection is given by the operator @xmath , where
@xmath is an antiholomorphic involution of the CY. It acts on the forms
@xmath and @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath some arbitrary phase ³ ³ 3 These are different from the Type
IIB conditions where the transformation of @xmath and @xmath under the
holomorphic involution @xmath are @xmath and @xmath . . The fixed loci
of @xmath are special Lagrangian 3-cycles @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

Orientifold O6-planes fill spacetime and wrap the @xmath .

The orientifold involution splits @xmath . Each of these eigenspaces is
of real dimesion @xmath . We split the basis for @xmath into a set of
even forms @xmath and a set of odd forms @xmath ; here @xmath while
@xmath . Then the orientifold projections requires (taking @xmath ):

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.43)
  -- -- -- --------

Two of these conditions are constraints on the moduli, while the other
two follow automatically for a space admitting the antiholomorphic
involution @xmath . We see that for each complex @xmath , only one real
component survives the projection. The condition that @xmath must be
even under @xmath truncates the space of axions in half to @xmath . In
addition, the orientifold projects in the dilaton and one of @xmath and
@xmath . So from each hypermultiplet, we get a single chiral multiplet,
whose scalar components are the real or imaginary part of the complex
structure modulus, and a RR axion.

We can summarize the surviving hypermultiplet moduli in terms of the
object

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a compensator which incorporates the dilaton dependence
via

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

One should think of @xmath as the four dimensional dilaton. The good
Kähler coordinate are then the coefficients of the expansion of @xmath
on a basis for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Kähler potential for these moduli is quite different from ( 2.1 ),
and takes the form:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.48)
  -- -- -- --------

The Kähler potential for the Kähler moduli remains of the same form as
without orientifold ( 2.22 ). The only difference is that only odd
fluctuations of @xmath survive. Actually it is complexified by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is odd under the orientifold projection, it is expanded on
a basis @xmath of @xmath odd harmonic forms:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

###### Flux Superpotential and Moduli Stabilization

We can now turn on the fluxes that are projected in by the
antiholomorphic involution [ 90 ] . It turns out that @xmath and @xmath
must be odd, while @xmath should be even (see 3.3 ). So we can write:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the 4-forms dual of the @xmath . Since the volume form
is odd, while the @xmath ’s are odd, the @xmath are even. There are in
addition two parameters @xmath and @xmath parametrizing the @xmath and
@xmath fluxes on @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 @xmath is the Hodge dual of the part of
@xmath along the four dimensional spacetime .

The background fluxes contribute to the total D6 charge, together with
the orientifold O6-plane. Actually the Bianchi identity for @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Poincaré dual three-form of the 3-cycle wrapped by
the O6-plane. Integrating this equation over any 3-cycle produces a
cancellation condition between the combination @xmath of the RR 0-form
flux and the NSNS 3-form flux, and the background O6-plane charge.
Adding D6-branes also would contribute. This is the analogue of the
effective D3 charge of the 3-form fluxes in Type IIB. Differently from
Type IIB, in Type IIA there are other RR fluxes that are not contrained.

The @xmath potential generated by these fluxes is determined (through (
2.35 )) by the Kähler potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and by the superpotential:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This superpotential depends, in general, on all geometric moduli at
tree-level. The system of equations governing supersymmetric vacua is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 91 ] it was shown that under reasonable assumptions of genericity,
one can stabilize all geometric moduli at tree-level in these
constructions. The same considerations show that in the leading
approximation, @xmath axions will remain unfixed. These solutions can
moreover be brought into a regime where @xmath is arbitrary small and
the volume is arbitrary large.

#### 3.4 M-theory Vacua

M-theory is locally supersymmetric and is well described at low energy
by the eleven dimensional supergravity. Its action is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bosonic fields are the eleven dimensional metric and a 3-form @xmath
, whose field strength is @xmath .

To obtain a four dimensional theory, we have to compactify on a seven
dimensional manifold @xmath . Requiring @xmath supersymmetry in four
dimension poses constraints on the holonomy group of @xmath . One
possibility is the Horava-Witten theory [ 92 ] compactified on a CY
space @xmath times an orbifold of a circle. A second possibility, that
is the one studied in this work, is to compactify M-theory on a seven
dimensional manifold with holonomy group given by @xmath [ 93 ] . A
central point concerning such @xmath compactification is that, if @xmath
is smooth, the four dimensional physics contains at most Abelian gauge
group and no light charged fermions [ 36 ] .

We will at first briefly describe the manifolds with holonomy group
@xmath and then we will see the effective theory obtained compactifying
on these manifolds. Then we will see what are the relevant physical
singularities and at the end we will add fluxes.

##### 3.4.1 @xmath-holonomy Manifolds

@xmath is the automorphism group of the octonions @xmath . It is a
simple Lie group, that is compact, connected, simply-connected and with
dimension @xmath [ 93 ] .

It may be defined as the subgroup of @xmath that leaves invariant the
following 3-form on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are coordinates of @xmath and @xmath are totally
antisymmetric structure constants of the imaginary octonions. In a
particular choice of basis the non-zero structure constants are given
by:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

The spinorial representation @xmath splits into representations of
@xmath when @xmath is reduced to this subgroup:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that there is one singlet in this decomposition. ⁵ ⁵ 5 This
shows, with a reasoning analogous to that of page 2.4 , that there are
four supercharges surviving after compactification and so that the four
dimensional theory will have @xmath supersymmetry.

One can so characterize a @xmath holonomy manifold as a seven
dimensional manifold with one covariantly constant spinor, in the same
way as a CY is a six dimensional manifold with one covariantly constant
spinor. On the other hand special holonomy manifolds can be also
characterized by the existence of certain invariants forms (for a CY,
these are @xmath and @xmath ) [ 93 ] .

Indeed, one can construct antisymmetric combinations of gamma matrices
with the covariantly constant spinor @xmath , to obtain tensor forms of
various degree:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

By construction, the p-form @xmath is invariant under the holonomy
group. In order to find all possible invariant forms on a special
holonomy manifold @xmath , we need to decompose the space of
differential forms on @xmath into irreducible representation of @xmath
and identify the singlet components. For the case under consideration we
have singlets in the decompositions of the 3-forms and of the 4-forms,
since the @xmath representation of @xmath decomposes as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other relevant representations split as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.62)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From the decompositions ( 3.61 ) and ( 3.62 ) we see that on a @xmath
manifold the invariant forms appear only in degree @xmath . They are
called respectively associative and coassociative forms and are denoted
as @xmath and @xmath . In fact the coassociative 4-form is the Hodge
dual of the associative 3-form.

The existence of a @xmath holonomy metric on @xmath is equivalent to the
following conditions on the associative and the coassociative forms:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

Actually, using the 3-form @xmath one can reconstruct a metric, and if
@xmath is closed and coclosed, the Levi-Civita connection of this metric
has holonomy group equals to @xmath . In particular this metric is Ricci
flat . With respect to it the conditions ( 3.63 ) say also that @xmath
must be harmonic.

Since the Laplacian of the metric @xmath on @xmath preserves the
decomposition of the spaces of forms in @xmath representations, the
harmonic forms can also be decomposed in this way. By knowing that for a
@xmath holonomy manifold @xmath and that @xmath is independent of @xmath
, one can prove that the only non-trivial refined Betti numbers ( @xmath
) are @xmath and @xmath , which satisfy @xmath and @xmath .

##### 3.4.2 Compactification of M-theory on @xmath Holonomy Manifolds

###### Compactification on Smooth Manifolds

In this section, we describe the KK reduction of the eleven dimensional
supergravity on a smooth manifold with @xmath holonomy [ 36 ] .

As seen above, the supergravity theory has two bosonic fields, the
metric @xmath and a 3-form @xmath , with field strength @xmath . The
equation of motion for @xmath is given by: @xmath . We start from the
usual ansatz for the higher dimensional metric that preserves four
dimensional Poincaré invariance, i.e. a product of Minkowski spacetime
times a compact seven dimensional manifold. This manifold is taken to
have @xmath holonomy group, in order to have @xmath supersymmetry in
four dimensions.

We now analyze the massless scalars coming from the KK reduction of the
metric. We will follow the same procedure used for the CY manifolds, but
we will be more precise in describing the KK reduction. The obtained
scalars are associated with the moduli parametrizing the @xmath metric
with a given topology.

We begin with a @xmath holonomy metric @xmath on @xmath . @xmath obeys
the vacuum Einstein equation @xmath . To obtain the spectrum of modes
originating from @xmath we look for fluctuations @xmath such that @xmath
is also Ricci flat. This implies that @xmath satisfies the Lichnerowicz
equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next we make the KK ansatz for the fluctuations as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we @xmath are the eigenvectors of the operator @xmath . Since the
full spacetime is taken to be a product of Minkowski times a seven
dimensional space, the eleven dimensional Laplacian can be splitted as
@xmath . So we can write the equation ( 3.64 ) as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus we see that the massless scalars @xmath are associated with the
zero modes @xmath of the Lichnerowicz operator @xmath . We will now show
that they are associated with the harmonic 3-forms.

On a seven dimensional manifold of @xmath holonomy, the @xmath transform
in the @xmath dimensional representation. Under @xmath this
representation remains irreducible. On the other hand, as we have seen
before, the 3-forms decomposes as @xmath . Thus the @xmath can also be
regarded as 3-forms on @xmath , using the 3-form @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath ’s are 3-forms in the same representation as @xmath , since
@xmath is in the trivial representation. The condition that @xmath is a
zero mode of @xmath is equivalent to @xmath being a zero mode of the
Laplacian. But we know how many 3-forms there are that are zero modes of
@xmath : they are the harmonic 3-forms, whose number is @xmath . So the
dimension of the moduli space of the @xmath holonomy manifolds is given
by @xmath , the dimension of the third cohomology group. This is
analogous of what happens for a CY; in that case we have a
correspondence between the moduli and harmonic 2-forms and 3-forms. As
in that case, the moduli come from the expansion of the invariant 3-form
on harmonic 3-forms and are called @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a basis for @xmath .

There are also scalars arising from the reduction of @xmath . Let us
make the KK ansatz:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation of motion for @xmath tells that @xmath must be harmonic.
This happens because @xmath has components only along the internal
directions and so the term @xmath identically vanishes. This implies
that massless scalars @xmath correspond to harmonic 3-forms. So again
the number of massless scalars are given by @xmath . Since @xmath is a
@xmath gauge 3-form potential, a gauge transformation add to @xmath a
closed 3-form on @xmath of appropriately normalized period; so the
fields @xmath takes values on a compact space.

The scalars coming from the reduction of @xmath combine to the scalars
coming from @xmath to give a massless complex scalars @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath ’s are the complex scalars appearing in the chiral
multiplets. It is not surprising that the scalars @xmath and @xmath
belong to the same four dimensional supersymmetry multiplet, as @xmath
and @xmath are superpartners in eleven dimensions.

In addition to the massless chiral multiplets, we also get massless
vector multiplets. The bosonic components of such multiplet is a
massless Abelian gauge field, that arises from the field @xmath through
the KK ansatz:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ’s are basis for the harmonic 2-forms and @xmath ’s are
1-forms in Minkowski space. Again the equation of motion for @xmath
implies that the @xmath ’s are massless in four dimension. This gives
@xmath such gauge fields. As for the chiral multiplet introduced above,
the fermionic superpartners arise from the gravitino field.

Since on a manifold with @xmath holonomy there are no harmonic 1-forms (
@xmath ), there are no four dimensional 2-forms arising from @xmath .

Summarizing, the low energy four dimensional effective theory is an
@xmath supergravity theory coupled to @xmath Abelian vector multiplets
and @xmath massless, neutral chiral multiplets. This theory is
relatively uninteresting from a phenomenological point of view, since
the gauge group is Abelian and there are no light charged particles.
These features arise in the effective theory if we compactify on a
singular @xmath holonomy manifold.

In the next section we will briefly describe the theory arising from
singularities.

###### Compactification on Singular Manifolds

Since compactification on smooth manifolds does not produce interesting
physics, one has to study dynamics of M-theory on singular @xmath
holonomy manifolds [ 36 ] .

One simple and common kind of singularity is an orbifold singularity.
Locally, it can be represented as a quotient of @xmath by some discrete
group @xmath : @xmath . In perturbative string theory, the physics
associated with such singularities can be systematically extracted from
the orbifold conformal field theory. Typically, one finds new massless
degrees of freedom localized at the orbifold singularity. However, CFT
technique is not applicable for studying M-theory on singular @xmath
-manifolds. Moreover many interesting phenomena occur at singularities
which are not of the orbifold type. One can study M-theory dynamics on
singularities, by using the duality of this theory with Heterotic and
Type IIA string theories [ 94 , 95 ] . In what follows we will use the
duality with the Heterotic theory.

Non-Abelian Gauge Fields

Non-Abelian gauge groups emerge from M-theory when the compact space has
a so called ADE-singularity [ 37 , 96 ] . One can learn this in the
context of the duality between M-theory on @xmath and the Heterotic
string on a flat 3-torus @xmath [ 94 ] .

Let us review this duality briefly [ 36 ] . @xmath is a four dimensional
manifold with holonomy group @xmath . Its metric moduli space has
dimension 58. An @xmath holonomy metric admits two parallel spinors,
which when tensored with the @xmath constant spinor of the seven
dimensional Minkowski space give 16 global supercharges. This
corresponds to minimal supersymmetry in seven dimensions. On a smooth
point in the moduli space, we can use KK reduction to get 58 massless
scalars. Additionally, since @xmath , reducing @xmath on a basis of
harmonic 2-forms, we obtain a @xmath gauge group in seven dimensions.

This is the same spectrum of Heterotic compactification on @xmath at a
general point of the moduli space. The Heterotic string theory in ten
dimensions has a bosonic massless spectrum given by the metric @xmath ,
the 2-form @xmath , the dilaton @xmath and non-Abelian gauge fields with
group @xmath or @xmath . There are 16 global supersymmetries that are
preserved by compactification on @xmath . One gets 6 scalars from the
fluctuations of the metric, 3 scalars form @xmath and 1 from the
dilaton. Then one gets scalars from the gauge fields with component
along @xmath . The condition for them to be supersymmetric on @xmath is
that their field strengths vanish. They are parametrized by Wilson lines
around the three independent cycles of @xmath . These flat connections
break the gauge group to the subgroup whose generators commutes with
them. The most general unbroken group is @xmath . This gives rise to 48
more scalars. The total amount of scalars is actually 58 like in the
M-theory dual. There are then 16 gauge fields coming from the unbroken
gauge group, 3 coming from @xmath fluctuations and 3 from @xmath ,
giving a total @xmath gauge group in seven dimensions, as in M-theory.

At special points of the Heterotic moduli space, some of the eigenvalues
of the flat connections will vanish and so the gauge group can be
enhanced to a non-Abelian one. If M-theory on @xmath is actually
equivalent to the Heterotic string theory in seven dimensions, it too
should exhibit non-Abelian symmetry enhancement at special point in the
moduli space. These points are precisely the points where @xmath
develops orbifold singularities. These singularities can give rise to
Lie groups of the type A, D or E, and so are called ADE-singularities.

Locally these singularities can be described as @xmath , where @xmath is
a finite subgroup of @xmath , in order to preserve supersymmetry. In
absence of gravity, the low energy physics of M-theory on @xmath is
described by super Yang-Mills theory on @xmath with ADE gauge group.
@xmath is the singular point, so the gauge theory is localized on the
singularity [ 37 ] .

We have thus far restricted our attention to the ADE singularities in
@xmath . However, we can consider more complicated spacetimes @xmath
with ADE singularities along more general spacetimes @xmath . In the
context of @xmath compactification on @xmath , we want @xmath to be of
the form @xmath , with @xmath the locus of ADE singularities inside
@xmath . Near @xmath , @xmath looks like @xmath . In order to study the
gauge theory dynamics without gravity, we can restrict our attention to
the physics near the singularity. So we focus on seven dimensional super
Yang-Mills theory on @xmath .

In flat spacetime the SYM theory has a global symmetry group given by
@xmath . The first factor is the R-symmetry,while the second one is the
Lorentz group. The theory has a gauge field transforming in the @xmath ,
scalars in the @xmath and fermions in the @xmath representations. All
these fields transform in the adjoint representation of the gauge group.
The 16 supersymmetries transform in the @xmath representation of the
symmetry group.

On @xmath the symmetry group is broken to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The supersymmetries transform as @xmath . For large enough @xmath and at
energy scales below the inverse size of @xmath , we can describe the
physics in terms of a four dimensional gauge theory. In order to have a
supersymmetric theory, we must require that the space @xmath admits a
@xmath holonomy metric. When @xmath is curved, this metric cannot be the
product of the locally flat metric on @xmath and a metric on @xmath .
Instead the seven dimensional @xmath manifold is a non-trivial @xmath
fibration over @xmath . The locus of singularity of @xmath is a copy of
@xmath .

The condition of supersymmetry requires that this fibration has holonomy
group @xmath . If it is the case, we must identify the @xmath group in (
3.72 ) with @xmath [ 36 ] . This breaks the symmetries to the diagonal
subgroup of the two @xmath ’s and implies that the effective four
dimensional field theory is classically supersymmetric. Identifying the
two groups breaks the symmetry group down to @xmath under which the
supercharges transform as @xmath . We now have supersymmetry because the
@xmath can be taken to be constant on @xmath .

We also stress that the locus of ADE-singularity is a calibrated cycle
with respect to the associative form @xmath .

Supposing we could find a @xmath manifold of this type, we can find the
four dimensional supersymmetric gauge theory that it corresponds to.
Assuming @xmath to be smooth and large, we can do a standard KK
reduction on it. Under @xmath , the seven dimensional gauge fields
transform as @xmath , the three scalars give @xmath and the fermions
give @xmath . Thus the fields that are scalars under the four
dimensional Lorentz group are two copies of the @xmath of @xmath , that
can be interpreted as two one forms on @xmath . These will be massless
if they are zero modes of the Laplacian on @xmath . Thus there will be
precisely @xmath of these. Their superpartners are clearly the @xmath
fermions, which will be massless by supersymmetry. These fields collect
into @xmath chiral superfields.

The @xmath field is massless if it is constant on @xmath and this gives
one gauge field in four dimensions. The superpartners are the remaining
fermions transforming as @xmath .

All of these fields transform in the adjoint representation of the ADE
gauge group. So the four dimensional spectrum theory is an @xmath SYM
with @xmath massless adjoint chiral supermultiplets.

Chiral Matter Fields

The theory described so far is not chiral. Therefore one has to
introduce some new type of singularities, that are worse than orbifold
ones [ 38 ] . Again we use the duality with Heterotic string theory to
determine what kind of singularities are required. We describe it in a
specific example, that will be usefull later on. We will consider the
case @xmath heterotic string with @xmath as the unbroken gauge group.
Such model can have chiral @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s of @xmath . Let us
see how this happens in the region of moduli space in which the CY is
@xmath -fibered over @xmath , with small fibers, and then translate to
M-theory on @xmath .

Since the unbroken group is @xmath , the structure group of the gauge
bundle must be another copy of @xmath (the commutant of @xmath in @xmath
). Massless fermions in the Heterotic theory transform in the adjoint of
@xmath . The part of the @xmath adjoint representation that transforms
as @xmath under @xmath , transforms as @xmath under @xmath . So to get
chiral fermions in the @xmath , we must look at zero modes of the Dirac
equation on the CY with values in the @xmath of @xmath .

The regime of validity of the duality between Heterotic theory on a
@xmath fibration over @xmath and M-theory on a @xmath fibration over
@xmath is that the generic radius @xmath of @xmath is much smaller than
the size of @xmath . For small @xmath we can split the Dirac operator
as: @xmath . For a generic fiber of CY @xmath the eigenvalues of @xmath
are all non-zero and are of order @xmath . This is much too large to be
cancelled by the behavior of @xmath . So the zero modes of @xmath are
localized near points in @xmath above which @xmath has zero modes.

When restricted to a @xmath fiber, the @xmath bundle can be described as
a flat bundle with monodromies around the three cycles in @xmath , i.e.
we have three Wilson lines on each fiber. For generic Wilson lines,
every vector in the @xmath of @xmath undergoes non-trivial twists in
going around some of the three cycles. When this is the case, the
minimum eigenvalue of @xmath is of order @xmath . This is simply because
for a generic flat gauge field on @xmath there will be no zero mode.

A zero mode of @xmath above some point @xmath of @xmath arises if for
some vector in the @xmath , the monodromies in the fiber are all
trivial. This means that the monodromies lie in the subgroup @xmath of
@xmath that leaves fixed that vector. The commutant of @xmath in @xmath
is a group @xmath larger than @xmath . So over the point @xmath , the
monodromies commute not just with SU(5) but with @xmath . The
monodromies at @xmath give large masses to all @xmath modes except those
in the adjoint of @xmath .

The fact that, over @xmath , the Heterotic string theory has unbroken
@xmath means that, in the M-theory description, the fiber over @xmath
has a @xmath singularity. Likewise, the fact that away from @xmath , the
Heterotic theory has only @xmath unbroken means that the generic fiber,
in the M-theory description, must contain an @xmath singularity only,
rather than a @xmath singularity. From this we can conclude that in
M-theory the chiral fermions are localized at points in @xmath over
which the ADE-singularity gets worse [ 38 ] .

These singularities arise generally as conical singularities of the
seven dimensional @xmath manifold @xmath . One example is a cone over
weighted projective space @xmath . This six dimensional space has a
family of A @xmath -singularities at points @xmath . This set of points
is a copy of @xmath . As we have said the @xmath manifold @xmath is a
cone over @xmath , so it has a family of A @xmath -singularities which
are a cone over this @xmath . This is a copy of @xmath . Away from the
origin in @xmath , the only singularities are these orbifold
singularities. At the origin however, the whole manifold develops a
conical singularity. One can show that at this point the singularity
becomes a A @xmath -singularity, giving the possibility of the
appearance of chiral fermions [ 38 ] .

##### 3.4.3 Flux Superpotential and Moduli Stabilization

Turning on a background field strength @xmath for @xmath along the
compact directions, induces the following superpotential into the four
dimensional theory [ 97 , 98 , 99 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relative factor of @xmath between the two terms is required by
supersymmetry.

Since @xmath does not depend on the metric and is harmonic (from the
equation of motion for @xmath ) and quantized, we can expand it in terms
of a basis of harmonic 4-forms @xmath ( @xmath ) which are dual to the
harmonic 3-forms @xmath . This means that the superpotential can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is therefore linear in the moduli with coefficient which are the
flux quanta. This is a standard form for the superpotential, as we have
seen for Type II flux compactifications. Here and in what follows we
have put @xmath .

The Kähler potential depends only on the @xmath ’s and not on the axions
and it is given by ⁶ ⁶ 6 Our normalization conventions for @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are slightly different from [ 99 , 98 ] . The value of
the normalization coefficient appearing in ( 3.75 ) in front of @xmath
is verified in appendix B.1 . [ 99 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath Vol @xmath ; Vol @xmath is the volume of the seven
dimensional manifold @xmath and @xmath is given by @xmath . @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it is a homogeneous function of the @xmath of degree @xmath . This
classical metric will receive quantum corrections, but at large enough
volumes such corrections can be argued to be small. Since @xmath depends
non-linearly on the metric, @xmath is a non-linear function of the
moduli.

The @xmath supergravity potential is given by the formula ( 2.35 ).
Inserting the expressions above for @xmath and @xmath one gets a
definite positive potential that runs off to zero at infinity. So one
must find a new mechanism to fix all the moduli. This was found in [ 100
] . The idea is to turn on a backround value for the gauge fields and
their bosonic superpartners living on the locus @xmath of
ADE-singularities of @xmath . As we have seen in the previous section,
the seven dimensional gauge field gives rise to a 1-form @xmath on the
three dimensional submanifold @xmath that is complexified by a 1-form
@xmath coming from the scalar superpartners. We turn on background
values for these 1-forms. Their contribution to the superpotential is
given by the complex Chern-Simons functional

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its critical points are complex flat connections, that are the solutions
to the supersymmetry equations [ 100 ] . @xmath is a topologically
invariant functional, independent of the geometric moduli ⁷ ⁷ 7 It is
not obvious that @xmath admits such topological invariant. The only
known examples of flat connection with non-zero complex and non-real
Chern-Simons invariant are in the cases in which @xmath , i.e when
@xmath is diffeomorphic to a compact 3-manifold which admits a
hyperbolic metric. :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general this constant is complex. In particular the real part is only
well defined modulo 1 in appropriate units and is essentially the more
familiar real Chern-Simons invariant. Its imaginary part however can in
general take any possibly large real number [ 100 ] .

The resulting superpotential is then given by [ 97 , 98 , 99 , 100 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

This superpotential was demonstrated to give at least a supersymmetric
vacuum in which all the geometric moduli are stabilized [ 100 ] . We
describe how this mechanism works in the simple example of @xmath . In
this case the supersymmetry condition @xmath gives the following
equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

This has the unique solution @xmath . The supergravity approximation is
valid when the volume of @xmath is large and this corresponds to @xmath
being large. Therefore as long as @xmath is large compared to the flux
@xmath , the minimum exists in a region of field space within the
approximation.

The potential also has another critical point at finite @xmath . This
critical point is a de Sitter local maximum.

For @xmath generic, there can be several non-supersymmetric vacua, where
all the geometric moduli are fixes. This is shown in the example studied
in [ 42 ] and reviewed in details in the section 4.3.2 .

#### Final Remarks

In this chapter, we have seen three corners of String/M-theory that can
give phenomenological viable compactifications. In the following part of
this thesis, we will see how the various approaches to string
phenomenology, that we described in the Introduction, can be applied to
these sets of vacua.

First of all, we will describe the statistical approach to the enormous
number of vacua arising in flux compactifications. Then we will deal
with the ten dimensional description of such compactifications. Finally
we will study some particular features of these vacua that can have
important phenomenological consequences.

## Part II Aspects of String Phenomenology

### Chapter 4 Statistics of Vacua

In this chapter we will describe the statistical approach to the
Landscape, made natural by the enormous number of four dimensional
string vacua. After a review of motivations for a statistical study and
of techniques and results obtained with this approach, we will present
the results obtained in [ 42 ] , where we studied some ensembles of
M-theory vacua.

#### 4.1 Statistics on the Landscape of String Vacua

In the previous chapter we have described the effects, on the four
dimensional effective theory, of turning on fluxes on the internal
manifold. The most important qualitative feature of fluxes is that,
since their contribution to the energy depends on the geometric moduli,
minimizing this energy will stabilize moduli, eliminating undesired
massless fields. Since coupling constants in the low energy theory
depend on moduli, finding the values at which moduli can be stabilized
is an essential step in determining low energy predictions.

Taking into account the large number of possible discrete choices for
the fluxes, one is led to a “discretum” of a large number of vacua, the
so called “Landscape”. A natural question is if one or more of them
describe our universe. In fact there are many different scenarios for
string phenomenology, each requiring different properties of the vacuum.
Thus, rather than study individual vacua, M. Douglas and collaborators
proposed to study the overall distribution of vacua in moduli space, and
the distribution of quantities such as the cosmological constant and
supersymmetry breaking scale. This approach may be useful to: 1)
estimate the frequency with which SM-like models arise in
Sting/M-theory; 2) get an idea in which regions of the Landscape to look
for realistic models, giving a guide for model building; 3) find
statistical evidence that SM-like properties are extremely rare in
String/M-theory, getting evidence against it; 4) argue for a uniform
distribution of certain physical quantities like for example the
cosmological constant, giving a new approach to the so called fine
tuning problems.

Guidance for model building provides the main motivation for statistical
studies. Actually, before embarking on the search and construction of
vacua describing our world, it would be useful to know what our chances
of success are. For example it could save us a lot of time and effort if
we found that large regions of the Landscape (or more precisely large
classes of models) are excluded. Traditionally the approach has been to
focus on the most easily controllable constraints such as light charged
particle spectra, while ignoring issues such as moduli stabilization,
supersymmetry breaking or the cosmological constant. However these
constraints are equally important, and it would be very useful to
estimate how much they reduce the set of possibilities.

In [ 12 ] , it was further pointed out that a sufficiently fine
“discretum” of string theory vacua could naturally accommodate an
extremely small but nonzero cosmological constant. More precisely, in an
ensemble of @xmath vacua with roughly uniform distributed cosmological
constant @xmath , one expects that there exist vacua realizing a
cosmological constant as small as @xmath . To obtain the observed @xmath
one should have @xmath . To find out whether this idea can be realized
in a given ensemble of vacua, and more generally to analyze how strongly
constraints on various parameters reduce the number of possibilities
within a given class of models, one would like to have an estimate of
how many vacua with certain properties lie in a given region of the
Landscape. In other words, one needs to study the statistics of vacua in
this region (where “statistics” does not refer to any probability
measure, but simply to number distributions on parameter space).

Finally, one could take things one step further and altogether discard
the idea that some dynamical mechanism has uniquely selected our vacuum
and in particular picked the extremely nongeneric scale hierarchies
which just happen to be also necessary to make structure formation and
atoms other than hydrogen or helium possible [ 101 , 102 , 103 , 104 ,
13 ] . Instead, one could start with the hypothesis that a “multiverse”
exists in which a huge number of vacua is actually realized, and in
particular that we observe ourselves to be in a vacuum with such large
scale hierarchies simply because this is needed for structure and atoms,
and therefore observers, to exist. To make direct predictions from just
string theory in such a framework, one would need to know the
probability measure on at least the part of the Landscape compatible
with a number of basic requirements. There is no established way of
computing these probabilities at this time, but as an additional working
hypothesis one might assign for example in a given ensemble of flux
vacua approximately the same probability to every choice of flux. One
could refine this by restricting this equal probability postulate to
subsets of vacua with fixed values of parameters relevant for cosmology,
such as the vacuum energy, as one does for microstates with equal energy
in the microcanonical ensemble of statistical mechanics. Different
choices of these relevant parameters might then be weighted by
cosmological considerations (up to the extent that this is needed, as
some will be effectively fixed by environmental requirements). Under
such hypotheses, suitable number distributions can be interpreted as
probability distributions, and one can test the hypotheses that went in
by Bayesian inference.

It should be emphasized that this framework is significantly more
predictive than the traditional model building approach of simply
considering any model compatible with current observations. Under these
simple hypotheses, the Landscape picture together with a few rough
environmental principles gives a new notion of naturalness for effective
field theories, which translates into a set of rules for model building.
This turns out to lead to very distinct models which do not need
contrived engineering to fit known data, and which moreover give very
specific predictions, including many unambiguous signatures at LHC [ 104
, 105 , 13 ] .

In conclusion, the vacua statistical program will improve our knowledge
of the vacua of String/M-theory. It is important both from a theoretical
point of view, being a step through a complete understanding of the
theory, and from a phenomenological point of view, giving hints of how
face the problem of finding the Standard Model inside String/M-theory.

##### Statistical Methods

From String/M-theory, one can extract different @xmath effective four
dimensional supergravity theories with a given configuration (moduli)
space. Each of these theories includes discrete data @xmath , such as
fluxes, brane charges, etc. This defines ensembles of four dimensional
effective supergravity theories @xmath , with Lagrangians @xmath , whose
potential on the moduli space is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Minimizing this potential, one finds the vacua of the theory. Varying
the discrete data, the potential changes and one finds different vacua.
Collecting all these solutions, one gets a discretum of vacua @xmath ,
that can be represented as in fig. 4.1 . The physical quantities depend
on the moduli and so one can study the distribution of them over the
discretum of vacua. In particular phenomenological or theoretical
constraints on physical observables select a region in the moduli space
and one can compute how many vacua there are that realize these
constraints, just counting the points inside the region (see fig. 4.1 ).

Conceptually, the simplest distribution one could consider is the
density of supersymmetric vacua [ 9 ] . As we have seen, a
supersymmetric vacuum is a solution of @xmath , thus the density of such
vacua is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a delta function at @xmath , with normalization factor
such that each solution of @xmath contributes unit weight in an integral
over @xmath . Thus, integrating this density over a region of the moduli
space, gives the number of vacua which stabilize the moduli in that
region.

One can also define joint distributions such as the distribution of
supersymmetric vacua with a given cosmological constant, that for a
supersymmetric minimum is given by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we have a finite list of supergravity theories @xmath , and if in
each the number of vacua is finite, such a density will be a sum of
delta functions. This is hard to study and for many purposes it is
enough to use a continuous approximation to this density, a function
@xmath whose integral over a region @xmath approximates the actual
number of vacua in this region.

Now, suppose we have an explicit string construction of the Standard
Model, and we are trying to reproduce the actual value for some physical
quantities, such as Yukawa couplings. As we have said, these quantities
depend on the moduli of the compactification. When we have their
explicit formula in terms of the moduli, we can use it to identify a
region of the moduli space where their values is compatible with the
experiments (see fig. 4.1 ). The string construction ”works” if this
region contains vacua. If we can find an approximate density @xmath and
integrating it on this region gives a non-zero value, we cannot
immediately conclude that there exists a vacuum in that region. The
result could be that the number of vacua is @xmath ; in this case one
has to be careful in interpreting the result, and should find other
methods to prove if there exists or not a vacuum in that region. However
if there are other string constructions that lead to different regions
of the Landscape, with a much bigger number of vacua, then it is more
natural to search the SM there. This criterium of naturalness is called
statistical selection and it is described in [ 11 ] . To understand how
this mechanism works, we report the example given there. Let us first
assume that the distribution of the cosmological constant (cc) is
uniform on the space of vacua. Then suppose there are @xmath vacua with
the property @xmath , and which realize all known physics, except for
the observed cosmological constant (cc). We would expect that out of
this set, @xmath vacua reproduce the observed cc. Suppose furthermore
that there exist diffrent @xmath vacua with the property @xmath , that
realize the known physics except for the value of cc. Then we expect
that the observed cc is realized on @xmath vacua. As we have said above
we will not conclude that there are no vacua realizing the property
@xmath . On the other hand we have another set of vacua that work much
better. So we have reasonable grounds for expecting the property @xmath
instead of @xmath . This is not an exact prediction, but if @xmath was
realized in nature, we could say to have an evidence against string
theory. In a systematic approach, one would take all aspects of the
physics resulting from each choice of vacuum, not just the cc, but
couplings and matter content as well, and make analogous arguments.
Clearly, if the total number of vacua is too large, the statistical
selection just described cannot work.

One can also profit by the hypothesis that some distributions are
statistically independent. In this case, one can argue that the fraction
of vacua which realize both properties is the product of the fractions
which realize each, without explicitly finding the vacua that realize
both. Naturally, before multiplying the distribution one should first
verify that this hypothesis is true. On the other hand, if one found
that the hypothesis is false, this would be surprising and even more
interesting, as it could happen that it is peculiar of string theory.

Multiplying the fractions of vacua that realize the experimental
constraints leads to an estimate of the fraction of vacua which agree
with the Standard Model. This ratio is so small that the task of finding
the vacuum which actually realizes all of its properties simultaneously
is almost impossible. A statistical study of the distributions seems to
be a more approachable problem and could give hints to find the vacua
describing the SM with all its properties realized.

###### Finiteness of Vacua

In counting vacua, one is implicitly assuming that the number of
quasi-realistic vacua of String/M-theory is finite. Since it is easy to
write down effective potential with an infinite number of local minima,
this is a non-trivial hypothesis, which must be checked. Actually there
are many well established infinite series of compactifications, such as
Freund-Rubin ones.

A basic reason to want a finite number of quasi-realistic vacua, is that
if this is not true, one runs a real risk that the theory can match any
set of observables, and so it would not be falsifiable. However one must
say that this is not automatic: one can have infinite series which would
lead to a definite prediction. This happens for example if the series
has an accumulation point: almost all the vacua give the same
prediction, and one could further say that this accumulation point is
the preferred prediction. One could also have that the measure factor
suppresses infinite series. In any case the question of finiteness of
the number of vacua is a very important issue to solve, and at present
there is no completely general argument for it. To see a discussion look
at [ 106 ] , where the authors presented evidence that the number of
string/M-theory vacua consistent with experiments is a finite number.
They did that both by explicit analysis of infinite sequences of vacua
and by applying various mathematical finiteness theorems.

#### 4.2 Ensembles of Vacua

Up until [ 42 ] most statistical Landscape studies had focused on Type
IIB flux vacua. Because of string duality, one might optimistically hope
that such IIB flux vacua could be representative, in the sense that they
constitute a significant fraction of all string vacua, perhaps
constrained to have some additional properties such as supersymmetry in
the UV. However, it should be noted that the studies in [ 69 ] - [ 91 ]
are limited to vacua described as Calabi-Yau orientifolds at moderately
large volume and moderately weak string coupling, and strictly speaking
these represent only a corner of the string theory Landscape. In
principle, distributions of observables could change dramatically as one
explores different regions of the Landscape. It was suggested in [ 107 ]
that the set of four dimensional string and M-theory vacua with @xmath
or no supersymmetry is a disconnected space whose different components
represent qualitatively different low energy physics, and this could
translate into very different statistical properties. This gave us
additional motivation to study the statistics of @xmath vacua and
compare to the IIB case.

Another branch of the Landscape whose statistical analysis we initiated
in [ 42 ] is the set of Freund-Rubin vacua [ 49 ] , i.e. M-theory
compactifications on Einstein manifolds with positive scalar curvature.
Their properties are quite different from more familiar
compactifications on special holonomy manifolds, and this is reflected
in their vacuum distributions which are very different as well.

In this work, we will present in details the statistical study of
ensembles of M-theory compactifications on @xmath holonomy manifolds
with fluxes. For comparison, we will briefly review the result obtained
in the statistical study of Type IIB flux vacua [ 69 , 9 , 10 ] and of
M-theory Freund-Rubin vacua [ 42 ] . ¹ ¹ 1 Analogous statistica studies
have also been done on the Heterotic String Landscape [ 108 , 109 , 110
] .

##### Type IIB Statistics

Here we present what is known about the statistics of IIB flux vacua of
Calabi-Yau orientifolds. There is a natural splitting of Kähler and
complex structure moduli in this context. We have seen that turning on
fluxes induces a superpotential which only depends on the complex
structure moduli. We have also described how, in suitable circumstances,
the Kähler moduli can be stabilized by nonperturbative effects. It is
reasonable to ignore the Kähler moduli altogether as far as vacuum
statistics is concerned, because: 1) the main contribution to vacuum
multiplicities comes from the huge number of different fluxes, 2) at
sufficiently large volume the Kähler moduli do not influence the
positions in complex structure moduli space significantly, and 3)
practically, the Kähler sector is less under control and more difficult
to treat systematically.

In what follows we describe the results for the distributions of moduli,
cosmological constants, volumes and supersymmetry breaking scales for
IIB flux vacua.

-   As seen at page 3.2 , the fluxes are constrained by the condition
    @xmath , where @xmath denotes the contribution of the negative
    D3-charge objects and the 3-form fluxes D3-charge is given by @xmath
    . The number of supersymmetric vacua in a region @xmath of dilaton
    and complex structure moduli space and satisfying @xmath is given
    by:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.4)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

    As argued in the introduction of this chapter, we can approximate
    the discrete sum over the flux quanta by an integral. So the sum
    over all vacua can be written as:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    where @xmath denotes the 3-form fluxes, and @xmath .
    Using this formula, @xmath was estimated by [ 69 ] , and the result
    is:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the curvature form on the moduli space and @xmath
    the Kähler form. ² ² 2 Actually this expression gives an index
    rather than an absolute number: it counts vacua with signs, so it is
    strictly speaking a lower bound. Essentially this expression implies
    that vacua are uniformly distributed over moduli space, except when
    the curvature part becomes important, which is the case near
    conifold degenerations.

-   The cosmological constant for supersymmetric vacua is @xmath . Its
    distribution for values much smaller than the string scale was found
    in [ 9 ] to be essentially uniform, i.e.

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Here @xmath is the total number of flux vacua.

-   The compactification volume @xmath is stabilized by nonperturbative
    D3-instanton effects and/or gaugino condensates, both of which give
    contributions @xmath to the superpotential, where @xmath decreases
    when @xmath increases. These have to balance against the
    contribution @xmath from the fluxes. That is, at sufficiently large
    @xmath (or equivalently sufficiently small @xmath ), @xmath . Since
    @xmath is uniformly distributed according to ( 4.7 ), this gives the
    volume distribution

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Large volumes are therefore exponentially suppressed, and for
    reasonable values of @xmath and @xmath , the maximal volume will be
    of the order @xmath . ³ ³ 3 One could also interpret the IIB complex
    structures fixed by the fluxes to be mirror to IIA Kähler moduli.
    Then the distribution of IIA compactification volumes can be shown
    to be

    @xmath (4.9)

    for @xmath . Here @xmath is a constant weakly decreasing with
    increasing @xmath . Again, large volumes are suppressed, now bounded
    by @xmath .

-   The flux potential has nonsupersymmetric minima as well. The
    supersymmetry breaking scale @xmath for @xmath is distributed as [
    10 ]

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    if no further constraints are imposed, and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    if one requires the cosmological constant @xmath to be much smaller
    than @xmath . Scenarios in which supersymmetry breaking is driven by
    D-terms were also considered in [ 10 ] , and it was pointed out that
    in the special case of supersymmetry breaking by an anti-D3 brane at
    the bottom of a conifold throat, low scales are more natural. Since
    we work in the large radius regime, there is no counterpart of this
    scenario in the M-theory compactifications we will study, so we will
    not get into details here. We should also point out that large
    classes of string compactifications have been proposed in [ 111 ]
    where supersymmetry is broken at the KK scale.

##### Freund-Rubin Statistics

Freund-Rubin vacua of M-theory have geometry @xmath , with @xmath a
positively curved seven dimensional Einstein manifold, and can be
understood as arising from the near-horizon geometry of @xmath
coincident M5-branes, which become @xmath units of @xmath -flux in the
AdS-space. The compactification volume is fixed and depends on @xmath
and the choice of @xmath . Typically, these geometries cannot really be
considered as compactifications on @xmath in the usual sense, because
the Kaluza-Klein scale tends to be of the same order as the AdS scale.

Nevertheless one can study the distributions of AdS cosmological
constants @xmath and compactification volumes @xmath . We did this in [
42 ] for a model ensemble with @xmath , where we vary @xmath and @xmath
. This ensemble is extremely simple, and is therefore additionally
useful as a simple toy model for testing counting methods.

At fixed @xmath , i.e. for a fixed topology of the extra dimensions, we
found the following distributions for @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This already shows a dramatic difference compared to IIB flux vacua.
First, there are an infinite number of vacua, since @xmath is arbitrary.
Secondly, the distribution of @xmath is not uniform near zero, but
diverges. Finally, large volumes are not suppressed, as the larger
@xmath , the larger the volume becomes.

Allowing both @xmath and @xmath to vary, i.e. by sampling the topology
of the extra dimensions as well, these results significantly change. Now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The qualitative features are the same though: smaller cosmological
constants and larger volumes are favored. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Perhaps we should stress
that by “favored” we do not mean “more probable”. As emphasized earlier,
we are computing number distributions at this level, not probability
distributions. We also obtain the joint distribution for @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath when @xmath and zero otherwise (see also fig. 4.2 ). One
interesting feature that can be read off from this distribution is that
at fixed @xmath , @xmath actually accumulates at smaller values,
opposite to what we found for the unconstrained case. This is possible
because the step function @xmath allows @xmath to vary over a larger
domain when @xmath increases. This illustrates the importance of
constraints for statements about which parameters are favored. Such
issues become especially important if one wishes to interpret number
distributions as probability distributions, since through such
correlations, the dependence of these probabilities on one parameter may
strongly influence the likelihood of values of the other.

#### 4.3 @xmath holonomy Statistics

As we have seen in the previous chapter, @xmath holonomy vacua are
compactifications of M-theory to four dimensions which, in the absence
of flux classically give four dimensional @xmath vacua with zero
cosmological constant. These classical vacua have @xmath complex moduli,
of which the real parts are axions @xmath and the other half @xmath are
the massless fluctuations of the metric on @xmath .

The addition of fluxes when @xmath is smooth does not stabilize these
moduli, as the induced potential is positive definite and runs down to
zero at infinite volume. However, if @xmath has an orbifold singularity
along a three dimensional manifold @xmath , additional non-Abelian
degrees of freedom arise from massless membranes [ 96 ] . Non-Abelian
flux for these degrees of freedom then gives an additional contribution
to the potential which can stabilize all the moduli if @xmath admits a
complex, non-real Chern-Simons invariant [ 100 ] .

The vacua studied in [ 100 ] were supersymmetric with negative
cosmological constant. In fact, it was shown that in the large radius
approximation, for a given flux within a certain range, there is a
single supersymmetric vacuum (in addition to an unstable de Sitter
vacuum). In principle however there could be other, non-supersymmetric,
vacua and one of our aims here is to study this possibility. One might
wonder if any of these vacua could be metastable de Sitter. We answered
this question to a certain extent.

One of the difficulties in studying @xmath holonomy compactifications is
that @xmath holonomy manifolds are technically very difficult to
produce. For instance, we still do not know whether or not there exists
a @xmath holonomy manifold with a non-real Chern-Simons invariant. So
how can we hope to study the statistics of such vacua? As we have seen,
the superpotential of these @xmath compactifications with flux is very
simple and does not contain much information about @xmath . Instead,
this information comes through the Kähler potential on moduli space,
which could be a quite complicated function in general, of which very
little is concretely known. One approach then is to try to obtain
general results for an arbitrary Kähler potential. We will show this in
the next section by extending some of the general techniques which were
developed in the context mainly of IIB flux vacua in [ 69 , 9 , 10 ] .
Secondly we could study particular ensembles of model Kähler potentials
and hope that the results are representative in general. We follow this
approach in section 4.3.2 , where we study a particular class of model
Kähler potentials which allow explicit construction of all
supersymmetric and nonsupersymmetric vacua.

##### 4.3.1 General Results

###### @xmath Compactifications with Fluxes and Chern-Simons Invariants

We remind that the complexified moduli space @xmath of a @xmath holonomy
compactification of M-theory has dimension @xmath and has holomorphic
coordinates @xmath , defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath -invariant 3-form on @xmath . The metric on
@xmath is Kähler, derived from the Kähler potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a homogeneous function of the @xmath of degree @xmath .

We turn on 4-form flux

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is a basis of @xmath , and also assume the
presence of a complex Chern-Simons contribution as described in section
3.4.3 . This induces the superpotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

on @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the real and imaginary parts of
the complex Chern-Simons invariant.

The corresponding potential is obtained from the standard four
dimensional supergravity expression ( 2.35 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here and in what follows, we have put @xmath .

Since we are working in the large radius regime, the axions @xmath
essentially decouple from the moduli @xmath , and all nontrivial
structure resides in the latter sector. This is seen as follows. Writing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so on, the potential ( 4.19 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the last line we used the fact that the volume @xmath is homogeneous
of degree 7/3, which implies the following identities:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second is obtained from the first by differentiation.

Since @xmath and everything else in ( 4.22 ) depends only on @xmath , it
is clear that any critical point of @xmath will fix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore @xmath . Apart from this, the @xmath are left
undetermined, and they decouple from the @xmath . From now on we will
work on this slice of moduli space, so we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The geometry of the real moduli space @xmath parametrized by the @xmath
is the real analog of Kähler, often called Hessian, with metric @xmath .

###### Distribution of Supersymmetric Vacua over Moduli Space

The aim of this section is to find the distribution of vacua over @xmath
, along the lines of [ 69 , 9 , 10 ] . As seen before, the condition for
a supersymmetric vacuum in the above notations is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In what follows we will drop the index @xmath to avoid cluttering. The
number of solutions in a region @xmath of @xmath , for all possible
fluxes @xmath but at fixed @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The determinant factor ensures every zero of the delta-function argument
is counted with weight 1. As in Type IIB we approximate expression for
@xmath by replacing the discrete sum over @xmath by a continuous
integral, which is a good approximation if the number of contributing
lattice points is large (which will be the case for sufficiently large
@xmath ). Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Differentiating ( 4.26 ) and using ( 4.27 ) and ( 4.23 ), one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

One eigenvector of the matrix in brackets is @xmath , with eigenvalue
@xmath (this follows again from ( 4.23 )). On the orthogonal complement
@xmath , the matrix is just the identity, so all other eigenvalues are
@xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, by contracting ( 4.26 ) with @xmath , we get at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

To compute ( 4.29 ), we change variables from @xmath to @xmath . The
Jacobian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting everything together, we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the part of the complexified moduli space projecting
onto @xmath ( i.e. the direct product of @xmath with the @xmath -torus
@xmath swept out by the axions @xmath ), and the volume is measured
using the Kähler metric @xmath on this space.

Thus, supersymmetric vacua are distributed uniformly over moduli space.
This result is similar to the Type IIB orientifold case studied in [ 9 ]
, but simpler: the Type IIB vacuum number density involves curvature
terms as well, and in order to get a closed form expression for @xmath ,
it was necessary there to count vacua with signs rather than their
absolute number.

Note that in any finite region of moduli space, the number of vacua is
finite, because @xmath is finite despite the absence of a tadpole cutoff
on the fluxes. In particular, the total number of vacua in the large
radius region of moduli space (where our computation is valid) is
finite. For IIB vacua on the other hand, finiteness is only obtained
after imposing the tadpole cutoff @xmath on the fluxes. In a way, the
Chern-Simons invariant @xmath plays the role of @xmath here.

The simplest example is the case @xmath . Then homogeneity fixes @xmath
, so @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, vacua become denser towards smaller volume of @xmath , and from
this equation one would estimate there are no vacua with @xmath , which
is where @xmath drops below 1. Indeed, it is easily verified that the
exact critical point solution is @xmath , so the largest possible value
of @xmath , obtained at @xmath , is precisely @xmath . Better even, from
the explicit solution it easily follows that the approximate
distribution ( 4.37 ) becomes in fact exact by rounding off the right
hand side to the nearest smaller integer.

###### Large Volume Suppression

Although the precise form of the metric for @xmath is unfortunately not
known, one general feature is easy to deduce: flux vacua with large
compactification volume are suppressed, and strongly so if the number of
moduli is large. This follows from simple scaling. If @xmath , @xmath
shifts with a constant, so @xmath and the measure @xmath . Thus we have
for example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is independent of @xmath and @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 Even though the
obvious metric divergence at @xmath is avoided by bounding @xmath from
below, it might still be possible that this bound alone does not
determine a finite volume region in @xmath -space. Then the left hand
side will be infinite and the scaling becomes meaningless. In this case,
additional cutoffs should be imposed, which will complicate the
dependence on @xmath , but large volume suppression is still to be
expected. Hence large compactification volume is strongly suppressed
when @xmath is large.

To get an estimate for the absolute number of vacua with @xmath , one
would need to estimate @xmath in ( 4.39 ). This would be quite hard in
general even if the metric was explicitly known. It is expected that the
volume has an upper bound as we confirm in section 4.3.2 . In general,
large extra dimension scenarios with, say, micrometer scale
compactification radii are therefore excluded in these ensembles unless
@xmath is exceedingly large.

###### Distribution of Supersymmetric Cosmological Constants

The vacuum energy in a supersymmetric vacuum is, in four dimensional
Planck units, using ( 4.32 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Therefore, the only way to get a small cosmological
constant is to have large compactification volume. This contrasts with
the ensemble of type IIB flux vacua, where very small cosmological
constants can be obtained at arbitrary complex structure. The underlying
reason is the fact that in IIB, there are four times as many fluxes as
equations @xmath , so at a given point, there is still a whole space of
(real) fluxes solving the equations. This freedom can be used to tune
the cosmological constant to a small value. Here on the other hand,
there is only one flux per equation, so at a given @xmath , the fluxes
are completely fixed, and no freedom remains to tune the cosmological
constant. This would likely change however if more discrete data were
turned on, such as the M-theory duals of IIA RR 2-form flux or IIB NS
3-form flux. Unfortunately these are difficult to describe
systematically in M-theory in a way suitable for statistical analysis.

Let us compute the distribution of cosmological constants more
precisely. Equation ( 4.40 ) implies that this follows directly from the
distribution of volumes. Using ( 4.39 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding distribution density is therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, for @xmath , the distribution diverges at @xmath , while
for @xmath , the density goes to zero. We will see that one gets a lower
bound for @xmath . For large @xmath , this turns out to be much larger
than the naive @xmath which was found to be a good estimate in the Type
IIB case, where the cosmological constants of supersymmetric vacua are
always distributed uniformly near zero [ 9 ] .

Because @xmath manifolds with many moduli are much more numerous than
those with only a few, we can thus conclude that small cosmological
constants are (without further constraints) strongly suppressed in the
ensemble of all supersymmetric @xmath flux vacua.

###### Nonsupersymmetric Vacua

A vacuum satisfies @xmath , and metastability requires @xmath . Thus,
the number of all metastable vacua in a region @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In principle one could again approximate the sum over @xmath by an
integral and try to solve the integral by changing to appropriate
variables, as we did for the supersymmetric case in section 4.3.1 , and
as was done in [ 10 ] for supersymmetry breaking scales well below the
fundamental scale. In practice, we encounter some difficulties doing
this for @xmath vacua.

By differentiating equation ( 4.25 ), one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the Hessian Levi-Civita plus Kähler covariant
derivative. The matrix @xmath is related to the fermionic mass matrix,
and with this notation the critical point condition becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 10 ] , a similar equation was interpreted at a given point in
moduli space as a linear eigenvalue equation for the supersymmetry
breaking parameters @xmath , assuming the matrix @xmath (denoted @xmath
there) to be independent of @xmath . This is indeed the case for the
Type IIB flux ensemble, but it is not true for the @xmath ensemble. The
reason is again the fact that there are only as many fluxes as moduli
here, so a complete set of variables parametrizing the fluxes @xmath is
already given by the @xmath (affinely related to the @xmath as expressed
in ( 4.26 )). Therefore, all other quantities such as @xmath and @xmath
and so on must be determined by the @xmath . Indeed, a short computation
gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This means that at a given point in moduli space, ( 4.45 ) is actually a
complicated system of quadratic equations in @xmath , with in general
only one obvious solution, the supersymmetric one, @xmath . In total one
can expect up to @xmath solutions for @xmath . The nonsupersymmetric
solutions will generically be of order @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 The physical
supersymmetry breaking scale has an additional factor @xmath . In
particular it is not possible to tune fluxes to make @xmath
parametrically small, so it is not possible to use the analysis of [ 10
] here, and there is no obvious perturbation scheme to compute ( 4.43 ).

As a simple example we again take the case @xmath . As noted in section
4.3.1 , homogeneity then forces @xmath , hence @xmath , and ( 4.45 )
(considered as an equation for @xmath at fixed @xmath ) has solutions
@xmath and @xmath . Neglecting the metastability condition, the
continuum approximated number density of nonsupersymmetric vacua is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We changed variables from @xmath to @xmath in the integral using the
Jacobian ( 4.33 ). This result should be compared to the supersymmetric
density implied by ( 4.37 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

This does not mean that for a given flux, there are on average five
nonsupersymmetric critical points for every supersymmetric one. In fact,
as we will see below, and as was already pointed out in [ 100 ] , for
@xmath , there is exactly one nonsupersymmetric critical point for every
supersymmetric one: the supersymmetric minimum is separated from @xmath
by a barrier, whose maximum is the (de Sitter, unstable)
nonsupersymmetric critical point. Equation ( 4.49 ) only expresses that
in a given region of moduli space (at large @xmath ), there are on
average 5 times more nonsupersymmetric vacua then supersymmetric ones.
This is simply because in the region of moduli space under
consideration, the nonsupersymmetric critical points are located at five
times the value of @xmath of the supersymmetric critical points.

###### Supersymmetry Breaking Scales

For more moduli, things become more complicated. A few useful general
observations can be made though. If we require @xmath (which remains a
good approximation for what follows as long as @xmath ) we can make a
fairly strong statement about the value of the supersymmetry breaking
scale. Contracting ( 4.45 ) with @xmath and using ( 4.46 )-( 4.47 ) and
( 4.23 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Together with @xmath , this gives a system of two equations in two
variables, @xmath and @xmath , with solutions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The physical supersymmetry breaking scale for such vacua (assuming they
exist) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the four and eleven dimensional Planck
scales.

Let us plug in some numbers to get an idea of the implications. If we
identify @xmath with the unification scale @xmath , this means that
@xmath , and the gravitino mass @xmath . Since @xmath is at least of
order 1, this estimate implies (under the given assumptions) that in
this ensemble supersymmetry is always broken at a scale much higher than
what would be required to get the electroweak scale @xmath without fine
tuning.

In fact a slight extension of this calculation shows that even if one
allows the addition of an arbitrary constant to the potential to reach
@xmath (e.g. to model D-terms or contributions from loop corrections),
the supersymmetry breaking scale in this ensemble is still bounded from
below by the scale @xmath .

One could of course question the identification @xmath . Lowering the
11d Planck scale down to @xmath for example (which requires @xmath )
gives a supersymmetry breaking scale @xmath and gravitino mass @xmath ,
which for @xmath not too large would give low energy supersymmetry.

Note however that in analogy with the supersymmetric case, and based on
general considerations, we expect suppression of vacua at large volume
and therefore also suppression of low energy supersymmetry breaking
scales in this ensemble. This is further confirmed by the exactly
solvable models we will present in section 4.3.2 . In particular we get
a lower bound on the supersymmetry breaking scale from the upper bound
on the volume @xmath , which in general we expect to be of the form
@xmath , with @xmath weakly growing with @xmath . Using the relation (
4.52 ) between @xmath and @xmath , this implies the following lower
bound for the supersymmetry breaking scale

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Getting @xmath below @xmath in the case of many moduli would thus
require @xmath to be at least of order @xmath .

Using the volume distribution ( 4.39 ), we furthermore get an estimate
for the distribution of supersymmetry breaking scales (in four
dimensional Planck units):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant independent of @xmath and @xmath .

Here we have not yet taken into account the tuning required to get a
tiny cosmological constant: @xmath . For a given volume @xmath (or
equivalently a given supersymmetry breaking scale), this requires tuning
the fluxes such that @xmath , which can be expected to at least add
another suppression factor @xmath . The suppression may in fact be
stronger, if the distribution of cosmological constants is not uniform
but more like a Gaussian sharply peaked away from @xmath . Such
distributions are quite plausible in these ensembles, as will be
illustrated by the model ensemble we will study in section 4.3.2 .
Another potentially important factor which we are neglecting in this
analysis is the metastability constraint (this was found in [ 10 ] to
add another factor @xmath to the distribution in the ensembles studied
there).

Finally, when one also takes into account the observed value of the
electroweak scale @xmath , there is an additional expected tuning factor
presumably of order @xmath (in the region of parameter space where this
is less than 1) [ 112 , 113 , 114 ] . Putting everything together, this
gives (for @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

So we see that for @xmath , the Higgs mass and cosmological constant
tunings tilt the balance to lower scales, while for @xmath higher scales
are favored, and strongly so if @xmath is large. For @xmath we should
keep in mind however that there is an absolute lower bound on the
supersymmetry breaking scale, given by ( 4.53 ), which will further be
increased by the additional tunings of cosmological constant and Higgs
mass. We should also not forget that this is only a naive analysis; in
principle a full computation of the measure should be done along the
lines of [ 10 ] , but as we discussed, this does not seem possible in
the present context, because of the absence of a small parameter.

Nevertheless, the above consideration indicate clearly that low energy
supersymmetry is typically disfavored in @xmath flux ensembles, and even
excluded if @xmath is less than @xmath .

##### 4.3.2 Model Kähler Potentials and Exact Solutions

In the previous section we gave a number of general results about
distributions of @xmath flux vacua, independent of the actual form of
the Kähler potential. For nonsupersymmetric vacua the results were less
detailed, mainly because the constraint @xmath is quadratic in @xmath ,
and, unlike the situation in [ 10 ] , no regime exists in which the
equations can be linearized. To make further progress, we study a class
of model Kähler potentials for which all vacua can be computed
explicitly.

In general, at large volume, the Kähler potential is given by ( 3.75 ):
@xmath , where @xmath is the volume of @xmath regarded as a function of
the moduli @xmath . Unlike the case of a Calabi-Yau, where the volume
function is always a third order homogeneous polynomial in the Kähler
moduli, no strong constraints on @xmath are known for @xmath holonomy
manifolds, just that the volume function is homogeneous of degree @xmath
and that minus its logarithm is convex, i.e. the second derivative of
@xmath , which gives the kinetic energies of the moduli, is positive
definite. In general it is difficult to find simple candidate volume
functions which satisfy this positivity constraint. The most general
homogeneous degree @xmath function is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath invariant under scaling. If we now suppose that we are in a
region of moduli space where @xmath is approximately constant then we
can take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

and this in fact gives a positive moduli space metric. This justifies
this particular choice of Kähler potentials.

The above choice of @xmath gives a simple geometry to the moduli space
which is quite natural. The Kähler metric is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is locally the metric of the product of @xmath hyperbolic planes
@xmath , which is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is connected to the curvature tensor by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

So locally the moduli space is @xmath . Globally it is given by @xmath ,
because the axions @xmath are periodic variables. In this class of
@xmath -parameter Kähler potentials labeled by @xmath , all the
information about @xmath is contained in the values of the @xmath .
Since the moduli space metric (equivalently moduli kinetic terms) is
singular if @xmath and the moduli have the wrong sign kinetic terms if
@xmath , we take @xmath . We will not restrict to any other particular
values for the @xmath if it is not necessary to do so ⁷ ⁷ 7 To find
examples which realize these Kähler potentials, consider the case @xmath
and @xmath , Then this Kähler potential correctly describes the seven
radial moduli of @xmath and certain orbifolds thereof [ 115 ] . .

The potential on the moduli space is given by ( 4.22 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

###### Description of the Vacua

We now describe the vacua i.e. the critical points of @xmath . The
equations for the axions give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

which fixes this particular linear combination of axions. We do not
concentrate on fixing the remaining axions, since they are compact
fields and are fixed by any non-perturbative corrections. Our interest
is in the moduli @xmath . The equations of motion for the @xmath reduces
to a system of @xmath quadratic equations. For the case at hand these
are equivalent to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we defined @xmath (no sum). Note that this system separates in
@xmath quadratic equations in one variable @xmath . The solutions are
therefore of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath or @xmath , and @xmath is determined by substituting this
in ( 4.64 ). This results in a single quadratic equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

A priori therefore, @xmath can take two possible values:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, because

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

we only ever need to consider, say, the negative branch of the square
root to get all solutions in ( 4.65 ). In total, therefore, the number
of vacua for a fixed choice of fluxes is @xmath . We choose the
following parametrization: take all @xmath choices for @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

We can thus think of the vacua as the states of a system with @xmath
“spins” @xmath . When all spins are aligned with the “external field”
@xmath , that is if all @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

When all spins are anti-aligned ( @xmath ), this becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first of these can be shown to be the supersymmetric AdS vacuum
discussed in [ 100 ] whilst the second is the unstable de Sitter vacuum
also discussed there. The remaining @xmath are all non-supersymmetric
and could be either de Sitter or anti de Sitter. The metastability of
these vacua will be analyzed in a following section.

Substituting ( 4.70 ) in ( 4.62 ), we get that the energy of these vacua
is given by @xmath with ⁸ ⁸ 8 The normalization is chosen such that
@xmath equals the term inside the big brackets in ( 4.62 ). Also, @xmath
. @xmath . At fixed volume, the vacuum energy varies only through @xmath
. The dependence of @xmath on @xmath is shown on the left in fig. 4.3 .
However, the volume depends on @xmath as well:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the total vacuum energy is, up to @xmath -independent factors:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.74)
  -- -- -- --------

The dependence of this on @xmath is shown on the right in fig. 4.3 . The
divergence at @xmath is due to the vanishing of the volume there, as all
@xmath with @xmath vanish at this point. Obviously the supergravity
approximation breaks down in this regime. One notable fact is further
that the smallest positive cosmological constant is obtained when all
spins are down, while the smallest negative cosmological constant (in
absolute value) is obtained when all spins are up, i.e. at the
supersymmetric critical point.

At large @xmath , the vast majority of vacua will be “halfway” the
extrema. More precisely, if say all @xmath , the variable @xmath will be
binomially distributed around @xmath , as illustrated in 4.4 . At large
@xmath this distribution asymptotes to the continuous normal density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

For large @xmath this is sharply peaked around @xmath , for which @xmath
and @xmath , so the majority of vacua are AdS and break supersymmetry at
a scale @xmath .

Thus far we have considered solutions in terms of @xmath . The actual
values of the moduli are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the moduli fields @xmath are positive in the supergravity
approximation, the signs of the @xmath and flux quanta @xmath must be
correlated. Without loss of generality we take @xmath to be positive.
Then @xmath and @xmath must have opposite signs. Now as long as @xmath ,
every @xmath is automatically positive, so any such vacuum must have
negative @xmath . When @xmath , @xmath is positive if @xmath and
negative if @xmath , so these vacua must have @xmath . Recall that the
condition @xmath is also the condition to have @xmath .

Thus, for any given @xmath , there is a unique choice of sign for each
@xmath which renders all @xmath positive for all choices of @xmath .

On the other hand, not all given, fixed fluxes @xmath gives rise to the
same number of vacua. The following cases can be distinguished:

-   All @xmath : set of vacua = @xmath . All vacua in the first set are
    AdS. The additional one is dS (but is unstable, as we will discuss
    in the next section). There are of order @xmath such vacua (between
    @xmath and @xmath for example when all @xmath are equal as for the
    distribution of fig. 4.3 ).

-   Some @xmath , and @xmath : just one vacuum, given by @xmath . This
    vacuum is dS (but again will turn out to be unstable).

-   Some @xmath , and @xmath : no vacua.

As noted before, the choices of @xmath for which @xmath is at or near
@xmath do not correspond to vacua within the region of validity of our
computations for reasonable values of @xmath , because some of the
moduli, and hence the volume, will be at or near zero then.

###### Stability Analysis

The sign of the potential for a particular solution depends on the sign
of @xmath , with @xmath as defined in section 4.3.2 . It is negative
when @xmath and it is positive when @xmath . We discuss these cases
separately.

     [AdS vacua] An AdS critical point @xmath does not have to be a
    local minimum to be perturbatively stable. It suffices that the
    eigenvalues of the Hessian of @xmath are not too negative compared
    to the cosmological constant, and more precisely that
    Breitenlohner-Freedman bound is satisfied [ 116 ] :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.77)
      -- -------- -- --------

    i.e. this matrix should be positive definite.

    The derivatives are done with respect to the canonically normalized
    scalars. The relevant kinetic term expanded around the critical
    point @xmath is (in four dimensional Planck units):

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.79)
                                    @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

    Hence the canonically normalized scalars are

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.80)
      -- -------- -- --------

    With this redefinition, the condition ( 4.77 ) becomes

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.81)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.82)
                                    @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

    By substituting these expressions in ( 4.81 ), using the variables
    @xmath and factoring out the common positive term @xmath , the
    stability condition becomes:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.83)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.84)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Let us evaluate ( 4.83 ) on our solutions.

    -   supersymmetric solution:

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.85)
          -- -------- -- --------

        where @xmath is a rank @xmath positive definite matrix. We see
        that @xmath and so that the supersymmetric solution is always
        stable.

    -   Other AdS ( @xmath ) solutions:

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.86)
          -- -------- -- --------

        where

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.87)
          -- -------- -- --------

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.88)
          -- -------- -- --------

        The following relations are valid: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ;
        so @xmath and @xmath are always positive definite. @xmath has no
        definite sign. We have two cases:

        1.  when @xmath , @xmath ; then @xmath and consequently @xmath
            is positive, and the corresponding solutions are
            perturbatively stable;

        2.  when @xmath , @xmath ; in this case the @xmath matrix is not
            positive definite when @xmath has more than one entry equal
            to @xmath and the corresponding solutions are not stable.
            Actually, if @xmath and @xmath , @xmath has the @xmath minor

              -- -------- -- --------
                 @xmath      (4.89)
              -- -------- -- --------

            which has @xmath as one of the two eigenvalues.
            On the other hand, when @xmath has exactly one entry equal
            to @xmath , the solution is a local minimum and so it is
            stable.

    Let us prove that when @xmath and exactly one @xmath is equal to
    @xmath , the corresponding solution is a local minimum.

    Without loss of generality we choose @xmath . @xmath is proportional
    to @xmath , where @xmath is negative for all considered values of
    @xmath . Let us call @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . So @xmath , @xmath
    and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.90)
      -- -------- -- --------

    By direct study of its eigenvalues, it can be shown that this matrix
    is positive definite for @xmath . Now we prove by induction that
    this matrix is positive definite for each @xmath .

    Let us assume that @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.91)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath . Let @xmath be the extension of @xmath to @xmath ,
    i.e. @xmath . Then @xmath there exists @xmath , such that

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.92)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    It follows that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.93)
      -- -------- -- --------

    

     [dS vacua] The solutions with positive potential ( i.e. @xmath )
    must be local minima to be metastable, and so the matrix @xmath (in
    the notations introduced previously) must be positive definite. We
    now show that this is never the case.

    We have @xmath , where @xmath and so @xmath . Let us consider the
    @xmath matrix defined by @xmath . If @xmath is positive definite
    then @xmath is positive too. Clearly, its eigenvalues are @xmath ,
    which is positive for @xmath , and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.94)
      -- -------- -- --------

    By studying @xmath as a function of @xmath , one finds that it is
    positive for @xmath . So @xmath is not positive definite for @xmath
    and so @xmath is not positive for the same values.

    Moreover one can study the @xmath submatrix of @xmath obtained by
    restriction to the subspace on which @xmath ( @xmath is the number
    of such @xmath ’s). This is equal to @xmath , where we are
    considering only @xmath corresponding to @xmath . Its eigenvalues
    are @xmath , which is positive for @xmath , and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.95)
      -- -------- -- --------

    By studying @xmath as a function of @xmath , one finds that it is
    negative for @xmath , where @xmath . For these values of @xmath we
    have a nonpositive minor and so @xmath is not positive definite.

    By combining these two results, we see that for no value of @xmath
    the corresponding solution is a local minimum. Thus, all dS critical
    points are unstable in our model ensembles.

We have found that all dS vacua ( i.e. the vacua with @xmath ) for our
model ensembles have a tachyon and hence are perturbatively unstable. We
therefore focus on AdS vacua in what follows. We have found that
exponentially large numbers of the @xmath vacua are in fact metastable.
Specifically, vacua for which @xmath are always metastable. Vacua with
@xmath can in principle also be metastable (and actually turn out to be
local minima), but this is rather exceptional: they correspond to having
only one of the @xmath equal to @xmath . In particular, since @xmath ,
this means that the corresponding @xmath must be greater than @xmath ,
and thus there cannot be more than two such solutions.

Some lower bounds on the numbers of metastable vacua with @xmath can be
derived as follows. For simplicity, but without loss of generality, we
put

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath , all solutions with @xmath correspond to @xmath , and we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

one of which is the supersymmetric solution. When @xmath the number of
stable vacua is at least

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so on. So in a model with @xmath , but with @xmath , the number of
stable vacua is at least

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of ( 4.96 ) and the fact that @xmath , we cannot have @xmath .
So for a model with @xmath moduli, the number of stable vacua is surely
bigger than

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is exponentially smaller than @xmath but still exponential in
@xmath .

Actually this number is very hard to reach and for generic models the
number of stable vacua is much bigger than this. Take for example the
case @xmath of the figure, for which @xmath is distributed according to
( 4.75 ) in the large @xmath limit. The number of vacua with @xmath is
then given by integrating the distribution ( 4.75 ) from @xmath to
@xmath . At large @xmath this gives asymptotically

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again for large @xmath this is an exponentially small fraction, but
still exponentially large in absolute number. In fact for @xmath the
stable fraction is still about @xmath . For @xmath , this goes down to
about @xmath , but this is not a small number compared to the total
number of vacua, which is @xmath .

###### Distributions over Moduli Space

Let us fix @xmath and @xmath . We want to study the distributions of
physical quantities over the space of vacua parametrized by @xmath . As
discussed in section 4.3.2 , the sign of each @xmath is completely
determined by @xmath . We can therefore restrict to counting positive
@xmath .

Let us start by finding the number of such vacua in a region @xmath
given by @xmath . By the substitution @xmath , this condition becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So, in the large N approximation, the number of vacua at fixed @xmath in
this region is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As in ( 4.36 ), @xmath is the region of the complexified moduli space
projecting to @xmath . In particular, the number of vacua in any finite
region of moduli space is finite. Note that in the supersymmetric case
@xmath , this reproduces the general formula ( 4.36 ). More generally,
we see that also nonsupersymmetric vacua are distributed uniformly with
respect to the volume form in the supergravity approximation, but that
their density relative to the supersymmetric vacua, given by @xmath , is
higher. Moreover, the density grows with increasing numbers of
anti-aligned spins. The highest density is that of the dS vacua with all
@xmath , which is @xmath higher than the density of supersymmetric
vacua. Obviously, this does not mean that in total there are @xmath
times more dS maxima as supersymmetric critical points, since we know
there is a one-to-one correspondence between them (in the supergravity
approximation). The density in a given region is higher simply because
the nonsupersymmetric vacua sit at larger radii. Integrated over the
entire moduli space in the supergravity approximation, we do not run
into a paradox, because both numbers are then infinite. In the fully
quantum corrected problem, the numbers presumably will be finite (by
analogy of what happens for type II flux vacua due to worldsheet
instanton corrections), but then of course also the relative densities
will change.

In order to have a meaningful four dimensional effective theory,
decoupled from the KK modes, we need the Kaluza-Klein radius to be
smaller than the AdS radius. Taking all @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.104)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

so @xmath iff @xmath . ⁹ ⁹ 9 The assumption that all @xmath can be
relaxed. Then one can prove that @xmath is guaranteed if @xmath .
However for most vacua, @xmath will be sufficient to have the required
scale hierarchy, so we stick to this estimate.

This also ensures the validity of the supergravity approximation. The
number of vacua at fixed @xmath satisfying this condition is given by (
4.103 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, to get the total density for all possible @xmath as well, we
must sum ( 4.103 ) over all @xmath . Because of the absolute values and
the nonlinear dependence of @xmath on @xmath , this is not easy to
compute analytically even in special cases. But one can get numerical
results without much effort. For example in the case with all @xmath ,
we get numerically that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This approximation becomes better for large @xmath , but is quite good
for smaller values as well. For @xmath , the exact result is @xmath ,
which is already not too far from this expression.

###### Distributions of Volumes and Cosmological Constants: Fixed @xmath

Now, let us consider the distributions of the volumes @xmath . For a
given @xmath the volume is given by ( 4.73 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.108)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We see that as the @xmath go to infinity, @xmath tends to zero, so the
density of vacua (strongly) increases with decreasing volume, i.e. large
volumes are suppressed. This agrees with what we found earlier for the
general supersymmetric case in section 4.3.1 .

The maximal value that @xmath can assume is obtained when all @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here we isolated the @xmath -dependent product @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The variation of @xmath over different choices of @xmath is entirely
given by the dependence of this function on @xmath . This is shown in
fig. 4.5 .

When we take all @xmath , and we consider say the susy case @xmath so
@xmath , ( 4.109 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the usual continuum approximation for the fluxes, it is possible
to get explicit expressions for the volume distribution of vacua at
fixed @xmath . Taking as example again the case @xmath , we show in
appendix B.2 that for @xmath , at fixed @xmath (or fixed @xmath ), the
vacuum number density is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore the total number of such vacua with @xmath goes as @xmath , in
agreement with the general estimates of section 4.3.1 . Note that in
addition here, the density of vacua vanishes to order @xmath near the
cutoff @xmath .

Thus, in accordance with general expectations, we see that large volumes
are strongly suppressed, and more so when there are more moduli.

Analogous considerations can be made about the distribution of
cosmological constants at fixed @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath as defined in section 4.3.2 . Clearly, the distribution of
@xmath is completely determined by the distribution of @xmath . Thus,
because large volumes are suppressed, we see that small cosmological
constants are suppressed. In particular there is a lower bound on @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath as given by ( 4.74 ) and plotted in figure 4.3 .

###### Distributions of Volumes and Cosmological Constants: All @xmath

So far in this section, we have studied distributions at fixed @xmath ,
or equivalently at fixed @xmath . To get complete statistics of all
vacua, we need to combine these results with the distribution of
solutions over values of @xmath .

One general observation one can make is that since there are no
metastable vacua at @xmath , the largest possible volume of a metastable
vacuum is obtained at @xmath (and @xmath ), the supersymmetric solution.
This can be seen from fig. 4.5 . Therefore, the maximal volume for a
metastable vacuum is @xmath . It is not hard to show further that @xmath
. The former corresponds to all @xmath equal, the latter to the limiting
case @xmath for all but one @xmath . Similar considerations hold for the
cosmological constant. Thus we arrive at the result that for our
ensembles:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath .

To get more refined results on the actual distributions, we need the
precise distribution of solutions over @xmath . This depends on the
values of @xmath . When all @xmath for example, the distribution is
binomial, peaked around @xmath , which for sufficiently large @xmath is
well approximated by the normal distribution given in ( 4.75 ). When all
@xmath are approximately equal, the distribution will still be
approximately binomial, and ( 4.75 ) is still a good approximation for
large @xmath . When say @xmath and all other @xmath with @xmath large,
the distribution will have two peaks, one at @xmath , corresponding to
@xmath , and the other one at @xmath , corresponding to @xmath . In the
following we will work with the distribution given in ( 4.75 ).

The joint distribution for @xmath and @xmath is then given by
multiplying the distributions ( 4.75 ) and ( 4.112 ). Note that ( 4.112
) depends on @xmath through @xmath . One can also change variables from
@xmath to @xmath and thus write down a joint distribution for @xmath and
@xmath , or equivalently (and physically more relevantly) for @xmath and
@xmath , as we did for the Freund-Rubin ensemble. The explicit
expressions are not very illuminating, so we will not get into details
here. An example is plotted in fig. 4.6 .

Clearly, @xmath and @xmath are correlated, as in the Freund-Rubin case.
This follows directly of course from the relation @xmath . In particular
given one variable, we get a roughly Gaussian distribution of the other
variable. Qualitatively this is somewhat similar to the Freund-Rubin
ensemble (compare ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Notice that fig. 4.2 shows @xmath instead of
@xmath on the vertical axis. with fig. 4.2 ), although the details are
different. For example in the Freund-Rubin case, at fixed @xmath , the
vacua accumulate near the lower bound on @xmath , whereas in the @xmath
case they accumulate near the upper bound. Without constraint on @xmath
this gets reversed for both.

Finally, one can get the distribution of cosmological constants for
vacua with volume above some cutoff value by integrating the joint
density over @xmath . Again for the case with all @xmath , we obtain the
distribution for @xmath shown in fig. 4.7 for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. The cutoff at smaller values of @xmath appears because of the lower
cutoff we impose on the volume; the lower we take the volume cutoff, the
lower the value of @xmath at which the density peaks. This is because
@xmath sets the scale for @xmath . The cutoff for small @xmath appears
because the ensemble does not contain vacua with arbitrarily large
volume, as discussed at length before.

###### Supersymmetry Breaking Scales

Let us consider the distribution of the supersymmetry breaking scale,
which for a fixed @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.116)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is a decreasing function of @xmath , which is positive for @xmath
and zero in the supersymmetric solution ( @xmath ).

We see that the expression for @xmath is the same as that of the
cosmological constant, but with @xmath instead of @xmath . So the
distribution of the supersymmetry breaking scale at fixed @xmath is very
similar to that of the cosmological constant:

-   it is completely determined by the volume distribution;

-   low supersymmetry breaking scales are suppressed (in line with the
    general expectations of section 4.3.1 ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The situation here is
    a bit different than the case on which we focused there, namely
    @xmath , which cannot be obtained in the present ensemble. );

-   @xmath has a lower bound given by

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (4.118)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    with @xmath defined in ( 4.110 ).

As for the @xmath and @xmath distributions, in order to get the complete
statistic of all vacua, we need to consider the distribution of
solutions over @xmath , which depends on the @xmath ’s. Similar to what
we did for @xmath in the previous subsection, we can compute the
distribution of @xmath for vacua with volume bounded by some lower
cutoff. This is illustrated in fig. 4.8 . The cutoff at large values of
@xmath appears because of the lower cutoff we impose on the volume,
again because @xmath sets the scale for @xmath . The lower cutoff is
there because large volumes are absent.

#### 4.4 Conclusions and Discussion

The potential importance of the emerging ideas surrounding the
Landscape, e.g. for the notion of naturalness, is clear. These ideas
should therefore be tested both experimentally by verifying specific
predictions and theoretically within the framework of string theory. To
make progress in the latter, one should further scrutinize the proposed
ensembles of string theory vacua, to establish whether or not these
vacua truly persist after taking into account the full set of subtle
consistency requirements, quantum corrections, and cosmological
constraints [ 117 ] . Parallel to that one should develop techniques to
analyze large classes of (potential)vacua without actually having to go
through their detailed constructions. In [ 42 ] we have contributed to
this program. We analyzed the statistics of Freund-Rubin and @xmath flux
compactifications of M-theory, and compared this to known IIB results.
Here we have presented in details only the second ensemble.

From what we have briefly said about the Freund-Rubin vacua, one can
note that their statistics is very different from that of flux
compactifications on special holonomy manifolds. Most notably, they can
have arbitrarily high compactification volume, and accumulate near zero
cosmological constant. On the other hand, these vacua typically do not
have a large gap between the KK scale and the four dimensional AdS
curvature scale, so they are not really compactifications in the usual
sense. This is no longer true [ 118 ] if (in units in which the scalar
curvature is one) the Einstein metric has all length scales much smaller
than 1, but it remains a challenge to construct such manifolds with more
than a modest scale hierarchy. Alternatively, one can imagine adding
positive energy sources to lift the cosmological constant, perhaps even
to small positive values, but no viable controlled scenario that would
accomplish this is presently known. The problem is clear: in order to
lift the cosmological constant to a positive value, one would have to
add an energy source at or near the Kaluza-Klein scale, which makes four
dimensional effective field theory unreliable and could easily
destabilize the compactification. Adding such effects could also
drastically change the distributions of vacua over parameter space.
Therefore, the results for Freund-Rubin vacua should not be interpreted
as showing there are parts of the Landscape compatible with rough
observational requirements that for example strongly favor large
volumes. But our results do show that this is possible in principle, and
constructing Freund-Rubin-like vacua which overcome the above mentioned
problems would therefore be all the more interesting.

In this chapter we have presented in more details our statistical
analysis of flux compactification of M-theory. We have seen that the
statistics of @xmath flux vacua has a number of universal features. One
is that the distribution of vacua over moduli space is uniform with
respect to the Kähler metric on moduli space. In essence, because the
large volume region of moduli space is small when its dimension @xmath
is large, this implies that large compactification volumes are
suppressed, and strongly so if @xmath is large. In particular there is
an upper bound to the volume in a given ensemble, set by the
Chern-Simons invariant @xmath . This is true as well for IIB flux
ensembles and their IIA mirror counterparts, where the maximal size is
set by the D3 tadpole cutoff @xmath . Since both the IIB and the @xmath
ensembles contain flux degrees of freedom that are not dual to flux
degrees of freedom in the other ensemble, but are possibly dual to
discrete geometrical deformations away from special holonomy, this
suggests this behavior will persist when extending the ensembles to also
sample non-flux discrete compactification data away from special
holonomy. Our results on Freund-Rubin vacua on the other hand show that
departure from special holonomy can produce the opposite behavior. So
before general conclusions can be drawn, this question needs to be
investigated in more general ensembles.

Essentially because of the limited discrete tunability of @xmath flux
vacua, the scale of the cosmological constant is set by the volume,
@xmath . Since large volumes are strongly suppressed at large @xmath ,
it follows that small cosmological constants are strongly suppressed as
well. This contrasts with type IIB ensembles, where the distribution of
cosmological constants is uniform near zero. Similarly, the scale of
supersymmetry breaking is set by @xmath , so small supersymmetry
breaking scales are suppressed. For @xmath not too small, this remains
true even when taking into account tuning of Higgs mass and cosmological
constants. F-breaking IIB flux vacua similarly favor high susy breaking
scales, although @xmath can be tuned to be small there, and the
suppression was found to be independent of the number of moduli in the
regime where @xmath is much smaller than the fundamental scale [ 10 ] .
It is plausible that extending the @xmath ensembles as discussed above
would allow the supersymmetry breaking scale to be tuned small as well,
reproducing the statistics of the generic ensembles of [ 10 ] in this
regime, but this would still favor higher scales.

In section 4.3.2 we have presented and studied a class of models defined
by Kähler potentials which give a direct product metric on moduli space.
Though very rich, the semi-classical, supergravity vacuum structure of
these models can be solved exactly, allowing us to explicitly verify our
more general results just summarized. Minimizing the potential we
obtained one supersymmetric vacuum and @xmath nonsupersymmetric ones. As
the fluxes are varied, we found that these are uniformly distributed
over the moduli space and that there are roughly an equal number of de
Sitter vs anti de Sitter vacua. Not all of these vacua exist within the
supergravity approximation and we analyze the conditions under which
they do, finding that an exponentially large number survive. Finally,
after analyzing the stability of these vacua we found that all de Sitter
vacua are classically unstable whilst an exponentially large number of
non-supersymmetric anti de Sitter vacua are metastable. As expected on
general grounds, the supersymmetry breaking scale is typically high.

We finally note that these model ensembles are reminiscent of the
effective field theory Landscapes recently considered in [ 13 ] . In
particular, at large @xmath , the distributions we found are sharply
peaked, see e.g. figure 4.7 and figure 4.8 for examples of distributions
of cosmological constants and supersymmetry breaking scales. The
cosmological constant in these ensembles does not scan near zero; there
is a cutoff at @xmath . It is conceivable though that this would change
for more complicated Kähler potentials which do not lead to direct
product metrics (see for example [ 119 ] ).

### Chapter 5 Ten Dimensional Description of Type IIA Flux Vacua

In this chapter we will study the ten dimensional description of Type
IIA vacua. In the chapter 3 we have given the ten dimensional
description of the Type IIB CY orientifold vacua, but not of Type IIA
vacua.

The standard ten dimensional approach consists in finding supersymmetric
solutions of the ten dimensional theory. From this requirement one
usually gets some constraints that relate the geometry of the internal
manifold with the flux background. As we have seen in the second
chapter, if the fluxes are zero, the requirement of four dimensional
supersymmetry translates into requiring reduced holonomy on the internal
manifold; in particular we get CY manifolds if the holonomy is reduced
to @xmath . When the fluxes are turned on, the structure group of the
internal manifold is still reduced but it does not coincide with the
Levi-Civita holonomy group any more. The special class of ten
dimensional Type IIB solutions studied in section 3.2 , is of this type:
the internal manifold is no more a CY, but a conformal CY (that has not
Levi-Civita holonomy group @xmath ). However the difference with respect
to the CY vacua are only in the conformal factor and the vacua can be
studied using what is known about CY geometry.

On the other hand, Type IIA has not such kind of tractable solutions.
The solutions of the supersymmetry equations are all far from a CY
geometry. In this chapter we will review the results of [ 43 ] , where
we found an approximation that allows to obtain a CY internal manifold
in presence of fluxes in the Type IIA context. Before doing this, we
will review the connection between the structure group of the internal
manifold and the background required by four dimensional supersymmetry.

#### 5.1 Supersymmetric Backgrounds with Fluxes: Beyond the
Ricci-flatness Approximation

In this section we will review what the supersymmetry condition requires
for Type II compactifications without and with fluxes [ 5 ] .

We always use the most general ansatz for the ten dimensional metric
with four dimensional maximal symmetry:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a function of the internal coordinates and is called
warp factor , @xmath is a Minkowski, @xmath or @xmath metric, and @xmath
is a six dimensional metric.

A supersymmetric vacuum where only bosonic fields have non-vanishing
vacuum expectation values should obey @xmath , where @xmath is the
supersymmetry parameter and @xmath any fermion field. In Type II
theories, the fermionic fields are two gravitinos @xmath ( @xmath ) and
two dilatinos @xmath . In the supergravity approximation, the bosonic
parts of their supersymmetry transformations in string frame are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath are the two Majorana-Weyl spinors with
the same chirality in Type IIB and with opposite chirality in Type IIA);
similar definitions hold for @xmath and @xmath . For Type IIA @xmath and
@xmath when @xmath is even while @xmath and @xmath when @xmath is odd;
for Type IIA @xmath and @xmath . @xmath . @xmath are the physical RR
field strength and @xmath as we want fluxes only along the internal
directions.

###### Supersymmetric Fluxless Backgrounds

As we have seen for Heterotic compactifications, when no fluxes are
present, demanding zero vev for the gravitino variation requires the
existence of a covariantly constant spinor on the ten dimensional
manifold, i.e. @xmath . The spacetime component of this equation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the standard decomposition of the ten dimensional
gamma matrices and the hat-objects means that they are computed using
@xmath .

The integrability condition for this equations implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the constant @xmath is negative for @xmath , zero for Minkowski
and positive for @xmath . The only constant value for @xmath on a
compact manifold is zero, which implies that the warp factor is constant
and the four dimensional manifold can only be Minkowski spacetime.

As explained with more details in the second chapter, the internal
component of @xmath says that there should exist at least one
covariantly constant spinor on the six manifold. This is a very strong
requirement from the topological and differential point of view. It
forces the manifold to have reduced holonomy. When the compact manifold
has dimension six, the requirement to have one covariantly constant
spinor implies the compact manifold to be CY. If there are more than one
covariantly constant spinor, the holonomy group has to be a proper
subgroup of @xmath and this results in a larger number of preserved
supersymmetries.

In Type II theories, when there is one covariantly constant internal
spinor, the internal gravitino equation tells us that there are two four
dimensional supersymmetry parameters. This compactifications therefore
preserve eight supercharges, that means an effective @xmath four
dimensional theory.

Fluxes can break the @xmath supersymmetries spontaneously to @xmath or
even completely in a stable way. We will see this in the next section by
including also their backreaction on the geometry.

###### Supersymmetric Background with Non Zero Fluxes

In this section we consider compactifications preserving the minimal
amount of supersymmetry, i.e. @xmath in four dimension. In order to have
some supercharges preserved, or even in the case when all of them are
completely broken spontaneously by fluxes, we need to have globally well
defined supercurrents. This requires to have globally well defined
spinors on the compact manifold, which is only possible if its structure
group is reduced.

In the absence of fluxes, supersymmetry requires a covariantly constant
spinor on the internal manifold. This condition actually splits into
two: the existence of a nowhere-vanishing globally well defined spinor,
and the condition that it is left invariant by the holonomy group (of
the Levi-Civita connection). The first condition is topological and
implies an effective @xmath four dimensional action, while the second is
a differential requirement on the metric connection and implies that
there exists a @xmath Minkowski vacuum.

A globally well defined nowhere-vanishing spinor exists only on
manifolds that have reduced structure group . The structure group of a
manifold is the group of transformations required to patch the
orthonormal frame bundle. A @xmath -dimensional Riemann manifold has
automatically structure group @xmath . All vector, tensor and spinor
representations can be decomposed in representations of @xmath . If the
manifold has structure group @xmath , all the representations can be
further decomposed in @xmath -representations.

Let us consider a six dimensional manifold. If it has @xmath structure
group, then the spinorial representation of @xmath decomposes as @xmath
. There is therefore an @xmath singlet in the decomposition, which means
that there is a spinor that depends trivially on the tangent bundle of
the manifold and is so well defined globally and nowhere-vanishing.

We can decomposes also other @xmath representations; for example the 1-,
2- and 3-forms decomposes as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From here, we can see that there are singlets also in the decomposition
of 2-forms and 3-forms. Therefore there is also a nowhere-vanishing
globally defined real 2-form and complex 3-form, that are called
respectively @xmath and @xmath . We also see that there are no singlets
in the vector decomposition; this in particular implies @xmath . On the
contrary a six form is a singlet and there is only one of them, so
@xmath . We note that these conditions are valid also for the Kähler
form and the holomorphic 3-form on a CY. In fact a CY is a special case
of @xmath structure manifold; in addition the holonomy group of its
Levi-Civita connection coincides with the structure group.

The invariant forms @xmath and @xmath determine a metric: @xmath says
what are the holomorphic and antiholomorphic coordinates and in these
coordinates the metric takes the form @xmath .

Raising one of the indices of @xmath we get an almost complex structure,
i.e. a map that satisfies @xmath . The existence of an almost complex
structure allows to introduce local holomorphic and antiholomorphic
vectors. If their dual forms are integrable and if the transition
functions between different patches are holomorphic, then the structure
is integrable and the manifold is a complex manifold.

The @xmath structure is determined equivalently either by the invariant
spinor @xmath , or by the forms @xmath and @xmath . Actually these are
related by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is a (1,1)-form with respect to the almost complex structure
@xmath , while @xmath is a (3,0)-form.

Let us now pass to the differential condition coming from the
supersymmetry requirement. It is given by the gravitino variation, which
gives a differential condition on the invariant spinor, that is
schematically given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the piece proportional to the fluxes. If the fluxes are
zero, we recover the condition that @xmath is covariantly constant with
respect to the Levi-Civita connection. If, on the other hand, the fluxes
are different from zero, we get that @xmath . This means that the spinor
is not invariant under the Levi-Civita Holonomy group and so that Hol
@xmath ( i.e the Levi-Civita connection is not compatible with the
structure group). In the case of manifolds with @xmath structure, one
can show that there is always a metric compatible connection ( @xmath ),
possibly with torsion, such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The torsion is defined by the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and belongs to @xmath , where @xmath is the space of 1-forms, while
@xmath is the Lie algebra of @xmath . Acting on @xmath invariant forms,
the @xmath piece drops. The corresponding torsion is called the
intrinsic torsion @xmath ; it can be decomposed in @xmath representation
as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the @xmath is obtained by subtracting the adjoint @xmath
representation of @xmath from the adjoint @xmath representation of
@xmath (and using @xmath ).

The @xmath ’s are the five torsion classes that appear in the covariant
derivatives of the spinor and of the forms @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is
a complex scalar, @xmath is a primitive (1,1) form ( i.e. @xmath ),
@xmath is a real primitive (2,1)+(1,2) form and @xmath and @xmath are
real vectors. Because of the supersymmetry condition, the torsion
classes are determined by the fluxes. This can be easily seen by the
matching the conditions @xmath and @xmath , and considering that @xmath
can be written as a sum of the Levi-Civita connection and a piece
depending on the torsion. The last piece is completely determined by the
torsion classes when @xmath is applied to the invariant spinor @xmath .

The supersymmetry condition allows also to compute the Levi Civita
covariant derivative of the @xmath in terms of the torsion classes.
Because of @xmath , one can express the Levi-Civita connection of @xmath
in terms of the torsion classes. Then, by using the expressions ( 5.5 ),
one can find what are the covariant derivatives of @xmath and @xmath .
Antisymmetrizing them, one gets the expressions for their differential
in terms of the torsion classes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

A manifold of @xmath structure is complex if @xmath . This condition
comes from the fact that in a complex manifold the differential of a (
@xmath ) form is a ( @xmath ) @xmath ( @xmath ) form. But if one of
@xmath and @xmath is different from zero, @xmath contains a (2,2) form.
One can show that this condition is also sufficient for the manifold to
be complex. In a symplectic manifold the 2-form @xmath is closed. This
corresponds to vanishing @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . A Kähler manifold
is complex and symplectic. So the only possible non-vanishing torsion
class is @xmath . In this case the Levi-Civita connection has holonomy
@xmath (we note that actually the Levi-Civita holonomy group is not
compatible with the structure group). Finally, for a CY all the torsion
classes are zero.

#### 5.2 Ten Dimensional Description of Type IIA with Fluxes

The ten dimensional description of the Type IIA vacua we described in
section 3.3 is less well understood than the Type IIB case. This is
because in Type IIB one special class of solutions is conformally CY:
the fluxes drive the internal manifold away from @xmath holonomy, but
their effects results in a conformal factor in front of a CY metric. For
Type IIA there are not solutions of this type. We will see in what
follows that the supersymmetric compactifications are half-flat
manifolds with @xmath structure.

It is natural to wonder what relation these solutions have with the CY
flux vacua discussed in the four dimensional language at page 3.3 ,
where fluxes are viewed as a perturbation of a Type IIA CY
compactification. In that case the massive Type IIA was compactified on
a CY threefold. Switching on the RR fluxes gives rise to a potential
which depends on the Kähler moduli. In order to stabilize the complex
structure moduli one could introduce NSNS 3-form flux, H. However this
leads to a tadpole for the D6-brane charge, which is cancelled by
introducing orientifold O6-planes. The full system of fluxes and
O6-planes then stabilizes all the moduli, essentially at leading order
in @xmath and @xmath . This was done by using the effective four
dimensional potential for the moduli in the large volume limit, when the
backreaction of the fluxes on Einstein’s equations can be ignored (since
their contribution to the stress tensor is volume suppressed). This
class of vacua is an excellent arena to study aspects of moduli
stabilization in detail, since the vacua are essentially classical
solutions of ten dimensional IIA supergravity. In the work [ 43 ] we
studied these classical solutions from a ten dimensional perspective.

We proved that the exact ten dimensional solution is not Calabi-Yau. The
precise modification of the Calabi-Yau geometry can be described by a
particular type of half-flat SU(3) structure [ 120 ] . Though we were
unable to find the full solution (for which we will have to await
further developments in the mathematical literature), in the
approximation that the O6-plane source is smoothed out, we found an
exact solution. This solution is CY and by studying the moduli
stabilization from the ten dimensional point of view, we found the same
results as [ 41 ] .

In what follows we shortly review a class of solutions of Type IIA
supergravity found in [ 121 , 122 ] and [ 123 ] . These form the basis
of the solutions with O6-planes. They describe compactifications on an
internal @xmath structure manifold down to four dimensional @xmath .
Then we discuss the introduction of orientifold O6-planes in
supergravity, the issue of supersymmetry preserving configurations and
how the original solutions are modified by their presence. In
particular, we present an exact “smeared” solution in which the
orientifold charge is smoothed out. Finally moduli stabilization is
studied. We show that all the geometrical moduli are lifted at tree
level in supersymmetric vacua.

##### 5.2.1 Massive Type IIA Supergravity on @xmath

We are interested in the ten dimensional description of the
supersymmetric vacua with non-zero cosmological constant discussed by de
Wolfe et al from an effective field theory point of view in [ 41 ] .
Therefore, without loss of generality, we can take the ten dimensional
spacetime to be a warped product @xmath , where @xmath is a compact
manifold and the ten dimensional metric is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are coordinates for @xmath and @xmath
respectively and the warp factor is @xmath ( @xmath in previous
conventions). All the fluxes have non-zero @xmath -dependent components
only along the compact directions, except for @xmath which has a
non-zero four-dimensional component ¹ ¹ 1 It can be seen as an @xmath
background on the compact manifold @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a function on @xmath . These assumptions are dictated by
local Poincaré invariance on @xmath .

As we have seen in the first section of this chapter, @xmath
supersymmetry in four dimensions implies that the compact manifold
@xmath has a globally defined spinor, @xmath . The structure group of
@xmath reduces (at least) to @xmath and the spinor @xmath is related to
the globally defined 2-form @xmath and 3-form @xmath by ( 5.5 ). These
forms completely specify an @xmath structure on @xmath and as described
previously, from the @xmath decomposition of their differentials @xmath
and @xmath , one can read off the torsion classes which characterize the
@xmath structure, as shown in ( 5.10 ).

By requiring the fluxes to preserve precisely @xmath SUSY in four
dimensions, the ten dimensional supersymmetry parameter has to be of the
form [ 123 ] :

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (5.13)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath (with @xmath ) are the two Weyl spinors on @xmath
, satisfying the Killing spinor equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is related to the scalar curvature @xmath of @xmath through
@xmath . On the other hand, @xmath and @xmath are chiral spinors on
@xmath related by charge conjugation, so that @xmath is a Majorana
spinor.

Now, we can solve the supersymmetry equations @xmath , @xmath , where:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (5.15)
     @xmath         (5.16)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

In order to solve this, one substitutes the ansatz for @xmath ( 5.13 ),
for the metric and for the forms and contracts the resulting six
dimensional equations with @xmath . In this way, one obtains separate
equations for every @xmath representation in the decomposition of forms
[ 123 ] : one can decompose the tensors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in
terms of irreducible @xmath representations. For example, for @xmath one
gets:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the different pieces can be extracted through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

By different contractions one has a set of equations, and then recasting
together the various pieces one obtains two cases, depending whether
@xmath or @xmath [ 123 ] .

If @xmath , one gets the usual Calabi-Yau supersymmetric
compactification, i.e. @xmath is a Calabi-Yau manifold, all the fluxes
vanish and @xmath , so the four dimensional space is Minkowski.

If @xmath , one can, without loss of generality, choose @xmath and get
the following expressions that relate the fluxes to the geometry:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the @xmath component in the @xmath decomposition of
@xmath , as explained above, and it is not determined by supersymmetry.

From contraction of the supersymmetry equations, one can also get the
covariant derivative of the forms @xmath and @xmath . By
antisymmetrizing the resulting expressions in all indices, one obtains
the differential of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A solution of the supersymmetry equations is also a solution of the
Einstein equations, if the form fields satisfy the Bianchi identities
and the equations of motion [ 123 ] .

Therefore we impose the Bianchi identities on the supersymmetry solution
( 5.2.1 ). The BI for @xmath gives @xmath that implies @xmath constant.
On the other hand, by imposing the Bianchi identity for @xmath , one
finds a constraint on the differential:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the last equation, using the fact @xmath and the expression ( 5.21
) for @xmath , one can in particular compute:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.24)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Note that the Bianchi identities are crucial to obtain a solution of all
the equations of motion.

From these results we can obtain a characterization of the @xmath
structure of these backgrounds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the nonvanishing torsion classes of @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

A manifold with such an @xmath structure is a special case of a
so-called half-flat manifold. (Compactifications on half-flat manifolds
are considered in [ 23 , 124 , 125 ] ).

From these results we can see that the only Calabi-Yau solution (which
has zero torsion) is the standard one with zero fluxes and zero
cosmological constant. The only other special class of solutions which
can be considered have @xmath (because of 5.24 ). This requires @xmath .
These manifolds are called nearly-Kähler , and solutions of this kind
were obtained in [ 121 , 122 ] .

##### 5.2.2 IIA Supergravity with Orientifolds

Our main result in [ 43 ] has been the ten dimensional description of
the vacua discovered in [ 41 ] (an example of such vacua is also given
in [ 126 ] ). Since these vacua must also have O6-planes we need to
understand how the solutions of [ 123 ] change in the presence of the
O6. The O6-plane is not a genuine supergravity object, but rather
something defined by the superstring compactification. Nevertheless, the
supergravity action can be enriched with terms that describe the
interactions of such an object with the low energy fields.

As seen in section 3.1 , in IIA String Theory an O6-plane is obtained by
modding out the theory by the discrete symmetry operator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the world-sheet parity, @xmath is the left-moving
spacetime fermion number, while @xmath is an isometric involution of the
original manifold. The fixed point locus of @xmath is the orientifold
O6-plane. It is a BPS object, which preserves half of the
supersymmetries: those such that @xmath , where @xmath are the two
Majorana-Weyl supersymmetry parameters ( 5.13 ).

We add an O6-plane filling the @xmath factor and wrapping a 3-cycle in
the internal manifold. Since the background preserves only four
supercharges, in general an O6-plane will break all of them. On the
other hand, in order to get an @xmath four dimensional theory, we must
take the O6 such that it preserves the same supercharges as the
background. As in the case of a D6-brane, this is achieved by wrapping
the plane on a supersymmetric (calibrated) 3-cycle.

The operator @xmath does not act on the four dimensional spinors @xmath
while it exchanges @xmath and @xmath . ² ² 2 Note that @xmath acts
trivially on the supersymmetry parameters, since they have the same
parity properties of the metric. Thus

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Supersymmetry forces @xmath to be antiholomorphic with respect to the
almost complex structure @xmath .

The fixed locus of the isometry @xmath (if any) on the internal manifold
is the supersymmetric 3-cycle @xmath the O6 wraps. In particular, we get
for the pull-back to the plane:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a singular @xmath -like 3-form that will be usefull later and
that is defined by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a calibration and @xmath is calibrated with respect to @xmath
. In fact one can compute

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

One obtains the spatial parity of the other form fields by considering
their worldsheet origin and imposing them to be invariant under the
orientifold operator ( 5.27 ): so, under @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
odd as well as @xmath , while @xmath is even.

Now consider the modifications to the equations of motion (EOM) and the
Bianchi identities (BI) given by the O6-plane to Type IIA massive
supergravity. The bosonic action is, at leading order in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first piece comes from the DBI action, the second one from the
CS action. ³ ³ 3 This action is directly derived from the one of a
D6-brane noticing that the orientifold projection forces @xmath to
vanish on the plane, and O-planes do not support gauge fields. Moreover
@xmath is the pulled-back metric determinant on the plane, @xmath ,
while @xmath is the Dp-brane charge and tension, and we have taken into
account that the charge of an Op-plane is @xmath times that of a
Dp-brane.

These terms are only the first ones in an infinite expansion in @xmath .
Keeping just them and working with the leading supergravity action ( 3.3
) is consistent. In @xmath ten dimensional supergravity theories, the
first corrections coming from string theory are of order @xmath , where
@xmath stands for various contractions of four Riemann tensors, to be
compared to the leading term @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4 For @xmath ten dimensional
theories the first corrections are of order @xmath . The orientifold
leading action is instead of order @xmath . Classical solutions will be
reliable only in regions where @xmath .

The DBI term gives a contribution to the Einstein and dilaton equations,
while the CS term represents an electric coupling to @xmath . The DBI
term brings a localized contribution to the energy momentum tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the projected metric on the plane and @xmath is the
determinant of the transverse metric. In case of a warped product metric
as in ( 5.11 ) and for a submanifold wrapping the four-dimensional
factor, @xmath .

The equations of motion are ⁵ ⁵ 5 Remember: @xmath . Moreover the
equation of motion for @xmath is given by the differential of ( 5.38 ).

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (5.36)
     @xmath               (5.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.38)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath means contraction on all but the first index. Notice that
the only equations that get modified with respect to [ 123 ] , due to
the presence of an orientifold plane, are the Einstein and dilaton
equations.

The CS term in ( 5.34 ) describes the coupling of the plane to @xmath ,
which is the gauge potential dual to @xmath , and so the O6 is a
magnetic source for @xmath . This term does not modify the equations of
motion, but only the Bianchi identity. The way this modification can be
evaluated is taking the dual description in terms of @xmath , so that
the BI is obtained by varying with respect to @xmath . We obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other BI is @xmath and it is satisfied. ⁶ ⁶ 6 Looking at the
complete CS term for a D6-brane, one could have suspected a localized
modification to the BI for @xmath like @xmath . But the orientifold
projection forces the pull-back of @xmath on the plane to vanish. This
would not necessarily be true for D6-branes.

In the derivation it has been convenient to express integrals on the
plane as integrals on the whole space, through the 3-form @xmath ,
transverse to the plane and localized on it:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In local coordinates @xmath , where the O6-plane is located ad @xmath ,
we have @xmath expressed through a usual delta function. Notice the
closure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means nothing more than charge conservation. A precise treatment
of distributional forms would be to consider the embedding of a seven
dimensional manifold @xmath into the target space @xmath , so that
@xmath is a nondegenerate linear map from 7-forms to real numbers. The
Poincaré dual to @xmath is now, by definition, an object @xmath which
realizes ( 5.41 ) as a linear map on 7-forms. It turns out that the
differential @xmath is defined by @xmath on 6-forms. In our case the
O6-plane has no boundary, hence closure.

Summarizing, the introduction of the O6-plane does not modify the SUSY
variations in ( 5.15 ); it changes the Bianchi identity for the 2-form
field-strength and induces some additional terms in the Einstein and
dilaton equations of motion.

In order to find the new solution, we follow the same procedure as in [
123 ] , i.e. we solve the SUSY equations @xmath and @xmath , and then we
impose BI’s and EOM’s for form fields. In fact, one can show that the
Einstein and dilaton equations are automatically satisfied (with the
minor requirement on the Einstein equation @xmath for @xmath , which is
granted with the ansatz ( 5.11 )). We will partly verify it in the
appendix C.2 .

The system of relations ( 5.2.1 ) solve also the form field equations (
5.38 ), ( 5.39 ) and the BI for @xmath . So we are left with only the
modified BI for @xmath ( 5.40 ). Substituting the solution ( 5.2.1 )
into the modified BI and using the expression ( 5.25 ) for @xmath , one
gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this, through the same procedure used to obtain ( 5.24 ), we can
compute @xmath . Start from @xmath , use again ( 5.24 ) and ( 5.33 ) to
get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term is constant on @xmath , while the second one has support
on the cycle @xmath . @xmath is positive definite, so we find two
conditions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the latter is perfectly expected: changing the sign of the
charge of the O6-plane gives an anti-O6-plane, which however preserves
orthogonal supersymmetries incompatible with the background. The
discussion of the possibility of getting a Calabi-Yau geometry is
parallel to section 5.2.1 . One would have to put @xmath and @xmath to
zero, but this would also imply @xmath vanishing. The massless limit has
to be taken with care, and one finds Calabi-Yau without fluxes.
Moreover, as long as the localized contribution is present, there will
always be a singular behavior on it, captured by ( 5.25 ).

###### A Smeared Solution

To find exact solutions in presence of localized objects is not easy,
mainly because, as we saw, in no case with non-vanishing mass parameter
does the geometry reduce to Calabi-Yau . Nevertheless, as a first step,
we can consider a long-wavelength approximation in which this situation
is realized. In a Calabi-Yau metric the torsion classes vanish. This
happens if:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the long-wavelength approximation the charge of the orientifold
plane, localized on @xmath , is substituted with a smeared distribution,
obviously keeping the total charge the same. Thus the 3-form describing
the new charge distribution must be in the same cohomology class as
@xmath . Integrating the Bianchi identity ( 5.40 ) on 3-cycles gives the
tadpole cancellation conditions. Actually, requiring @xmath and imposing
the supersymmetry equation for @xmath ( 5.2.1 ) implies the smeared
charge distribution to be:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Direct inspection of ( 5.43 ) shows that in fact we can consistently put
@xmath and @xmath to zero.

Requiring the further condition that the total charge of the @xmath is
actually @xmath , one gets a relation for the value of the dilaton:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the last equation in ( 5.2.1 ), the relation ( 5.48 ) fixes also
the value of the four-dimensional cosmological constant (as it depends
on @xmath ). Summarizing, the solution is completely described by the
internal Calabi-Yau manifold defined by @xmath invariant forms @xmath
and @xmath , with an anti-holomorphic isometrical involution @xmath :
the background fields @xmath and @xmath are determined by ( 5.2.1 ) with
@xmath , @xmath ; the dilaton is given by ( 5.48 ) where in turn the
volume is set by @xmath . Further constraints come from the integral
quantization of fluxes, and this mechanism provides the stabilization of
geometrical moduli in the geometry. Thus @xmath and @xmath are
(completely) determined by the integer fluxes. This will be analyzed in
the next section.

###### Tadpole Cancellation and Topology Change

In the exact localized solution, the fact that @xmath is exact implies
that @xmath must be exact. ⁷ ⁷ 7 Actually the exact forms are @xmath and
@xmath (as one reads from the equations ( 5.2.1 ) and ( 5.25 )). But
@xmath is constant. The most important consequence is that the modified
BI implies that @xmath must vanish in cohomology; here @xmath runs over
all the localized sources. Therefore from the tadpole cancellation
conditions one gets that the possible configurations of localized
charges are constrained: charge cancellation must work among localized
charges only. Specifically, it must be that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

on all closed 3-cycles. This is different from the smeared CY solution
(in which @xmath ), where a non-trivial closed @xmath was allowed by the
supersymmetry equations and could be used to cancel the @xmath charge.

In the case of a single source we see that @xmath is exact. Since @xmath
is the Poincare dual of the homology class of the O6-plane, we learn
that the 3-cycle that the O6-plane wraps is contractible. This is in
stark contrast to the smeared Calabi-Yau case in which the O6-plane is
necessarily non-trivial in homology. Therefore, we learn that the
transition from the Calabi-Yau approximation to the exact solution
necessarily involves a topology change.

##### 5.2.3 Moduli Stabilization

In this section we will describe from the point of view of ten
dimensional supergravity, how the introduction of the fluxes stabilizes
the moduli which are present in the zero flux, Calabi-Yau limit. After a
brief general discussion, we will first discuss the moduli vevs in the
examples studied in [ 41 ] and then go on to discuss the general case.

We begin with the axions. A background value for the field strength of a
gauge form potential can be separated into two pieces:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The former, cohomologically nontrivial, when integrated on cycles gives
the integer amounts of flux, whilst the second term is globally exact.
@xmath must be closed (so that the flux depends only on cohomology), and
we can choose an harmonic representative of the integral cohomology
class. Note however that this separation is arbitrary. From the exact
solution the total field strength @xmath is harmonic so that @xmath . We
can then use the gauge freedom @xmath to choose @xmath harmonic. The
internal harmonic components of @xmath are four dimensional axions. This
shows that all the other Kaluza-Klein modes have a zero vacuum
expectation value and are hence massive.

In the same way, we split the other field-strengths: ⁸ ⁸ 8 Notice that
the field strengths @xmath and @xmath are not automatically closed. They
are indeed closed in the smeared solutions we are considering, as it
turns out from the BI’s ( 5.40 ).

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.51)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Arguing as before, @xmath is the integrally quantized flux of the gauge
potential @xmath while @xmath is the flux of @xmath ; all of them can be
taken harmonic exploiting the gauge redundancy. Note that being @xmath
harmonic, it is actually vanishing on our Calabi-Yau solution because of
the vanishing of @xmath .

So one simply expands the fluxes (quantized), the gauge potentials and
the @xmath structure forms defining the metric. The right basis is
dictated by the exact solution, and by the constraints imposed by the
orientifold projection. In the special example at hand, everything is
harmonic. On the other hand, we can only study the vacuum and can not go
off-shell, so can not see any superpotential.

In order to discuss the stabilization of axions coming from @xmath , we
need to consider the BI for @xmath , or equivalently the EOM ( 5.39 ).
Splitting the field strength according to ( 5.50 ) and ( 5.52 ) and
recalling that @xmath one can recast it in the form of an exact
differential:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath , @xmath must contain also a four-dimensional piece @xmath
such that @xmath . Being a BI, the term in parenthesis is recognized as
the closed component of @xmath , which can be further split into flux
and an exact piece:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Example: the @xmath Orientifold

The smeared solution in the long-wavelength approximation can be
exploited to compare results with another widely used approximation:
what is called Calabi-Yau with fluxes. In the latter, one keeps the
contribution of fluxes small compared to the curvature of the
compactification manifold. Note that fluxes can not be taken arbitrarily
small; Dirac quantization condition puts a lower bound @xmath to the
amount for a p-form field-strength. So one requires the contribution of
fluxes to the action to be small compared to the Einstein term @xmath ,
which is of order @xmath with respect to the characteristic length of
the manifold. This gives @xmath . In other words, we must be in the
limit of large compactification manifold with respect to the string
length, which anyway is the regime of applicability of supergravity.
Under these conditions, one can neglect the backreaction of fluxes on
geometry, and work with the Calabi-Yau metric. Of course one has to be
careful to remember that in the action there are factors of the dilaton,
and both the dilaton and the volume are (possibly) determined by fluxes
themselves, so it is not always possible to keep the fluxes to their
minimal amount while increasing the volume.

A simple example studied in detail by [ 41 ] is the @xmath orientifold
and will be useful as a concrete model. The model is constructed by
compactifying Type IIA supergravity on a six dimensional manifold which
is (the singular limit of) a Calabi-Yau: a torus @xmath firstly
orbifolded by @xmath and then orientifolded. It has Hodge numbers @xmath
and @xmath , where 9 of the 12 Kähler moduli arise from the blow-up
modes of 9 @xmath singularities. There are no complex structure moduli.
The O6-plane wraps a special Lagrangian 3-cycle and is compatible with
the closed @xmath structure of the CY. The resulting theory has 4
preserved supercharges. The number of moduli from the form fields are: 3
from the NS-NS 2-form potential @xmath (odd under @xmath ), no one from
the R-R 1-form potential @xmath and 1 from the R-R 3-form potential
@xmath (even). Fluxes are switched on as described above.

In [ 41 ] the stabilization of the moduli, due to the fluxes, is
analyzed by a computation of the four dimensional effective moduli
potential. We are going to apply to this model the machinery previously
developed, in the long-wavelength approximation.

Let us introduce an integer basis of harmonic forms for the even
cohomology groups. The 2-forms (odd under @xmath ) @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 4-forms (even under @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the two values of @xmath besides @xmath .

Start with the decomposition of @xmath ( 5.51 ). Expand the fields on
harmonic forms (of correct parity)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are quantized in units of @xmath . Imposing the smeared
solution @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ‘‘moduli’’ ⁹ ⁹ 9 We call them moduli because they are so in the
Calabi-Yau compactification without fluxes, but here the exact solution
fixes completely @xmath , and so there are no moduli at all. @xmath
corresponding to four dimensional axions are fixed by the fluxes @xmath
. We can take for simplicity @xmath , as in [ 41 ] , then @xmath and the
axions are fixed to @xmath . The general case is dealt with in the next
section.

Then expand the 4-form flux @xmath and the @xmath structure fundamental
form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.59)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are quantized in units of @xmath , and we put a power of
the dilaton for later convenience. Note in particular

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting into the decomposition of @xmath ( 5.52 ) and in the
solution ( 5.2.1 ) with @xmath and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, as before, @xmath and @xmath are the two values of 1,2,3 besides
@xmath .

We find a series of relations on the possible fluxes that characterize a
supersymmetric vacuum: @xmath and the sign of @xmath is independent on
@xmath . These are in agreement with [ 41 ] . Moreover we can invert to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

So the Kähler moduli are fixed. In the more general case @xmath they are
still fixed, apart from changing the range of fluxes for which the
supergravity approximation is reliable.

The stabilization of the dilaton comes from the decomposition of @xmath
( 5.50 ). Expand @xmath in a basis of harmonic forms for the third
cohomology group, odd under the spatial orientifold operation @xmath .
In the present example there is only @xmath . Note that this is
consistent with the solution ( 5.2.1 ). So let us put

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The normalization comes from @xmath , so @xmath is integrally quantized
in units of @xmath . Integrating the BI for @xmath on the cycle @xmath
we get the only nontrivial tadpole cancellation condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose only two solutions are ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Note, in quantizing @xmath , that
it is not canonically normalized in the action ( 3.3 ); then it is
quantized in units of @xmath . @xmath and @xmath . Comparing with the
solution, the dilaton gets stabilized to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last issue is the stabilization of possible axions coming from the
3-form potential @xmath . Being it odd under @xmath and harmonic, there
is only one axion:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

This must be substituted into the decomposition of the field-strength
@xmath dual to @xmath ( 5.54 ), with quantized flux @xmath . We get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The result is that, in this simple model, all the Kähler moduli, the
dilaton and the only axion are geometrically stabilized, whilst there
are no complex structure moduli. All the results found in this section
are in precise agreement with those found in [ 41 ] . Really one should
discuss the moduli associated to the 9 resolved singularities as well,
which are one Kähler modulus each. One would find that the singularities
are blown up to a finite volume. In the next section will discuss how
this example generalizes to any Calabi-Yau, of which the orbifold is
just a singular limit.

We can determine also the four-dimensional cosmological constant, that
is the vacuum energy in @xmath . The exact solution ( 5.2.1 ) gives the
scalar curvature @xmath of the @xmath factor in ten dimensional Einstein
metric (note that the constant @xmath cancells out). Then we must
express it in four dimensional Einstein frame, through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eventually, choosing conventions for the Einstein equation @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### General Calabi-Yau with Fluxes

The generalization of this example to any Calabi-Yau model with an
orientifold projection is straightforward. We will continue to adopt the
long-wavelength approximation as done in the previous section. First of
all the antiholomorphic involutive isometry @xmath divides the
cohomology groups of the internal manifold into even and odd components.
In particular, @xmath with dimensions @xmath . Let @xmath be an integer
basis for @xmath , with intersection numbers

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath the dual basis for @xmath (since @xmath is odd):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The third cohomology group @xmath is halved in two spaces of real
dimension @xmath . We choose an integer symplectic real basis for @xmath
: @xmath with @xmath , such that @xmath are even under the projection
@xmath while @xmath are odd. It satisfies @xmath . Let the Poincaré dual
basis of integer cycles be @xmath so that @xmath . It satisfies @xmath ,
@xmath while the other vanishing. The orientifold homology class @xmath
will be a combination of @xmath ’s.

Then we expand the various fields and forms on these basis, according to
their behavior under the orientifold operation @xmath . The Kähler form
@xmath , the field @xmath and the flux @xmath are odd and follow ( 5.60
), ( 5.57 ). ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 A possible axion coming from @xmath lying on the
four dimensional space is forbidden by the orientifold projection. In
particular

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The flux @xmath is even and follows ( 5.59 ). The treatment of the
holomorphic 3-form needs a little bit more of care. On a Calabi-Yau it
can be expanded on the full @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can take @xmath as projective coordinates on the complex structure
moduli space of the Calabi-Yau, while @xmath as functions of @xmath on
this space. Nonetheless, we choose the particular normalization @xmath ,
and this fixes the overall factor. The orientifold projection requires
@xmath and @xmath to be respectively odd and even under @xmath ; this
translates to ¹² ¹² 12 One could note a difference with respect to (
3.43 ). It is because here we have done a different choice for @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that while the first set of relations really cuts out half of the
moduli space, the second set is automatically guaranteed on a CY
manifold which admits the antiholomorphic isometry @xmath . The flux
@xmath is odd and the gauge potential @xmath is even, so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The stabilization proceeds on the same track as before. We substitute
the expansions given above in the equations determining the solution.
From ( 5.51 ) and ( 5.52 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.77)
     @xmath      (5.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

The axions @xmath are all fixed, as well as the Kähler moduli @xmath .
For these last ones we have as many quadratic equations as unknowns
(provided that there is no @xmath such that @xmath is always zero), and,
as pointed out in [ 41 ] , one has only to check that the solution lies
in the supergravity regime (among the others, one asks for large
positive volumes @xmath ). Integrating the BI for @xmath on the cycles
@xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

This fixes all the remaining complex structure moduli ¹³ ¹³ 13 The
equations are not invariant under scaling (what one would have expected
for the projective coordinates), but this relies on the fact that a
normalization for @xmath is chosen, for example in ( C.6 ). . Then
subsituting in the solution ( 5.2.1 ) we find the dilaton

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eventually, by direct application of ( 5.54 ) follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that only this particular combination of the axions can be fixed,
while for the other ones non-perturbative effects and @xmath corrections
must be invoked. Anyway, the stabilization of axions is a minor problem,
because their configuration space is periodic and compact, so any
contribution which generate a nonconstant potential fixes them at a
finite value.

As noted in [ 41 ] , there is a gauge redundancy in the solutions
described above, i.e. solutions which are transformed into each other by
the gauge transformations ( 3.39 ) and following, are equivalent. In the
four-dimensional low energy theory those translate in Peccei-Quinn
symmetries that shift the axions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are accompanied by translations of the fluxes, and the correct
transformation rules are obtained by ( 5.51 ), ( 5.52 ) ,( 5.54 ) by
noticing that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are gauge-invariant. The point
is that one can always reduce to the case of @xmath and @xmath of order
unity, and the large volume limit (the one reliable in supergravity) is
controlled just by the fluxes @xmath . This simplifies considerably the
equations in the limit.

As in the particular case studied in the previous section, we have found
the same results as [ 41 ] : all the geometric moduli and the axions
coming from @xmath are fixed, whilst only one combination of the @xmath
axions is fixed.

#### 5.3 Summary and Comments

The flux compactifications have been largely studied during the last
years. As we have already said a lot of times during this thesis, the
main reason is that their contribution to the total energy depends on
the moduli of compactification manifolds. Minimizing this energy fixes
the value of the geometrical moduli (see section 2.2 ). But this energy
also contributes to the energy-momentum tensor, giving contribution to
the Einstein equations. This contribution backreacts on the geometry,
giving a solution that is no more Ricci flat.

In the first part of this chapter we have described this departure from
CY geometry given by the fluxes. We have seen it for supersymmetric
solutions of the Einstein equations. This is because it is more simple
to solve the supersymmetry equations ( @xmath ) than the Einstein
equation itself. One has to solve the supersymmetry equations and then
impose the Bianchi identities and the equations of motion for the form
fields. The result is that if one wants the minimal supersymmetry ¹⁴ ¹⁴
14 i.e. @xmath of the original supercharges are preserved by the
geometry. in four dimension, the structure group of the six dimensional
manifold must be reduced form @xmath to @xmath . In any case that the
fluxes are turned on, the holonomy group of the Levi-Civita connection
is not included in the structure group. This tells us that the compact
manifold is not a CY. The departure from CY structure is encoded in the
torsion classes, that vanish for a CY (actually a CY has a torsionless
@xmath structure).

In the work that we have presented here [ 43 ] , we concentrated on the
supersymmetric solutions that give rise to four dimensional theories on
AdS @xmath spacetime. These supergravity solutions have been classified
in [ 123 ] . We added to these setup an orientifold O6-plane. This
leaves the supersymmetry equations invariant, but changes the Bianchi
identities. So the solutions are modified and include localized terms.
To find an explicit solution we took the so called ”smeared
approximation”, i.e. the orientifold charged is smoothed out through the
compact manifold, by substituting a smooth 3-form to the singular 3-form
@xmath that gives the location of the fixed point locus.

In the smeared case we can put the parameter @xmath and the flux @xmath
to zero and get a torsionless solution, i.e. a CY, but with some fluxes
turned on. These fluxes allow to stabilize all the CY moduli. To see
this, we have substituted the KK ansatz in the supersymmetry equations
and found the values that the moduli take.

Before [ 43 ] , this ensemble of vacua had been studied only from a four
dimensional point of view by [ 41 ] , as described in section 3.3 . In
that work they studied the four dimensional effective potential, in the
small flux approximation and they found complete moduli stabilization by
minimizing the four dimensional effective potential. In [ 43 ] we have
given a ten dimensional description of the Type IIA CY with fluxes that
was missing before.

### Chapter 6 Warped Models in String Theory

In the previous chapters we have seen various aspects of flux
compactifications. In discussing Type IIB we have seen that the fluxes
can generate a non-trivial warp factor (this is a main difference with
respect to Type IIA case that we have studied in the last chapter). The
warp factor is a factor in front of the four dimensional spacetime
metric, that depends on the compact coordinates. It can so take very
different values on different points of the compact space, generating a
hierarchy of scales in the effective four dimensional theory.

Theories with strongly warped extradimensions have revealed novel
features compared with the standard factorised compactifications. Such
theories have been recently applied to phenomenological model building
beyond the SM to address a variety of questions, such as the hierarchy
problem and the fermion masses. The prototypical example of such
applications is the Randall-Sundrum model [ 33 ] . Since this seminal
paper, the state of the art five dimensional models have evolved
somewhat [ 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 131 , 132 , 133 , 134 , 135 , 136 ,
137 , 138 , 139 , 140 , 141 , 142 , 143 , 144 , 145 ] (see, for
instance, [ 35 ] for a review). Moreover, there are potentially very
interesting signals for the LHC, since these models are dual
descriptions of ‘compositeness’ [ 146 , 147 ] . Their most basic
features are:

-   for every standard model field, there is a five dimensional bulk
    field;

-   to solve the hierarchy problem, the Higgs is localized in a region
    of large warping;

-   turning on bulk and boundary masses localizes the fermion zero modes
    and hence one obtains hierarchical Yukawa couplings since the
    fermions can have varying degrees of overlap with the Higgs.

Since these models have arbitrary parameters e.g. the bulk and boundary
masses, in [ 44 ] we decided to investigate the realization of these
models in String Theory. This perspective offers a framework for
explaining the parameters of the five dimensional models and some new
insights:

-   To realize a warped geometry we considered warped string
    compactifications which arise naturally in the IIB string theory
    with fluxes [ 22 , 72 ] , as we have seen in section 3.2 .

-   Matter and gauge fields in the bulk arise as strings which end on
    D7-branes in the bulk ¹ ¹ 1 Previous studies of warped models in
    string theory had tended to have the standard model on D3-branes [
    148 ] See however [ 149 ] . .

-   To have several standard model generations, we turned on a
    topologically non-trivial (“instanton”) background field on the D7
    worldvolume.

-   Fermion zero modes then naturally localize near the instantons
    and/or by warping.

Our main results were explicit formulae for the profile of the fermion
zero modes in the fifth dimension and their Yukawa couplings. These
formulae show in particular how the physical size of the topologically
non-trivial “instanton” background field can give rise to hierarchies of
Yukawa couplings. They also show that the large Yukawa coupling is
associated with a “small instanton” in the extra dimension.

In this chapter we will firstly give a brief review of the five
dimensional warped models. In particular we will focus on the aspects
that we realized in our string theory construction. Then we will explain
the arising of warping in string theory and at the end we will describe
the realization of the five dimensional features that we constructed in
[ 44 ] .

#### 6.1 Five Dimensional Models

Five dimensional warped models are very interesting from a
phenomenological point of view. They are based on the Randall-Sundrum
idea of warping [ 33 ] : a non-factorisable geometry gives a chance to
address the hierarchy problem between the electroweak and the Planck
scale. It is really different with respect to the usual extradimensional
models, where the metric is of the form @xmath . In that case the
hierarchy problem is addressed by taking the size of the extradimension
very large: the fundamental scale is the (five dimensional) Planck
scale, that is suppressed with respect to the four dimensional one.

The RS models live in a five dimensional spacetime. The fifth dimension
@xmath is compactified on an orbifold of a circle @xmath . The orbifold
action is @xmath . We have two fixed points at @xmath and @xmath . At
each boundary there is a 3-brane. The one at @xmath is called the
UV-brane, while the one at @xmath is called IR-brane. The metric between
the two branes is non-factorisable and takes the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the @xmath metric and so the spacetime between the two 3-branes
is simply a slice of @xmath geometry. The four dimensional metric is
multiplied by a function depending on the extradimensional coordinate
@xmath , that is called warp factor . It is an exponential of @xmath
where @xmath is a good coordinate to measure distances in the
extradimension. It is equal to 1 on the UV-brane, while it is
exponentially small ( @xmath ) on the IR-brane. @xmath is the AdS
curvature.

The four dimensional Planck mass is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It depends only weakly on the size of the extradimension @xmath .
Moreover the exponential warp factor has very little effect in
determining the Planck scale. One can naturally take @xmath , obtaining
a four dimensional Planck scale of the order of the fundamental scale.

On the other hand, the warp factor plays an important role in
determining the four dimensional masses on the IR brane. In fact a
generic mass scale @xmath in the five dimensional theory is scaled down
to @xmath on the IR-brane. So with non-large extradimensions one can get
large hierarchy of scales. In particular, if the Higgs field is
localized on the IR-brane (at @xmath ), the weak scale is exponentially
suppressed with respect to the Planck scale.

The first proposal of Randall-Sundrum [ 33 ] was to put all the Standard
Model fields on the IR-brane. But to address the hierarchy problem, it
is not necessary to localize the matter fields on the IR-brane.
Moreover, this would introduce problems with operators associated to
proton decay, neutrino masses and FCNC, that would be suppressed by a
small mass, giving predictions inconsistent with experiments.

So in [ 129 ] it was proposed to consider models in which the SM
fermions and the gauge fields live in the five dimensional bulk. We will
concentrate on the fermion fields. We include in the five dimensional
Lagrangian both the kinetic term and a mass term. The five dimensional
Dirac equation is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

the mass @xmath is an odd function of @xmath . This is because @xmath is
odd under the orbifold action and we want an even mass term @xmath . The
covariant derivative @xmath contains the warp factor. Making it
explicit, we can write the equation ( 6.3 ) as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the five dimensional Dirac spinor can be splitted into even and
odd eigenvectors with respect to @xmath : @xmath with @xmath .

One then does the usual KK ansatz

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the KK modes satisfying @xmath , and @xmath is the
profile of the KK mode in the bulk. Substituting this ansatz in the five
dimensional Dirac equation ( 6.3 ), one can find the expression for the
zero modes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a normalization constant. We see that the profile is not
constant in the extradimensional coordinate @xmath .

The Standard Model Yukawa coupling interactions are promoted to five
dimensional interactions in the warped bulk:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Higgs is a four dimensional field localized on the IR-brane, and its
profile is a delta function in the coordinate @xmath . If we insert the
expression for the zero mode ( 6.5 ) and for the metric ( 6.1 ) in the
five dimensional Yukawa coupling term, we get the four dimensional
Yukawa coupling:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the dimensionfull five dimensional Yukawa coupling and it is
taken to be of order of the fundamental scale, i.e. @xmath . The
parameter @xmath determines how the fermion profile is localized in the
compact direction. Depending on it we can have a large overlap of the
fermion profile with the Higgs one ( @xmath ), giving a top-like Yukawa
coupling, or a small overlap ( @xmath ), that gives an exponentially
small Yukawa coupling.

Summarizing, introducing a bulk mass term for the fermions gives
localized profiles. The Higgs is localized on the IR-brane in order to
have a suitable weak scale. Taking fermion profiles with different
overlaps with the Higgs realizes the Yukawa hierarchy.

#### 6.2 String Realization

In this section, we will see how to realize the interesting features
that the five dimensional models in a string theory setup.

We will start by reviewing how to get warp compactifications in String
Theory, then we will present our result in [ 44 ] , i.e. how to realize
the Yukawa hierarchy in this context.

##### 6.2.1 Warped String Compactifications

In section 3.2 we have seen that in Type IIB String Theory, there are
solutions with non-factorisable metric of the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The regions of the compact manifold where @xmath are called throats .
This is because these regions are small with respect to the metric
@xmath , but become large with respect to the warped metric. So one can
draw the picture in which the compact manifold is the manifold described
by @xmath with some throats attached to it, where the warp factor is
sensitively different from 1. In the throats, the four dimensional
energy of the phenomena is redshifted by a factor of @xmath with respect
to regions of negligible warping.

Both D-branes and fluxes are sources of non-trivial warping. One typical
example is an orientifold @xmath compactification of Type IIB with a
stack of @xmath D3-branes [ 72 ] on one point (that we will choose to be
@xmath ). These D3-branes and the O3-planes backreact on the geometry,
giving the metric:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us define @xmath and @xmath . When @xmath then @xmath and locally
the space is the product of the Minkowski spacetime and the six-torus.
On the other hand, when @xmath then @xmath and the geometry reduces to
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting the background ( 6.9 ) in the gravitational action, one gets
the relation between the ten dimensional and the four dimensional Plack
scales. The four dimensional reduced Planck mass @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

As in the five dimensional models, the warp factor modifies only weakly
the relation between the Planck scales, that can so be taken of the same
order. On the other hand, the warp factor generates a hierarchy of four
dimensional scales. To see this, take the action of a scalar in the
background ( 6.10 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If a scalar field is localized in a region with warp factor @xmath ,
then its mass is suppressed (with respect to the ten dimensional mass
@xmath ) to @xmath . This is the effect that we found also in five
dimensional models. Hence we can address the hierarchy problem if we
take the Higgs localized in a region of the compact space, where the
warp factor is large.

One can generalize this setup and take as a compact manifold a CY, with
some 3-form fluxes turned on and some D-branes and orientifold planes.
All of these generate the warp factor. In some constructions (see page
3.34 ) there is a point where the warp factor takes its minimal value,
different from zero. In this case the throat is not infinite. This does
not happens in the case studied above, where the warp factor @xmath goes
to zero when @xmath .

The situation on the throat resembles what happens in a slice of @xmath
:

-   There is a warp factor depending on an extra dimensional coordinate
    and that generates hierarchy of four dimensional scales.

-   The role of the UV-brane is played by the bulk compact manifold
    (where @xmath ).

-   There are string mechanisms to end the throat at @xmath , avoiding
    vanishing warp factor. The IR-brane is associated with @xmath .

The question we tried to answer in [ 44 ] is if other features of the
five dimensional models can be realized in a string setup. In particular
we find a setup where the matter lives in the bulk and the fermion
profiles are localized in extradimensions, giving Yukawa hierarchy.

##### 6.2.2 The Setup: A Simple Example

In this section we will describe a simple example which illustrates the
setup we considered in [ 44 ] .

As said above, our interest is understanding how various features of the
five dimensional phenomenological models are realized in string theory
vacua, with the motivation that this might lead to additional insights
about the phenomenology. The three basic features which we aimed to
understand better are:

-   The five dimensional warped models tend to have the standard model
    gauge fields propagating in the bulk of @xmath .

-   For each standard model fermion there is a five dimensional bulk
    fermion field with both bulk and boundary mass parameters which
    determine whether or not the fermion is localized in the UV or IR
    end of @xmath .

-   The hierarchy amongst standard model Yukawa couplings is realized by
    the varying degrees of overlap between these localized wavefunctions
    and the Higgs.

We study the string theory realization of these features within the
context of Type IIB string theory vacua with fluxes, since this class of
vacua realizes warped extra dimensions in a natural way. In such vacua,
non-Abelian gauge fields can reside on D3 and D7-branes, so in order to
realize property a) the only possibility is to put the standard model
gauge fields on the D7-branes. Recall that the ten dimensional spacetime
is a warped product of four dimensional Minkowski spacetime @xmath and a
compact Calabi-Yau manifold @xmath [ 22 ] . The metric takes the form of
a D3-brane metric, where the D3-branes span the Minkowski spacetime. The
D7-branes have a world-volume which is a warped product of @xmath and a
four dimensional cycle @xmath .

Now we turn to property b). The physics behind the introduction of bulk
and boundary masses is that, before symmetry breaking, the standard
model fermions are all zero modes of the Dirac operator on @xmath . We
thus need to study the Dirac equation on the D7-brane in the warped
background. For the ten dimensional geometries described in [ 22 ] the
metric induced on the D7-branes is of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the warp factor @xmath is a function of the coordinates @xmath on
the 4-cycle @xmath , which the D7-brane wraps and @xmath are coordinates
on @xmath . For simplicity, we study the warped geometry induced by
D3-branes in flat spacetime. In this case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the separation between the D7 and
the D3-branes. For simplicity, in this example, we set @xmath .

We also use an almost “flat” radial coordinate @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

For illustration, the near horizon geometry in these coordinates is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is an @xmath contained in @xmath . In these coordinates, @xmath is
the tip of the throat while @xmath is its origin.

The low energy spectrum of the D7-brane modes includes massless fermions
in the adjoint representation of the gauge group: @xmath . Under the
splitting induced by the D3-brane background, the fermions factorise as
products of fermions on @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normalization constant.

The Dirac equation can be written as ² ² 2 In our conventions, @xmath
are the gamma matrices relative to the background metric, while @xmath
are relative to the flat metric.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the Dirac operator on @xmath
and on flat @xmath . Massless fermions in @xmath are the zero modes of
@xmath . As shown in the appendix E these are given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the zero modes of the operator @xmath . This means that
in the warped background, the four-dimensional zero modes are
conformally equal to the zero modes in an unwarped geometry .

The simplest possibility in this example is to take @xmath to be the
constant zero modes of the flat Euclidean Dirac operator @xmath on the
extra dimensions. Whilst this indeed would give us a four dimensional
fermion zero mode, it raises two problems:

1.  since the fermion field @xmath on the D7-brane is in the adjoint
    representation, the four dimensional zero mode @xmath is also in the
    adjoint representation;

2.  there would be four such fermion zero modes (since there are four
    constant spinors), whilst the standard model requires three
    generations of zero modes in representations which are certainly not
    adjoint.

In principle, there is an elegant solution to both of these problems,
which also elucidates the string theory description of property b): the
gauge covariant Dirac operator @xmath can have multiple non-trivial zero
modes in the presence of topologically non-trivial gauge field
backgrounds. This is a standard mechanism to generate light fermion
generations in string theory, however the novelty here is the presence
of the warp factor in @xmath and that we will be quite explicit about
the profile of the wavefunction.

The background field strength should be a solution of the equations of
motion. These come from the YM theory living on the D7-brane:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath and @xmath are the D3 background induced on the D7 worldvolume.
Among the solutions of the eight dimensional equations of motion there
are gauge fields living in the Euclidean (4)-space and satisfying:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the instanton anti-selfduality condition. So we will turn on a
background instanton gauge field, living only in (4)-space. This also
breaks the gauge group living on the D7 worldvolume.

As is well known from gauge theory instanton physics, gauge
field-strengths satisfying the condition @xmath in four Euclidean
dimensions can be topologically non-trivial and support multiple fermion
zero modes which are not in the adjoint representation. Depending on the
topological charge (or instanton number) one can have different numbers
of fermion zero modes. One can check that such gauge field
configurations also solve the equations of motion on the D7-brane, so
are acceptable backgrounds.

The zero mode wave functions @xmath have been computed explicitly long
ago for many different @xmath backgrounds [ 150 ] . If we take the
simplest known solution to these equations [ 151 ] , then we obtain a
zero mode which depends on the size of the instanton @xmath , as well as
its position @xmath in the Euclidean space (see also appendix D ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

here @xmath is a constant spinor normalized as @xmath .

These fermion zero modes have to be normalized properly. Consider the
kinetic term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the normalization constant @xmath was introduced in the
Kaluza-Klein ansatz ( 6.17 ) and we used @xmath . In order to have a
canonical kinetic term, we require:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In regions of negligible warping, this condition is realized for @xmath
, whilst when the warp factor is large (for instance in the near horizon
region) the normalization is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.22)
              @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radial position of the instanton in almost flat
radial coordinates. When @xmath , we get @xmath .

We see that in string theory the instanton scale size is important in
determining the profile of the fermion zero modes. Putting all the
factors together, the normalized zero mode wave function is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can compare this wave function with the five dimensional profile (
6.5 ). From this we learn that the zero mode wavefunction in string
theory is quite different from the five dimensional models. Note that
there is a dependence on the instanton scale size, @xmath . In
particular, in string theory the zero mode can be localized anywhere in
the fifth dimension.

###### Instantons as D3-branes

As is well known, gauge field backgrounds on D7-branes with @xmath carry
D3-brane charge [ 152 ] . In fact, smooth instanton backgrounds such as
those we are considering here, are “fat D3-branes” with size @xmath .
Therefore, we can also say that the fermion zero modes are localized on
fat D3-branes. The fermion zero modes are therefore 3-7 strings. Note
however that, in order to trust the metric we have been using, we should
consider the number of such fat D3-branes to be small compared to the
large number of ordinary D3-branes and fluxes which generate the bulk
geometry.

The parameters @xmath and @xmath are therefore moduli field vevs which
arise in the open string sector. It would be interesting to investigate
mechanisms which stabilize these moduli. Presumably closed and open
string fluxes generate a potential for these fields.

###### Yukawa Couplings

The zero mode profiles are crucial for computing the four dimensional
Yukawa couplings, and clearly the answer will depend on @xmath . In
order to determine the Yukawa couplings, we need to identify the Higgs
field in string theory. Essentially, with only D3 and D7-branes the
Higgs can be a 7-7 or a 3-7 string, since it must be charged under the
standard model gauge group. The simplest case to consider is that the
Higgs is a 3-7 string state. The 7-7 case will be described later. In
this case its wavefunction will be localized near a point @xmath in
@xmath and we will simply model this by a delta-function. This choice is
very similar to the standard five dimensional proposal [ 35 ] .

We must first determine the correctly normalized four dimensional Higgs
field from its kinetic term by imposing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives @xmath .

The four dimensional Yukawa coupling is obtained by direct dimensional
reduction of the eight dimensional one (remembering localization of the
Higgs):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Remember that the eight dimensional Yukawa has dimension of (length)
@xmath . We see therefore that the Yukawa coupling in the standard model
is determined by several factors: the fermion zero mode evaluated at the
Higgs position, the warp factor at the Higgs position and the
normalization constant @xmath (which itself depends on @xmath and @xmath
).

Let us analyze the four dimensional Yukawa coupling further. For
simplicity we study the case when the fermion zero mode is localized in
a region of large warping and @xmath . Then the four dimensional Yukawa
coupling is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where again we used almost flat radial coordinates @xmath . In the
standard model the Yukawa couplings of the charged fermions range from
order one for the top quark to @xmath for the electron, and clearly (
6.2.2 ) is rich enough to span this range. In more detail, the top quark
Yukawa coupling ( @xmath ) can arise when the top wave function peaks at
the location of the Higgs i.e. @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that, due to the warping in the spacetime, @xmath is not the
physical size @xmath of the instanton, which depends upon its location
in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last result is valid when @xmath . The same can be seen by
evaluating the instanton displacement in the almost flat radial
coordinate: @xmath . Note that in terms of the physical size, this is
simply @xmath : the instanton is physically smaller than the @xmath
radius, which is a natural requirement. Substituting in ( 6.28 ), one
gets:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, we expect @xmath to be of order @xmath , with @xmath the
string scale, we obtain @xmath when @xmath is of order of the string
scale. In other words, the instanton which localizes the top quark is a
small instanton. We therefore might expect strong quantum corrections to
the top sector. On the other hand, when @xmath is larger than the
fundamental scale, @xmath is smaller than 1 and we can also realize
smaller Yukawa couplings by localizing the corresponding fermions on
large instantons.

The smaller Yukawa couplings are actually better obtained in the case
when @xmath , which means that the fermion zero mode is localized far
from the Higgs, and again when @xmath . The Yukawa coupling is then
given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that even when the @xmath radius @xmath is just a little bigger
than the instanton size, that both the instanton scale size and the warp
factor suppress the generic Yukawa coupling.

##### 6.2.3 The Higgs as a Vector Zero Mode

In this section we will study the case that the Higgs is a 7-7 string
which is a zero mode of the 8-dimensional gauge field on the D7-brane.
We will see that such zero modes are not affected by the presence of the
warping and can also be computed in the instanton background.

In the eight dimensional kinetic term, all the fields are in the adjoint
representation of the gauge group @xmath . The background instanton
gauge field breaks this group, leaving a (3+1)-dimensional gauge theory,
whose gauge group is a subgroup @xmath of @xmath . The adjoint
representation of @xmath splits into irreducible representations of
@xmath , where @xmath is chosen as the gauge group of the instanton.
Thus, an eight dimensional field in the Adj rep of @xmath can be written
as a sum of products of fields in @xmath and @xmath in various
representations of @xmath . In order to reproduce a GUT theory at low
energy, we could take @xmath to contain some GUT group as a subgroup.

Let us see some details. The eight dimensional kinetic term is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and contains the term

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the eight dimensional gauge coupling (of order @xmath ,
with @xmath the string length) and where we have used the splitting (
6.17 ) of the fermion fields and that of the vector:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that the effective Yukawa coupling in @xmath -dimensions is given
by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have substituted the expression ( 6.2.2 ) for the fermion zero
modes @xmath . Note that the warp factor has disappeared; it only enters
in the fermion normalization constants ³ ³ 3 For this particular choice
for the Higgs, its normalization is not affected by the warping and will
be put @xmath . The zero modes @xmath are warp factor independent
because the Yang-Mills action on @xmath is conformally invariant.

The fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are in the @xmath representations
dictated by the splitting of Adj @xmath and by the @xmath
representations that one wants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath to belong to.

We compute the integral ( 6.35 ) in the simple case in which the two
fermions are in the fundamental representation of @xmath , while the
vector zero mode is in the adjoint. We will see that the coupling can be
highly suppressed in the usual approximation of well separated
instantons, and that this suppression is due to the localization of the
zero modes near individual single instantons. This justifies this simple
choice of representations, since the localization is characteristic of
the zero modes in any representation. This is important, because the
suppression works whatever @xmath -representations are associated (by
the splitting of Adj @xmath ) with the particular GUT-representations
that one wants to find in the GUT Yukawa interaction terms. It would be
interesting to compute the integral exactly, since new phenomena might
arise.

We consider the ’t Hooft solution with instanton number @xmath . This
solutions has @xmath explicit parameters: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The zero mode profiles when @xmath are given in the appendix D
. We also choose both the fermion zero modes in ( 6.35 ) to be localized
around @xmath , while the vector one (the Higgs) is to be localized
around @xmath . We put @xmath in a region of large warping, in order to
address the hierarchy problem. We will see that, in order to have a
sufficiently large top Yukawa coupling, one must have @xmath sharply
localized around @xmath .

We substitute the expressions ( D.3.1 ) and ( D.3.2 ) in ( 6.35 ) and
estimate it in several asymptotic regions of the parameter space of the
@xmath solution. With more than one instanton, we find a new suppression
mechanism: due to the localization of wavefunctions at well separated
points, suppression can also occur due to a hierarchy in the two
instanton sizes @xmath and @xmath . The maximal value of the integral is
actually obtained when @xmath and @xmath .

Actually when @xmath , the parameter @xmath disappears from the result,
that is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( D.3.2 ), and where @xmath is a constant of
order one. The expression ( 6.36 ) takes its maximal value when @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same result as ( 6.37 ) is obtained taking @xmath . Then one has to
substitute the physical size in this formula (see ( 6.29 )). The final
result is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From here, we see that if one wants the top coupling to be of order one,
the top zero mode must be localized close to the Higgs and the @xmath
-parameter of the corresponding instanton has to be of the order of the
Higgs one.

The Yukawa hierarchy can then be obtained by varying the instanton
parameters in such a way as to have different overlaps of the zero
modes. One can approximate the integral giving the Yukawa couplings in
different asymptotic regions of the instanton moduli space. We summarize
the results in Table 6.1 . In order to get the actual Yukawa coupling,
this integral has to be multiplied by @xmath and the instanton ‘sizes’
have to be substituted with their physical sizes. Let us consider some
relevant cases, which turn out to be similar to the result found in the
simple example of the previous section.

-   When the fermions are localized around the same position of the
    Higgs:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   When the fermions are far from the Higgs:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

#### 6.3 Summary and Comments

We have seen that there is a rather intricate string theory picture
underlying many of the important features of the five dimensional warped
phenomenology models. The hierarchy problem is addressed in the same
way: a non-factorisable geometry is taken, in which the four dimensional
metric is multiplied by a function of the extradimensional coordinates,
the warp factor. It generates a naturally exponential hierarchy between
four dimensional scales. In string theory both fluxes and D-brane
configurations generate a warp factor. Regions of the compact manifold
with large warping are called throats. One solves the hierarchy problem,
by localizing the Higgs in such regions.

In five dimensional models, the matter fields live in higher dimensions
and the fermion zero modes are localized through the introduction of
five dimensional mass terms. We realized this situation by considering
fields living on the eight dimensional worldvolume of a D7-brane. We
mimic the mass terms by turning on a non-trivial background gauge field
(an instanton in the four euclidean extradimensions). It indeed gives
localized profile for the fermion zero modes. The new feature of the
string construction is that the zero modes can be localized anywhere in
the extra dimensions.

Finally exponentially Yukawa hierarchy is generated by localizing the
fermions far from the Higgs position, while the top Yukawa coupling is
obtained when the top zero mode is localized near the Higgs. This
mechanism works both in five dimensional models and in our string
construction. The new feature of the last one is that, the scale of the
topologically non-trivial background (instanton size) can also be used
to suppress Yukawa couplings, in addition to separating the fermion zero
modes in the extra dimensions. In particular this implies that to
realize the largest Yukawa coupling the top must be associated to a
small size instanton.

A natural question arises: can we distinguish the string theory models
from the five dimensional phenomenology?

Obviously, yes in principle: the spectrum of the five dimensional models
consists of the zero modes which become the standard model particles
after symmetry breaking; then in addition, for each standard model
particle there is an infinite Kaluza-Klein tower of resonances with the
same spin as its associated standard model cousin. These particles are
also present in the string spectrum, but the string theory has more: for
each standard model particle, there is also an infinite tower of string
states of increasing spins . So, measuring even part of the spectrum
could be enough to distinguish them. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Usually, in the holographic
limit [ 53 ] we decouple these massive open string states, but here we
cannot since the string length and string coupling is finite.

In the five dimensional models, the masses of the Kaluza-Klein modes are
typically quantized in units of a TeV. Therefore, the LHC will only be
sensitive to the first or second resonance. What about the string
states? The @xmath scale is of order @xmath so, for weak string coupling
the string scale is below this. However, the D7-branes fill the entire
@xmath and hence, the 7-7 strings which are in the infrared end of
@xmath will have a TeV scale or lower mass: hence only the first or
second of these will be directly accessible at the LHC. Since these
states have the same gauge quantum numbers as the Kaluza-Klein modes,
they could only be distinguished by their decay patterns or their spins.
For example, there might be a spin 3/2 colored particle which is a
string excitation of the gluon. If produced, this particle must
eventually decay into jets, the angular distributions of which will be
sensitive to its spin. It would be interesting to study to what extent
these events can be selected and the discovery reach for the LHC.

We conclude with a discussion of some additional issues which deserve
further investigation. Firstly there is the issue of supersymmetry
breaking. In five dimensional models, one does not a priori need
supersymmetry at all, since the electroweak scale is generated through
the warped extra dimension. But in Type IIB string theory, there is
certainly local supersymmetry in the UV, and one needs to break it. One
possibility is to choose the background fluxes and geometry to
explicitly break supersymmetry, such as was recently considered in [ 153
] . However, backgrounds which explicitly break supersymmetry in string
theory can often be unstable; thus, it would be good to investigate this
further.

Secondly, there is the issue of fermion chirality. With one collection
of parallel D7-branes, even though the backgrounds we have considered
generate multiple copies of the same standard model representations, the
representations include both fermion chiralities. This can be avoided by
the introduction of another set of D7-branes intersecting the first set
along a surface in @xmath , but we have not investigated this in detail.
Also, in five dimensional models, the chirality problem is resolved by
considering a @xmath orbifold and perhaps such a mechanism can also be
realized in string theory. Finally, it could be interesting to extend
this construction to non-flat background, such as the Klebanov-Strassler
throat.

### Chapter 7 Proton Decay in Theories with Localized Fermions

In this chapter we will study the decay of the proton in theories coming
from String/M-theory. In particular we will focus on theories where the
fermions are localized in the extradimensions while the gauge bosons can
propagate in them. We have seen an example of this in compactifications
of M-theory on singular @xmath manifolds (see section 3.4.2 ).

We will first review the four dimensional GUT theory and how the decay
of the proton arises in it. Then we will go to higher dimensional
theories and see how GUT arises in M-theory compactifications on @xmath
manifolds, concentrating on the proton decay. Finally we will describe
the results of our paper [ 40 ] , i.e. a mechanism that suppresses some
proton decay channels with respect to the four dimensional prediction.

#### 7.1 Four Dimensional GUT and Proton Decay

The basic idea in a Grand Unified Theory (GUT) is that the Standard
Model gauge group @xmath is embedded in a larger underlying group @xmath
. In this case the additional symmetries may restrict some of the
features that are arbitrary in the Standard Model. The group @xmath is
broken spontaneously, giving at low energy the SM gauge group.

A typical consequence of this embedding is that the new symmetry
generators and their associated gauge bosons involve both flavor and
color. So the new interactions generally violate the conservation of the
baryon number and in most models lead to proton decay .

The proton is observed to be stable in nature. In fact the experimental
limit on its lifetime is extremely restrictive: @xmath years. This
requires that the baryon number violating interactions must be weak, and
gives bounds on the scale of the interaction and on the masses of the
massive gauge bosons: @xmath .

If @xmath is a simple group, there is only one coupling constant at
scales larger than @xmath . At these energies the spontaneous symmetry
breaking (SSB) effects are negligible and the strong, weak and
electromagnetic interactions are unified; the quarks and leptons behave
very similarly and are put together in representations of @xmath . At
energies smaller than @xmath , the SSB becomes important and the running
of the three coupling constant relative to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
become different; the @xmath representations decomposes in @xmath
representations and the different terms behave differently. Taking the
running back, one can predict the scale @xmath , that is the scale where
the running coupling constants meet each others. It is of the same order
as the gauge boson mass @xmath . Thus, one can check if it is consistent
with the bound given by the proton lifetime.

Let us be more specific, and choose @xmath . This will be the GUT group
that we will study in the higher dimensional theories. The field content
is given by:

     Gauge Bosons . They are in the adjoint representation of @xmath (
    @xmath ). When @xmath is broken to @xmath , this representation is
    splitted into the sum of SM representations @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The first three terms are the gauge bosons of the Standard Model,
    while the bosons @xmath are the massive gauge bosons mediating the
    proton decay, and are called lepto-quark bosons .

     Fermions . Each family of 15 fields is placed in a @xmath
    representation. Their decompositions are:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

     Higgs : The Higgs doublet field responsible for the SSB @xmath is
    embedded in the @xmath representation of @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    @xmath is a color triplet, while @xmath is the SM Higgs. @xmath can
    also mediate proton decay so they are constrained to be very massive
    by the bound on @xmath . On the other hand @xmath has a weak scale
    mass. It is the so called Doublet-Triplet splitting problem : one
    has to find a mechanism that suppresses the mass operators for
    @xmath but not those for @xmath . We will see that there is a
    natural such mechanism in M-theory context [ 154 ] .

The @xmath GUT models have both attractive and less attractive features.
Among the first ones, we have:

-   @xmath incorporates the SM gauge group as a maximal subgroup.

-   The electric charge is quantized. This comes from the fact that the
    electric charge operator @xmath is a generator of @xmath and so
    traceless. For example the condition Tr @xmath in the @xmath
    representation implies @xmath , and hence @xmath .

-   The @xmath charge is conserved.

-   The @xmath -violating operators can explain the asymmetry between
    baryons and antibaryons.

-   The @xmath Higgs gives @xmath for three families (the result is
    different for a different number of families).

-   There are no FCNC effects associated with the light gauge bosons.

Among the less attractive features there are:

-   Each family is in a reducible representation.

-   There are difficulties with the predictions for @xmath and @xmath .

##### 7.1.1 Proton Decay

In this section we will concentrate on the GUT interactions that drive
the decay of the proton. There are different operator contributing to
the nucleons decay. In supersymmetric theories the D=4 and D=5 operators
give the most important contributions. The D=6 operators coming from
lepto-quark bosons exchange are the most important contributions in
non-supersymmetric theories, but also in supersymmetric one if the D=4
and D=5 operators are suppressed (we will see an example of this in the
extradimensional models we will study). The D=6 operators coming from
Higgs exchange are less important.

Our main interest is in the D=6 operators coming from massive gauge
bosons exchange. Their contribution comes from the matrix elements of an
operator product:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the propagator of the heavy lepto-quark gauge bosons.
Because the proton is so large compared to the range of @xmath that
contributes appreciably in the integral, we can replace @xmath by @xmath
and use

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Replacing in ( 7.1 ), one gets an effective 4-fermions interaction:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The current is given by @xmath . From this interaction term one obtains
that the lifetime of the proton is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the proton mass.

From ( 7.4 ), we see that having a bound on @xmath (from experiments)
gives a bound on @xmath . As we have said before, @xmath can be
predicted independently from the running of the SM coupling constants,
that meet each other at @xmath and one can check if these two results
are consistent with each other.

Let us be more precise on the operators governing the proton decay in
the @xmath GUT theory. The possible D=6 operators coming from ( 7.3 )
and giving contribution to the proton decay are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the above expressions @xmath and @xmath are the mass of the
lepto-quark bosons and the coupling constant at the GUT scale. @xmath
and @xmath are the @xmath doublets; @xmath is the Pauli matrix and acts
on the doublets @xmath and @xmath . @xmath are family indices, while the
color indices are suppressed. @xmath and @xmath are the fermion currents
associated to the two matter representations; the current associated
with one family is @xmath . The operators above are written in the
interaction basis.

As we have said before, all these operators preserve the @xmath charge;
this means that the proton always decays into an antilepton. A second
rule is satisfied by these operators: @xmath .

The two different operators contribute to different decay channels:

    @xmath gives in the final state a left-handed antilepton ( i.e. an
    @xmath singlet); a typical example of such decays is @xmath .
    Feynman diagrams contributing to this process are given in figure
    7.1 .

    @xmath gives a right-handed antileptons ( i.e. an @xmath doublet);
    as examples we have @xmath and @xmath . Feynman diagrams
    contributing to this processes are given in figures 7.2 and 7.3 .

We note that the operator @xmath does not contribute to the proton
decay, because at least a u-quark must be involved in the interaction.

Above we have presented decays that involve fermions only in the first
family. Actually there are other decay channels that give also a muon or
a Kaon in the final state. What is important for our future treatment is
the chirality of fermions that are in the final state that says if the
decay has been driven by @xmath or @xmath . It is not important the
family they belong to.

The D=6 operators coming from Higgs exchange are quite model dependent
and are generally less important than the gauge contribution. In fact
they are suppressed with respect to them by a factor @xmath where @xmath
are Yukawa couplings of quarks involved in the proton decay (and so
exponentially small).

All we have said so far is valid both for non-supersymmetric and for
supersymmetric GUT theories. We are more interested in the
supersymmetric ones, because in this case the SM running coupling
constants meet all together at the same point giving the GUT scale.
Moreover the models we will study in the following are all derived in a
supersymmetric context. The main problem with the supersymmetric GUT
theories is that the proton stability is more difficult relative to the
non-supersymmetric case. This is because proton decay arises from D=4
and D=5 operators in addition to D=6 gauge bosons contributions. These
new operators generally give too large decay rate and must be suppressed
in order to give acceptable models. The D=4 operators can be eliminated
by imposing R-parity conservation. R-parity is defined by @xmath , where
@xmath is the spin and @xmath is the matter parity, which is @xmath for
all the matter superfields and @xmath for Higgs and gauge superfields.
The D=5 operators can be eliminated imposing some discrete symmetries.
We will see an example in the M-theory context.

###### Experimental Tests of Proton Decay.

In the 80’s there were large scale experiments for the detection of
proton decay [ 155 ] . They were mainly of two kinds: they use tracking
calorimeter ( e.g. SOUDAN [ 156 ] ) or Cherenkov effect ( e.g.
Kamiokande [ 157 ] ). These experiments yielded null results but set
lower bounds on various proton decay modes.

In the 90’s Super-Kamiokande [ 158 ] came on line. It is the currently
most sensitive proton decay experiment. It is a ring imaging water
Cherenkov detector containing 50 kton of ultra pure water held in a
cylindrical tank 1km underground in Japan. The surface of the cylinder
are covered by photomultilier tubes. When a relativistic particle pass
through the water, they emit a cone of Cherenkov light in the particle
direction of travel. By measuring the charge produced in each
photomultiplier tube and time at which it is collected, it is possible
to reconstruct the position and energy of the event as well as the
number, identity and momenta of the individual charged particles in the
event. The signature of e.g. @xmath is given by three cones: one
generated by the positron and the other two generated by the two photons
coming from the pion decay. Naturally, this process must be
distinguished by other processes giving the same particles, such as the
scattering of atmospheric or solar neutrinos with nucleons. So far no
clear signal of proton decay has been observed. This experiment has
however improved the bounds on proton decay rates [ 159 ] . Here we
report the rates of the decay channels that are interesting for our
work:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Other more sophisticated experiments are going to start in the next
years. They will use Cherenkov detector with water ( e.g.
Hyper-Kamiokande [ 160 ] ) or with noble gases ( e.g. ICARUS which will
use liquid Argon [ 161 ] ). These experiments will either find proton
decay or at least improve significantly the lower bounds and eliminate
many models. For example, Hyper-Kamiokande is to explore the proton
lifetime at least up to @xmath in a period of about 10 years [ 160 ] .

#### 7.2 GUT Theories in Extradimensions

In this section we study GUT theories living in more than four spacetime
dimensions. Most of these models do not precisely lead to four
dimensional GUT’s, since unification takes place in higher dimensions.
This leads among the other things to the possibility for GUT symmetry
breaking by discrete Wilson lines and to higher dimensional mechanisms
for doublet-triplet splitting, as we will see in the models we will
study.

In particular, we will consider theories in which the fermions and Higgs
particles of the Standard Model are localized in the extra dimensions,
but in which the gauge fields propagate in (part of) the bulk. The full
spacetime is thus of the form @xmath with @xmath our four dimensional
spacetime and @xmath the compact extra dimensions. The Standard Model
matter particles are localized at points on @xmath and the gauge fields
propagate along a submanifold @xmath of @xmath times the four
dimensional spacetime. In the GUT context, the GUT gauge group could be
broken to @xmath by a Wilson loop of the gauge field on @xmath . We will
also restrict our attention to theories in which the leading
contribution to the violation of baryon number comes from dimension six
operators (the analog of the gauge boson contribution in the original
non-supersymmetric four-dimensional GUT’s).

Although our results are more generally applicable, we will for
concreteness focus on the case of M-theory compactifications on
manifolds of @xmath -holonomy described in section 3.4 . As we have
seen, they provide an explicit realization of theories of this kind.
Here @xmath is a seven dimensional manifold with @xmath holonomy, @xmath
is a three dimensional submanifold along which @xmath has a particular
orbifold singularity, and the chiral fermions are localized at
particular kinds of conical singularity. In such models the D=4 and D=5
baryon number violating operators are naturally suppressed [ 154 ] .

Also, for definiteness we will restrict attention to the case where the
GUT gauge group is @xmath . It is realized by taking @xmath to be the
three dimensional locus of @xmath orbifold singularities inside @xmath .

Before breaking the gauge group @xmath to the Standard Model gauge
group, each generation of (supersymmetric) Standard Model matter resides
in the @xmath with Higgs particles in the @xmath . So with the minimal
field content there are eight points @xmath where matter is localized:
two for the Higgs multiplets, three for the @xmath matter and three for
the anti-fundamental generations.

If @xmath has incontractible loops, so that its fundamental group @xmath
is non-empty, it is possible to break @xmath to the Standard Model gauge
group by a Wilson line in the vacuum. This modifies the Kaluza-Klein
spectrum with respect to zero background gauge field; for example the
lightest modes of the gauge fields corresponding to the unbroken
generators remain massless, while the others generically get a non-zero
mass.

For an example, we take @xmath [ 39 ] . This space has non-contractible
circles which correspond to open curves in @xmath that connect two
points identified by the elements of @xmath . The background gauge field
can be taken to be a Wilson line around such cycles @xmath (relative to
the generator @xmath ). For instance, the following Wilson line breaks
@xmath to the Standard Model gauge group (as long as @xmath is not a
multiple of @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The introduction of discrete Wilson lines, together with discrete
symmetries of @xmath , gives the possibility to solve the
doublet-triplet splitting problem and the suppression of the D=4 and D=5
baryon number violating operators. Let us see how it happens in this
specific case [ 154 ] .

The 3-sphere can be parametrized by two complex coordinates @xmath
satisfying @xmath . The @xmath acts on them as

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

It acts freely on @xmath and so @xmath is a smooth manifold. Its
fundamental group is @xmath . Moreover @xmath admits a global symmetry
@xmath that acts as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (7.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

The fixed point set of @xmath consists of two circles: @xmath defined by
@xmath , and @xmath defined by @xmath . @xmath is left fixed by @xmath ,
while @xmath is left fixed by @xmath once we consider the identification
( 7.8 ). After having turned on a Wilson line around cycles given by
@xmath identification, if we apply a @xmath transformation to a charged
object, we have to apply to it also the corresponding Wilson line [ 154
] .

Since @xmath leaves fixed @xmath trivially, we can take @xmath to act
trivially on fibers of the gauge bundle over @xmath . On the other hand,
since @xmath leaves fixed @xmath only modulo an element @xmath , the
transformation ( 7.9 ) must be accompanied by the @xmath transformation,
on the charged objects over @xmath .

Now we can place the matter and Higgs superfields on points of @xmath or
@xmath in such a way to avoid the doublet-triplet splitting problem or
dangerous operators. Only the terms invariant under @xmath survive in
the Lagrangian.

Let us begin with the doublet-triplet splitting problem. We place Higgs
fields in the @xmath representation of @xmath on @xmath and those in the
@xmath on @xmath . So the @xmath and @xmath in the @xmath transform in
the same way under @xmath , say @xmath . But the @xmath and @xmath in
the @xmath transform differently, say @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are
arbitrary @xmath roots of 1. The doublet-triplet splitting problem is
solved by choosing the charges such that @xmath but @xmath . Then a
@xmath term in the superpotential is invariant, while a @xmath is
forbidden by the @xmath symmetry and must be generated at lower
energies.

Let us now assign the @xmath charges to the matter fields. We assume
that all fields in the @xmath transform as @xmath @xmath , and all
fields in @xmath as @xmath @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 They are assumed to be
localized all on @xmath . To give masses to the up quarks, we want
@xmath terms in the superpotential, that implies @xmath . To give masses
to the down quarks we need @xmath terms, and so @xmath . To get mass
terms for the neutrino, we need @xmath terms, implying @xmath . But we
do not want terms such @xmath , and so @xmath . Solving these conditions
one gets the constraints:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Further constraining @xmath one can prevent D=4 and D=5 baryon number
violating interactions. In particular D=4 operators come from @xmath
terms, implying @xmath , while D=5 operators come from @xmath terms,
implying @xmath .

##### 7.2.1 Proton Decay in Extradimensions

In this section we will see how the expression ( 7.3 ) for the D=6
baryon number violating operators is modified in the higher dimensional
theories under discussion here. In this case one must also include the
contribution of all charged Kaluza-Klein modes in the @xmath
representation. The seven dimensional propagator @xmath is a function of
the coordinates @xmath on @xmath as well as @xmath on @xmath and the
currents are functions of @xmath but are labelled by the points @xmath
which are the values of @xmath where the matter particles are located.
So we get a term of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again we can replace @xmath by @xmath , so the previous expression is
well approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have substituted @xmath .

This amplitude has to be compared with ( 7.3 ). Up to a factor of @xmath
, the difference is given by the @xmath dependent function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The seven dimensional propagator satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge covariant Laplacian on @xmath . From this we
see that the eigenvalues of @xmath act as masses @xmath from the four
dimensional viewpoint.

@xmath is the contraction of the Feynman propagator on @xmath of the
seven dimensional gauge fields in the @xmath representation of the
Standard Model gauge group:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the eigenfunctions on @xmath of @xmath ² ² 2 When
Wilson loops are turned on, the Laplacian on @xmath is defined as @xmath
where @xmath includes both the spin connection on @xmath and the gauge
connection related to the Wilson loop. with eigenvalues @xmath , and the
integral over @xmath is considered after euclidean continuation.

When there are no zero modes of the Laplacian on @xmath , one can
substitute this expression in ( 7.13 ) and get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

ie the Green’s function of the scalar Laplacian on @xmath for scalar
fields valued in @xmath representation.

When there is a non-zero background gauge field such that the @xmath
symmetry is broken to the Standard Model gauge group, the Laplacian
typically has no zero modes in the space of functions with values in
@xmath and the expression ( 7.16 ) is well defined. @xmath is the
Green’s function of the Laplacian for scalar fields in this
representation.

As we have seen in the four dimensional case, the @xmath operator is
decomposed as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Only the first term contributes to the cross-section for the decay of
the proton into left-handed positrons. The second and third contribute
to the decays into neutrinos whereas the last term does not contribute
to the decay. So for the decays modes such as @xmath studied in [ 39 ]
both @xmath currents are localized at the same point on @xmath . The
corresponding Greens function in ( 7.16 ) is therefore evaluated at
@xmath for this decay channel and therefore the classical formula is
divergent ³ ³ 3 Note that in the cases when @xmath is one dimensional,
the Green’s function is not divergent when @xmath . This actually
happens in some orbifold GUT models [ 162 , 163 , 164 , 165 , 166 ] .
This is presumably regularized in M-theory [ 39 ] .

However, since generically the points supporting the @xmath and the
@xmath are distinct (for example to generate reasonably small Yukawa
couplings), for the decay channels involving neutrinos, the @xmath is at
a point @xmath distinct from the point @xmath supporting the @xmath
current. Therefore the current-current correlator depends explicitly on
the Green’s function on @xmath evaluated at two different points @xmath
. When @xmath takes a small value the decay of the proton into neutrinos
is suppressed accordingly. Generically, @xmath is a curved, compact
manifold and the Green’s function will be a non-trivial function of the
geodesic distance @xmath between the points. In order to investigate the
behavior of such functions, in particular, whether or not they can take
small values, we will present some explicit sample calculations in the
M-theory context.

To compute the Green function, we need to know the scalars @xmath in (
7.16 ). These are eigenfunctions of the Laplacian, that take values in
the @xmath representation. Moreover they must be well defined functions
on @xmath . For simplicity we refer again to the example @xmath . If we
take a loop @xmath in @xmath , a scalar @xmath is well defined when
@xmath . If @xmath is charged under the gauge symmetry, then the
Laplacian acting on @xmath depends explicitly on the background gauge
field. This makes computing the spectrum difficult. However, since the
background gauge field has zero field strength, @xmath , we can locally
eliminate the gauge field dependence by performing a non-single valued
gauge transformation @xmath (see appendix F for a simple example). The
price we pay for this is to change the periodicity condition on @xmath
to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath acts in the appropriate representation. Thus, in the
presence of the Wilson line, a charged scalar field on @xmath is
equivalent to a field on @xmath satisfying the above invariance
conditions. Since the spectrum of the ordinary Laplacian is known on the
round @xmath we can proceed.

In order to compute the Green’s function @xmath , we will use the
eigenmodes of the Laplacian on @xmath which satisfy the boundary
conditions ( 7.18 ) and which take values in the @xmath representation
of @xmath .

We will now show the explicit computations of the Green’s function done
in [ 40 ] in several examples when @xmath has constant curvature. The
details of most of these computations are given in appendix G , but we
will give some explicit derivations below also.

###### Constant Positive Curvature

3-manifolds with constant positive curvature are all quotients of the
round 3-sphere by a discrete group. We will compute the relevant Green’s
function for quotients by @xmath , beginning with the simplest example.

The simplest case: @xmath

This is a particular case of the example presented above, in which
@xmath , @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under this transformation the generators of the @xmath representation
are odd (because the adjoint of the Standard Model is the only invariant
representation). Therefore to get invariant eigenmodes on @xmath we have
to take the odd eigenfunctions on @xmath under the @xmath
transformation.

The eigenvalues of the Laplacian on @xmath are labelled by integers
@xmath and given by @xmath . The relative eigenspaces are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the Wigner @xmath -functions, written in terms of
angular coordinates on @xmath . The @xmath ’s are just the matrix
elements of the spin @xmath representation of @xmath .

Under a @xmath transformation, @xmath . So the odd eigenfunctions are
those relative to odd @xmath . We have also to change the normalization
of such functions, because the volume of @xmath is half of the volume of
the defining @xmath .

The sum ( 7.16 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

From group theory we know that [ 167 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the geodesic distance on the 3-sphere between @xmath and
@xmath .

Inserting this relation in ( 7.22 ) one can do the sum explicitly:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used [ 168 ] and doing the last step, one gets:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is restricted to the points representing @xmath . We see
that the absolute value of the Green’s function takes all values between
@xmath and @xmath . So in this example, if the @xmath multiplet and the
@xmath multiplet are maximally separated in @xmath the Green’s function
is zero and the cross-section vanishes. In this case the lifetime of the
decay channel into neutrinos receives no contribution at all from
dimension six operators.

General Lens Space

The Lens space @xmath is the quotient of the 3-sphere by the cyclic
group whose generator @xmath is the @xmath isometry given in @xmath by [
169 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is given by ( 7.7 ). With the same procedure used for the
previous case, one obtains the formula for the Green’s function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath is again the geodesic distance on the sphere.

In order to study ( 7.26 ), we use the cartesian coordinates on @xmath
where @xmath is defined by @xmath , and choose, without loss of
generality, @xmath .

At first, we note that it has a singularity only at @xmath , at which
@xmath . In this limit @xmath , as one expects. One can check that this
is the only divergence. Secondly, we note that the Green’s function on a
Lens space has always zeros. Actually, the points @xmath (with @xmath )
have the same distance @xmath from each of the points @xmath . This is
because the distance on the sphere is given by @xmath in terms of the
euclidean distance on @xmath , and the chosen points have always @xmath
. So. for this value of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Constant Zero Curvature

Any closed, compact zero curvature manifold is a quotient of the flat
3-torus by a discrete group. Here we consider the case of the torus
itself.

The 3-dimensional torus

We consider the square torus, with coordinates @xmath and @xmath . It is
a non-simply connected manifold, whose fundamental group has three
generators. We choose a background gauge field such that the holonomy
associated to each of three generators is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . This choice breaks @xmath to the Standard Model gauge
group.
The eigenfunctions on the torus with values in @xmath are those which
satisfy the boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

for arbitrary @xmath with @xmath . This is because each lattice
generator acts as @xmath in the representation @xmath .

Once we have found them, we can compute the Green’s function, obtaining:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the same formula as the electrodynamic potential of a
distribution of positive and negative charges situated on nodes of the
lattice given by @xmath , where the sign of the charge is given by
@xmath . It has the expected @xmath singularity when @xmath . Moreover
it has zeros when any of the @xmath is equal to @xmath . Actually, the
charges can be grouped in pairs, one negative, one positive each of
which has the same distance from such points. Summing all these
contributions gives so zero since the contribution from each pair is
zero. One can check this more explicitly by evaluating the expression (
7.30 ) in the case @xmath .

###### Constant Negative Curvature

A constant negative curvature 3-manifold is a quotient of hyperbolic
3-space @xmath by a discrete group. In the compact case such groups are
very rich and complicated and a description of the eigenfunctions of the
Laplacian on charged scalars is difficult to give explicitly. Instead of
attempting an explicit computation, we will compute the Green’s
functions on @xmath itself and we will give an argument for the large
suppression of the Green’s function on compact manifolds with negative
curvature.

The Hyperbolic 3-space

In this case we get the Green’s function, by computing the Heat Kernel
@xmath and then integrating on @xmath . Actually

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, if the integral converges,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Following the explicit computation reported in the appendix H , one
gets:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case the Green’s function is suppressed already at distance of
order @xmath .

The Green’s function on a quotient of @xmath by a discrete group in the
presence of Wilson loops will be an infinite sum of the type:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the Torus we have found a similar expression and we have seen that
it has zeros. In this case we have also the suppression of @xmath at
distance of order @xmath , where @xmath is the volume of the final
compact manifold. So it is conceivable that the combined action of the
cancellation by the Wilson lines phases and the exponential suppression
will bring @xmath , if not to have zeros, to be strongly suppressed for
particular choices of the points @xmath . This would allow us to make
the same conclusions as for the previous cases.

#### 7.3 Summary and Discussions

One of the main predictions of grand unified theories is the decay of
the proton and the experimental limits on the proton lifetime in various
decay channels can give strong constraints on GUT models. In the work [
40 ] we studied proton decay in theories with extra dimensions. In
particular we discussed theories in which there are significantly
different predictions for the proton lifetime relative to four
dimensional GUT’s. In these theories GUT gauge fields propagate in more
than four dimensions, but the chiral matter fields are localized in the
extra dimensions. In these cases, the GUT gauge group can be broken to
that of the Standard Model through compactification; for example it can
be broken by a gauge field expectation value in the extra dimensions. We
showed that in such models one can get an enhancement of the lifetime in
some decay channels with respect to the four dimensional GUT prediction.

The mechanism for this is the following. Firstly the symmetries of the
model are such that dimension five baryon number violating operators are
suppressed. We showed that it is natural in M-theory context. The
leading contribution at dimension six is through the mediation of colour
triplet heavy gauge bosons. There is an infinite Kaluza-Klein tower of
such massive lepto-quarks. These are analogous to the @xmath and @xmath
bosons of four dimensional @xmath ’s the difference being in the number
of such particles. Then, since generically (in the language of @xmath )
the points where matter @xmath ’s are localized are distinct from the
points supporting @xmath ’s, there is a qualitative difference between
the decay modes such as @xmath and those such as @xmath or @xmath . The
reason is simple: the first decay mode comes from a current-current
correlator where both fermion currents are of a single @xmath multiplet
localized at the same point in the extra dimensions; on the other hand
for the other two channels the two currents involve a @xmath and @xmath
multiplet which are localized at different points in the extra
dimensions. The propagator for the Kaluza-Klein lepto-quarks in the
extra dimensions can take a non-trivial form. The fact that the value of
the propagator can become small, even zero, is what suppresses the
latter two decay channels. In other words, cancellations to the
amplitudes occur by including the contribution of all the relevant
Kaluza-Klein modes.

Of course, the detailed prediction for the cross-section for the proton
decay involving currents in different multiplets is quite model
dependent, since it depends both on the particular metric on the extra
dimensions and on the precise locations of the two currents involved in
the decay. To investigate this model dependence we calculated the
amplitude in a variety of different spaces. In particular we took @xmath
to be a space with constant positive, zero or negative curvature and
showed that a significant effect can always occur.

For the channel @xmath , the two currents are at the same point and the
universal short distance behavior of the propagator leads to a
divergence in the amplitude, which in the M-theory context studied in [
39 ] was argued to be regularized. On the contrary, for the channels
@xmath and @xmath , this divergence is absent in @xmath precisely
because the two currents involved are separated in the extra dimensions.
Hence there can be a suppression of these two channels both with respect
to the first channel and with respect to the four dimensional
prediction. For the case of @xmath where all the matter of one
generation resides in a single @xmath multiplet, all three channels
suffer the same divergence, hence we do not expect any qualitative
difference between the three amplitudes in @xmath . In particular we do
not have suppression of the decay rate into neutrino. This gives a
simple way to distinguish @xmath from @xmath .

Similarly, decays involving more than one generation e.g. @xmath can
also be suppressed by the small value of the propagator. This happens
because different families are generally put on different points in
extradimensions. These families contains fermions in interaction basis.
Going to the physical basis, mixing occurs. But it is still valid that
the decay into @xmath can be suppressed with respect to the decay into
@xmath ; this is because the leading contribution to the decay is
suppressed in the first channel, but not in the second one. The
suppression of operators involving more than one generation can occur in
@xmath as well.

The fact that the decays of protons into pions and neutrinos or right
handed positrons can be highly suppressed could give a natural
explanation if, for instance, protons are observed to decay into
positrons and the lifetime for the decay channel into neutrinos is
established to be significantly longer than this decay time.
Unfortunately super-Kamiokande is not sensitive to the helicity of
outgoing positrons. A measurement of the dominant helicity would be a
strong test of these models with localized fermions and should be
considered when planning future proton decay experiments.

In the models described here all the fermions of the standard model are
localized in the extra dimensions. In this case, the a priori problem
that the @xmath mass relations for the first two generations are
incorrect can be solved by introducing additional vector-like localized
matter (eg @xmath ) which mix with these generations [ 154 ] . In [ 154
] it is also suggested that in M-theory models with Wilson lines, one
can construct realistic Yukawa couplings by realizing them through many
membrane instantons intersecting the three superfield positions. In many
other models considered in the literature, where proton decay has been
considered in detail [ 162 , 163 , 164 , 165 , 166 ] , this problem can
be solved by including fermions in the bulk of @xmath which then mix
with the localized fermions. In M-theory this option is not obviously
available. Furthermore, in the models of the sort considered in [ 162 ,
163 , 164 , 165 , 166 ] , the extra dimensions have boundaries and
@xmath is broken by boundary conditions. These two considerations can
then lead to models in which decay channels involving the first
generation only are absent at dimension six. The dominant decays are
then those such as @xmath . By contrast, in the models under
consideration in this chapter, decays involving the first generation are
allowed. Moreover, as we have explained, the same mechanism which
suppresses, say, @xmath can also suppress @xmath . In principle
therefore it is straightforward to distinguish between these different
types of models experimentally.

### Chapter 8 Conclusions

In this thesis we have illustrated various aspects of String
Phenomenology.

String Phenomenology is the branch of String Theory that studies how to
relate the fundamental theory with the low energy theories that
reproduce very well the experimental data. In fact, its primary goals
are: a) to find models which reproduce all the experimentally observed
physics, and from which to work out predictions for future observations;
b) to discover new physical mechanisms that could have observable
signatures, or could solve theoretical problems; c) to get an overall
picture of the set of all phenomenologically interesting models arising
in String Theory, and to find structures in this set that could help in
making predictions or in understanding better the theory. The works
presented in this thesis tried to give contributions to all these
points.

The most serious obstacle to testing the theory is the problem of vacua
multiplycity. As we have seen, including all the discrete data of
compactification, such as fluxes and brane charges, generates a huge
number of possible four dimensional models. The problem of searching
throughout all of them is discouraging. Perhaps a priori selection
principles or measure factors will help, but there is little agreement
on what these might be. The most practical strategy is a statistical
study of this large space of vacua, trying to obtain as many
informations as one can and to get a guiding line for the model
builders. This approach is explained in chapter 4 , where at the end we
have given the detailed statistical study of one ensamble of
String/M-theory vacua performed in [ 42 ] . This work is strictly
connected to the point c). To understand the full set of vacua, one has
to investigate as many corners of the Landscape as one can. In [ 42 ] we
analyzed the statistics of a new set of four dimensional vacua, never
studied before: the @xmath holonomy compactifications of M-theory. We
got similar result as in Type IIB vacua statistics, such as the uniform
distribution of vacua over the moduli space and large volume
suppression. But we found also some differences, due to the limited
discrete tunability of @xmath flux vacua, that makes the distributions
of cosmological constant and supersymmetry breaking scale not uniform
near zero. In [ 42 ] we also studied the statistics of M-theory
Freund-Rubin vacua. We have briefly reviewed the results and seen that
their statistics is very different from the special holonomy vacua.

In chapter 5 we have illustrated a more theoretical aspect of string
compactifications. We have given the ten dimensional description of Type
IIA flux vacua, previously described from a four dimensional point of
view [ 43 ] . It is an important step in understanding the connection
between the ten dimensional theory and the four dimensional effective
one. At first we have seen that the fluxes backreact to the geometry,
giving compact manifold that are not Ricci-flat (and so not CY). Then we
considered the so called ”smeared approximation”, in which the localized
O6-plane is smeared through the compact manifold. We have found the same
results obtained by using the four dimensional approach in the ”CY with
fluxes” approximation.

In chapter 6 we have presented a setup in which one could reproduce
realistic models (a). In particular the phenomenological features we
reproduced are the hierarchy between the weak scale and the Planck scale
and the differences in the Yukawa couplings. To do this we used an
important effect of the backreaction of fluxes and D-branes on the
geometry: the presence of a warp factor depending on the compact
coordinates, in front of the four dimensional Minkowski metric. In fact,
there is a class of Type IIB solutions of the ten dimensional
supersymmetry equations in presence of fluxes, that have this form of
the metric.

The introduction of non-factorisable geometries was suggested by
Randall-Sundrum [ 33 ] to give a solution to the problem of the large
hierarchy between the weak scale and the Planck scale. It is realized by
putting the Higgs on a four dimensional brane localized in regions of
large warping. Five dimensional phenomenological models followed this
seminal paper. They realized among other things the Yukawa hierarchy by
having matter fields in the bulk. The fermion zero modes are localized
in the extradimensions and have different overlaps with the Higgs,
giving different and in some cases exponentially small Yukawa couplings.
In [ 44 ] we realized these properties in the setup of Type IIB warped
compactifications, with matter on a D7-brane and localization generated
by an instanton background on the D7. We found that we have more
parameters that controll the Yukawa coupling than in the five
dimensional models. In particular one can get small Yukawa coupling for
fermions localized on the Higgs position, but that are zero modes of a
fat instanton ( i.e. with large size).

Finally, in chapter 7 we have described a mechanism to suppress the
proton decay rate in some channels. It is peculiar of String/M-theory
compactifications with localized fermions (such as M-theory on singular
@xmath holonomy manifolds or Type IIA intersecting brane models). It
gives predictions very different from four dimensional GUT theories or
other phenomenological extradimensional GUT models (b). In summary, we
saw that for @xmath GUT models, fermions in @xmath and @xmath
representation are in general localized on different points of the
compact space. When considering the decay amplitude of channels
involving both the representations, we found that it is multiplied by
the scalar Green function. This can take zero values when the distance
between the two points have certain values. Actually this mechanism does
not work for decay channels involving only the @xmath representation.
This is peculiar of this kind of models. For @xmath GUT models this does
not happen, and one does not find a suppression of the decay into
neutrinos, as it happens for @xmath GUT models. However the mechanism
works in suppressing decays into second generation fermions, both for
@xmath and @xmath GUT models. This is because generally different
generations reside on different points in the extradimensions. In
conclusion, these models have very characteristic and attractive
features, that could give signature in the future experiments.

### Appendix A String Frame and Einstein Frame

The ten dimensional effective actions that describe String Theory below
the string scale @xmath , are obtained studying the interactions of the
massless modes of the string spectrum. One takes the string amplitude
that describe such interactions and take the point-particle limit @xmath
(one should also remember that we are working with perturbative string
theories, so the limit @xmath is implied). The dynamics of these states
can be summarized in terms of a low energy field theory action. For any
corner of String/M-theory there is a low energy ten dimensional action
(plus an eleven dimensional one, for which, however, the original theory
is unknown). These actions turn out to be the actions of supergravity
theories in ten dimensions with @xmath and @xmath supersymmetry.

When one derive these actions from string amplitudes, the resulting
action has not a canonically normalized Einstein term. There is a factor
depending on the dilaton, multiplying the Riemann scalar @xmath . To get
rid of this factor, one has to do a field redefinition, by rescaling the
metric. Let us see an example with Type IIA low energy effective action
obtained from string amplitudes [ 1 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The terms are grouped according to whether they belong to the NSNS or RR
sector; the last term is the Chern-Simons term involving both sectors.
The factor of the dilaton in the NSNS action comes from the fact that it
is derived from tree-level string amplitude (sphere worldsheet). On the
other hand, the RR tree-level action vanish and the first contribution
is at one-loop (torus worldsheet), getting a further factor of @xmath
that cancels @xmath .

If one wants a canonically normalized gravity term, one has to rescale
the metric:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The resulting action is then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

### Appendix B M-theory Vacua

In this appendix we will give the normalization we used in [ 42 ] and
the derivation of the volume distribution in the M-theory ensemble
studied in that work and reviewed in chapter 4.

#### b.1 Normalizations

We defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The expression for the supergravity potential is the standard one for
the case of dimensionless ¹ ¹ 1 The scalars can of course be given
standard dimensions by rescaling @xmath , which absorbs the @xmath
factor for the first term in ( B.2 ). scalars:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that when expressed in terms of the moduli @xmath , none of these
effective four dimensional field theory quantities explicitly contains
the fundamental scale @xmath , only the four dimensional Planck scale
@xmath , which is the directly measurable scale in four dimensions. To
check our normalizations, it is sufficient to verify the tension of a
domain wall corresponding to an M5 brane wrapped around a supersymmetric
3-cycle @xmath , which is Poincaré dual to the jump in flux @xmath
across the wall. Let’s take @xmath for simplicity. In the supergravity
theory, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which is indeed the correct expression in M-theory.

#### b.2 Volume Distribution

Here we give details on how to arrive at the distribution ( 4.112 ) of
volumes @xmath when all @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

### Appendix C Ten Dimensional Type IIA Vacua

#### c.1 @xmath Structure Conventions

As said before, the existence of the spinor @xmath implies the existence
of a globally defined 2-form @xmath and 3-form @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the normalization @xmath . @xmath and @xmath satisfy:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
     @xmath      (C.4)
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

So @xmath defines an almost complex structures with respect to which
@xmath is @xmath . Moreover

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

#### c.2 Check of the Equations of Motion

As we have said before, if the solution to the supersymmetry equations
satisfies also the BI and the equations of motion for the forms, then it
satisfies the Einstein and the dilaton equations as well [ 123 ] . Here
we check that it is true for the dilaton and the 4-dimensional
components of the Einstein equation. A complete proof in a more general
@xmath supersymmetric context (type IIA/IIB @xmath structure
compactifications in presence of general supersymmetric sources) can be
found in [ 170 ] .

The dilaton eom ( 5.37 ) is the same as in [ 123 ] , but with the
addition of the @xmath term. Moreover, the fields take the same values
on the solution as in [ 123 ] , except for @xmath . The value of @xmath
is the [ 123 ] one plus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

So if the [ 123 ] EOM are satisfied, all the terms in ( 5.37 ) sum up to
zero, except for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

By substituting ( C.9 ) into ( C.10 ) one gets exactly zero and the
dilaton EOM turns out to be correct.

Consider, now, the Einstein EOM in the @xmath directions. The piece of
the equation which is not automatically zero if the [ 123 ] EOM are
satisfied is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again the result is zero and the eom is satisfied.

### Appendix D The ADHM Construction

In this section we briefly review the ADHM formalism for instantons and
how to use it to find bosonic and fermionic zero modes around their
background [ 171 ] (to have a more complete review of the subject, see [
172 ] and references therein). We are interested in constructing finite
action solutions of the four dimensional Euclidean Yang-Mills theory
(instantons). The gauge potential satisfies a first order
(anti-)self-duality equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following we will restrict ourselves to @xmath gauge groups.

In order to discuss the ADHM formalism, we introduce the quaternionic
notation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath .

The ADHM formalism allows to obtain (anti-)self-dual field strength
configurations by solving only algebraic equations. The gauge field with
instanton number @xmath for @xmath gauge group is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a @xmath matrix. It is defined by the equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is a @xmath matrix, linear in the position variable @xmath ,
having the structure

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matrices @xmath are constrained to satisfy the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a @xmath invertible matrix. This assures the
(anti-)self-duality equation ( D.1 ).

@xmath are @xmath matrices that contain the moduli of the instantonic
configuration. Beacause of some symmetries of the equations above they
can be brought to the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an @xmath matrix and @xmath is a @xmath . There is no
one-to-one correspondence between these two matrices and the moduli:
some constraints and redundancies are left. The actual number of moduli
is @xmath .

#### d.1 Fermion Zero Modes

We will be interested in the fermionic zero modes in the fundamental
representation and with definite chirality, i.e. those solving:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

One gets @xmath independent solutions for @xmath as an @xmath matrix:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Thus we have found @xmath fermionic
zero modes in the fundamental representation.

#### d.2 @xmath @xmath Instanton

We apply the machinery described above to the simplest case of one
@xmath instanton. In this case, applying the further constraints on
@xmath and @xmath , one can put @xmath in the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath the @xmath parameters of the solution in the case
@xmath .

From here, using ( D.8 ), we can get @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then solving for the normalized zero eigenvectors @xmath and @xmath , we
have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

And finally one gets the connection in singular gauge:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### d.2.1 Fermion Zero Modes

We compute the fermion zero modes in this simple anti-instanton
background, by using the formula ( D.11 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a @xmath matrix. One index is for the fundamental rep, while the
other is a spinorial index.

#### d.3 ’t Hooft Solution

Now we consider the case in which @xmath is general, the gauge group is
@xmath , and we will concentrate on a class of solutions described by
@xmath parameters (instead of @xmath ): @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath
. It is called the ’t Hooft solution [ 151 ] and is characterized, in
the ADHM construction, by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is obtained by taking

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

From these, one can also get the expression for @xmath . The diagonal
entries are:

  -- -- -- --------
           (D.19)
  -- -- -- --------

while the off-diagonal elements are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are asymptotic regions of the parameters space where the
multi-instanton configurations can be identified as being composed of
well-separated single instantons. One can show that this limit is valid
when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this limit the @xmath ’s become the positions of the @xmath
instantons, while the @xmath ’s are their sizes.

##### d.3.1 Fermion Zero Modes

As in the case @xmath , we compute the fermion zero modes in the
background described above, by using the formula ( D.11 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is in the fundamental representation of @xmath .

In the limit of well separated @xmath instantons, i.e. ( D.21 ), the
expression for the fermionic zero modes simplifies:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is the same expression for the fermion zero mode in the case of one
instanton localized in @xmath . One can see that in regions around other
instanton ( @xmath , with @xmath ), the solution found above is of order
@xmath . So in this approximation there is one fermionic zero mode
localized around each instanton. One has to note that the suppression of
points distant from every instanton positions is larger than that
obtained around @xmath . On these points we have low peak, suppressed
with respect to that on @xmath , but larger with respect to the value of
the single instanton profile at that point.

##### d.3.2 Vector Zero Modes

The vector zero modes in the adjoint representation of @xmath are those
variations of @xmath that leave it a solution of the (anti-)selfdual
equation (and that are not gauge transformations). They are associated
to the parameter that describe the solution.

In the ADHM construction it is given the expression of the zero modes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider again the ’t Hooft solution. There are @xmath zero modes:
@xmath associated with changing positions of each instanton, and @xmath
with changing their sizes.

As an example, we give the expression for the zero mode relative to the
translation of @xmath , by the vector @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

One can see that in the limit ( D.21 ) it becomes the zero mode of the
single instanton solution localized on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

### Appendix E Warping Effects on the Dirac Operator

We want to find the spin-connection relative to the metric:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The corresponding 8-bein is given then by @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is
the radial coordinate in the (4)-dimensional space spanned by the
coordinates @xmath .

The spin connection is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (E.2)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Using this formula, one obtains:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the spin connection associated to @xmath and the
coordinates @xmath are split in the radial coordinate @xmath and in the
other three coordinates @xmath (and also @xmath ).

The Dirac operator is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the setup we are considering ( @xmath and @xmath given above), it is
equal to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Where @xmath can be read off above. In particular

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Putting all together one gets:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (E.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Splitting the eight dimensional spinor as @xmath , we see that the zero
modes of @xmath are associated to the zero modes of the operator @xmath
. If @xmath is a zero mode of @xmath , then @xmath is a zero mode of
@xmath , since:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

### Appendix F Modified Boundary Conditions Generated by Wilson Lines

We discuss a simple example in order to explain how a flat connection
can be exchange with non-trivial boundary conditions [ 173 ] . We take a
compactification on @xmath , parametrized by @xmath and @xmath gauge
group. We also take

  -- -- -- -------
           (F.1)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath does not depend on @xmath . The corresponding holonomy is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The KK modes of a scalar field @xmath in the fundamental representation
are given by the eigenmodes of the modified Laplacian operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The eigenmodes, which must be periodic ( @xmath ), are @xmath and @xmath
, while the relative eigenvalues are @xmath .

If instead we gauge away the gauge field by @xmath , the Laplacian is
simply @xmath , while the boundary condition is changed to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The eigenmodes of the Laplacian are now given by @xmath and @xmath , but
the corresponding spectrum is identical to the previous one.

### Appendix G Green’s function on Lens spaces: details

In order to compute the Green’s function on Lens spaces, one needs the
eigenmodes on them.

#### g.1 Eigenmodes of Laplacian on the 3-sphere

In order to study the eigenmodes of the Laplacian on Lens spaces, we
need to review the eigenmodes on the 3-sphere [ 169 ] .

At first, we introduce the toroidal coordinates on the 3-sphere @xmath .
Let @xmath and @xmath be the usual coordinates in @xmath , so @xmath is
defined by @xmath , and can be parametrized by the coordinates @xmath
and @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

The eigenvalues of the Laplacian on @xmath are given by @xmath . The
relative eigenspaces are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath ’s can be expressed in terms of the Wigner @xmath
-functions @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### g.2 Eigenmodes of Laplacian on Lens Spaces

The Lens space @xmath is the quotient of the 3-sphere by the cyclic
group whose generator @xmath is the isometry [ 169 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (G.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It can be described using toroidal coordinates, with limit @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Obviously it cannot be covered only with one such
patch, but the set of non-covered points is of null measure. Moreover it
gives a good local description around the point @xmath .

Under the transformation ( G.7 ) the eigenfunctions found above
transform as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover the @xmath representation takes a factor @xmath under the gauge
transformation @xmath . The condition ( 7.18 ) then becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the invariant eigenmodes are those satisfying the constraint @xmath
.

If one wants the right normalization, in order to get an orthonormal
base, the @xmath factor has to be changed in the more general @xmath ,
where @xmath is the volume of @xmath . In what follows we will call
@xmath the eigenmodes of Laplacian with appropriately modified
normalization.

#### g.3 Green’s function

Having the Laplacian eigenmodes on @xmath , we can compute the Green’s
function explicitly:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sum over @xmath and @xmath is constrained by @xmath and @xmath
and @xmath running from @xmath to @xmath with integer step. We implement
these constraints by using the fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

is equals to one if and only if @xmath and is zero otherwise.

So we can write:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (G.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the regulated Green’s Function on the sphere ( e.i. one neglects the
zero mode in the sum and the modes have the appropriate normalization
for the sphere), which we will compute in a moment.

By using ( 7.23 ) and [ 168 ] one gets:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (G.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

When we use it in order to compute ( G.12 ), we can neglect the constant
@xmath because it gives zero contribution: it factors out from the sum
over @xmath , which is so equal to zero since @xmath . So

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that if we use the formula ( G.15 ) for the Green’s function on
@xmath , we actually get the same result as ( 7.24 ).

### Appendix H Green’s function on @xmath

In order to compute the fundamental solution to the the Heat equation (
7.31 ) on @xmath , we will use the formula given at page @xmath of [ 174
] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (H.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We compute the following integral over @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (H.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Where @xmath is the modified Bessel function. So the Green’s function is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (H.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------