# Acknowledgments

I would like to thank my supervisor Hans Hansson. He always found time
for interesting discussions and has helped and guided me a lot during
this project. During the last year I got introduced to an interesting
field of physics that I didn’t know much about. In addition, I would
like to thank Prof. Dr. Matthias Vojta for being my co-supervisor and,
thus, making it possible for me to prolong my stay at Stockholm
University. I also thank everyone in the Quantum and Field Theory group
and in the Cosmology, Particle Astrophysics and String theory group for
a lot of interesting discussions (not just) about physics and for
creating such a nice working climate.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Classical and Topological Order
    -    1.2 Outline
    -    1.3 Topological Field Theory
        -    1.3.1 General Chern Simons Theory
        -    1.3.2 Quantum Hall Effect
        -    1.3.3 BF-theory for superconductors
        -    1.3.4 BF theory on the torus
    -    1.4 Casimir effect
    -    1.5 Regularization and renormalization of the impurity
        potential
-    2 Dirac Theory
    -    2.1 Quantization of Dirac Theory
    -    2.2 Massless Fermions
    -    2.3 The Effective Lagrangian
-    3 The Effective Lagrangian for a d-wave superconductor
    -    3.1 Derivation of the effective BF action
    -    3.2 BF-action on a torus
    -    3.3 Dirac Hamiltonian
    -    3.4 Symmetries
    -    3.5 Ground State Degeneracy
    -    3.6 Summary of the first part
-    4 Effects of a local perturbation
    -    4.1 general remarks
    -    4.2 Casimir energy
    -    4.3 Numerical results in zeroth order
    -    4.4 Perturbation theory to first order
    -    4.5 Perturbation theory to second order
        -    4.5.1 Proof of finiteness
        -    4.5.2 second order results
    -    4.6 Conclusions of the second part
-    5 Final conclusions and Outlook
-    A Spin Current
-    B Symmetries of the Effective Lagrangian
-    C Analysis of Spin and Chirality
-    D The Poisson resummation formula
-    E S-wave Contribution
-    F Frequency dependence of the Green’s function

## 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Classical and Topological Order

In classical physics we can describe an N-body system by a probability
distribution @xmath . If we change the external conditions a little, the
distribution will typically change continuously. However, if we change
too much it might cause a discontinuous change in the properties of the
system, a phase transition. Ginzburg and Landau developed a very
successful theory that describes phase transitions in terms of a (local)
order parameter @xmath , which is zero in one phase but finite in the
other. Order is a property of a (broken) symmetry of the Hamiltonian.
The ground state breaks one or more symmetries of the Hamiltonian. Each
broken symmetry generates a gapless particle, which is called Goldstone
boson. There is, however, a loophole for this mechanism. In presence of
a gauge field, the Goldstone boson will combine with the gauge particle
and form a massive, spin-1 particle. This is known as the Higgs
Mechanism.

With help of the order parameter @xmath , one can write an expansion of
the Landau free energy in terms of @xmath . This expansion will look the
same (except for the coefficients) for systems with similar symmetries.
Therefore, systems with similar symmetry properties have the same
critical behavior and are said to be in the same universality class.

Although this theory is very successful for classical phase transitions
¹ ¹ 1 However, even at the classical level symmetry breaking cannot
describe all kinds of phase transitions, see for example the
Kosterlitz-Thouless phase transition it fails to describe the Quantum
Hall Effect or charged superconductors ² ² 2 Although Ginzburg-Landau
theory, in principle, does not qualify for superconductors, it gives
nevertheless an accurate description of for example the H-T phase
diagram . In both cases no local, gauge invariant order parameter can be
found [ 1 ] . Therefore, it is more suitable to describe these with
topological orders to explain their characteristics. Topological order
is a property of the ground state wave function @xmath . Classical order
is a function of the probability distribution @xmath (at finite
temperature). It misses the phase of the wave function, which is a
quantum effect. Therefore, it can only partially describe the internal
structure of the ground state.

Topological order is robust against local perturbations as for example
impurities. The ground state degeneracy for example is not a consequence
of a symmetry of the Hamiltonian. Therefore, impurities, which in
general destroy the symmetry, do not have an effect on topological
orders. However, it is sensitive to the topology of the underlying
manifold. For trivial topology the ground state is unique. The simplest
example for a non trivial topology is described by a hole in the
manifold. A closed path around this hole cannot be deformed continuously
into a point, it is said to be non-contractible. The paths can be
labeled by how many times they wind around this hole. This will lead to
degenerate ground states. Thus, topological orders can be characterized
by analyzing the ground state degeneracy [ 2 ]

Another probe of topological order is to study its defects: the low
energy excitations, so called quasiparticles. These can carry fractional
charge and have fractional statistics. In contrast to the Goldstone
Bosons of the classical order these particles are normally massive.
Fractional statistics of point particles is generally a feature of two
dimensions.Consider two identical particles. Taking one particle around
the other, the wave function will acquire a phase. In three dimensions
this path can be continuously deformed into a point. Thus the wave
function cannot be changed by that path and the phase is a multiple of
@xmath . Therefore one can only obtain two different values of the phase
for exchanging the particles. For bosons this phase is zero
corresponding to integer spin and Bose-Einstein statistics. For Fermions
this phase is @xmath with half-integer spin and Fermi-statistics. In two
dimensions this argument is not valid anymore. The encircled particle
prohibits the deformation of the path to a point. Thus the phase can in
general be arbitrary. The particles are therefore called anyons. They
interpolate continuously between fermions and bosons.

As the wave functions are not single valued in two dimensions, one can
count how many times one particle circles around another. If the
underlying manifold is not simply connected, there are also closed path
on this manifold which cannot be continuously deformed into a point and
will put a phase to the wave function. This forms the so called the
braid group. For two particles on a simply connected manifold it is just
the group of integers. If both particles are identical exchanges are
also allowed. This is described by including half-integers. For N
particles on a non-simply connected manifold the braid group is
generally more complicated and does not have to be abelian [ 2 ] .

If one has a finite system with a boundary, there will also be edge
excitations. Their structures are extremely rich and, in general, they
provide a more complete and a more practical measurement of topological
order than the bulk excitations. To get a better idea of these
excitations consider a finite droplet of a FQH liquid. Although it
cannot be compressed changing its shape will not cost much energy. Thus
one can visualize edge states as the surface waves on these droplets. In
this case the edge states will be gapless, [ 2 ] , in general they can
also be gapped.

The concept of topological order was first introduced in a study of spin
liquids. The first experimentally observed state with non trivial
topological orders was the superconducting state. In standard literature
superconductors are often described by breaking of a gauge symmetry. The
gauge photons will acquire a mass. Thus, the magnetic field will be
excluded from the superconducting material. The order parameter is taken
to be proportional to the pair wave function @xmath and is in general a
complex-valued function. However, it is not gauge invariant and,
therefore, not a suitable candidate for the order parameter. On the
other hand, gauge invariant objects which could serve as an order
paramter are not local. So there is no local order parameter in the
superconducting state [ 1 ] . The main success of topological orders
came with the FQH liquids. Although not all of the FQH states can be
explained by it, it provides a good description for simple so called
filling fractions @xmath .

### 1.2 Outline

This diploma work analyzes whether a high-temperature superconductor can
be described by a topological theory. It has already been shown that
this is an appropriate description for conventional superconductors [ 1
] . The superconducting state exhibits various features of topological
order, i.e. its excitations are gapped and it is sensitive to the global
topology of the underlying manifold. In high-temperature
superconductors, the gap function is not of s-wave but of d-wave
symmetry: @xmath . In contrast to the s-wave symmetry of conventional
superconductors, it vanishes at four lines in momentum space. At the
points where these lines intersect with the Fermi surface, the energy
depends linearly on the momentum and the excitations are gapless. It is
an open question, how these gapless modes affect topological properties.

In the first part of this thesis, I derive the low-energy theory,
starting from the BCS Hamiltonian. It is shown that the appropriate
description is a Dirac Lagrangian for free, massless fermions, coupled
to a topological gauge potential. This model is then probed by taking a
torus to be the underlying manifold and the results are then compared to
the ones obtained in the s-wave case. Although the quasiparticle fields
couple to a topological gauge potential, the model itself yields
results, which differ in some important ways from conventional
topological models.

Some aspects of topological order are destroyed by the presence of
gapless modes. It can be shown, that the energy spectrum becomes
sensitive to local perturbations. The question arises, whether these
modes destroy all topological features or whether one can formulate some
weaker statements, which also hold in the presence of gapless
quasiparticles. More specifically, in the second part I look for other
features which depend solely on the topology. It is argued that the
energy shift under local perturbations may be such a one. Although the
ground state energies are not constant under these perturbations, there
is evidence that they at least behave in the same way. It can be shown
that the energy shift vanishes for all ground states in first order
perturbation theory. The expressions for the second order contribution
are derived and regularized. For symmetry reasons, it can be argued that
some of them show similar behaviour even in second order.

In the introductory section, I will give some necessary background
material. I begin with a short review on topological field theory. In
particular, I give a short introduction in BF-theory and state two
applications, the quantum Hall effect and superconductors. I proceed
with a section on the Casimir energy and give some comments on
regularization in quantum field theory (QFT).

### 1.3 Topological Field Theory

A field theory is called topological if neither the action nor the
observables depend on the metric of the underlying manifold. The easiest
way to achieve this is to require both quantities to be explicitly
metric independent. Examples are BF-Theory and Chern-Simons theory, both
of which can be solved exactly for simple cases. The observables for
Chern-Simons gauge fields A are Wilson loops @xmath . In this section, I
start with describing BF-Theory and its application, first in the
Quantum Hall Effect and then in the superconducting case. There is also
a discussion, how the latter behaves on a torus.

#### 1.3.1 General Chern Simons Theory

In contrast to BF-theory which can be formulated in any number of space
time dimensions, Chern-Simons theory (CS) only works in an odd number.
Mostly one is interested in @xmath , where the CS Lagrangian is
quadratic in the fields.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is a positive integer.

This Lagrangian is gauge invariant, if one can neglect boundary terms.
This is for example possible on a compact manifold such as a torus.
Varying ( 1 ) with respect to @xmath , one obtains the Euler Lagrange
equation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

In contrast to Maxwell’s equations there are no derivatives involved.
The current conservation is ensured by the @xmath tensor. In particular
the lack of time derivatives implies that the fields are non-dynamical [
6 ] . Without a current, the only degrees of freedom are topological
ones. Also the different components of @xmath do not commute with each
other but form a canonically conjugate pair.

To see this, first note that @xmath can be regarded as a Lagrange
multiplier as there are no derivatives acting on it. Thus it constrains
@xmath to fulfill:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

Explicit solution will depend on both, the topology of the manifold and
the density @xmath . Calculating the Euler-Lagrange equations for the
remaining terms one finds that @xmath is the conjugate momentum to
@xmath , leading to the following commutation relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

As @xmath is a gauge field and thus not gauge invariant, it cannot serve
as an observable. These are given by the Wilson loops around
non-contractible paths @xmath . These are gauge invariant, global
operators.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.3.2 Quantum Hall Effect

The best known example of a topological ordered physical system is the
Quantum Hall effect (QHE). Both the Integer Quantum Hall Effect (IQHE),
discovered 1980, and the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect (FQHE),
discovered two years later, had a great impact on condensed matter
physics.

Classically the Hall resistivity should be a linear function of the
electron density. In the quantum regime, i.e. at low temperatures and
high magnetic fields, the resistivity is not linear any more but
develops plateaus at certain ”magical” values of the filling fraction
@xmath , which is the corresponding quantity to the classical density:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The IQHE describes the plateaus for @xmath being an integer number,
fractional fillig factors can be described by the FQHE. Moreover, states
with simple rational filling factors, i.e. @xmath , are more stable and
easier to observe then states with more complex ones, i.e. @xmath .
These require lower temperatures and cleaner samples. The IQHE on the
other side is visible even for rather dirty samples. The observables are
also insensitive to the microscopic details of the sample. By measuring
the Hall resistivity one obtains a very precise value for the fine
structure constant @xmath . If the resistivity depended on e.g. the
physical dimensions of the sample, a measurement of that accuracy would
be impossible. But the quantization is not the only interesting property
of this new state. Because of the light electron mass, the 2-dim
electron gas cannot condense to a crystal but will instead form a
quantum liquid. However, it is much more rigid than a solid as it can
not be compressed. Furthermore, though it does not develop a spatial
order, the movements of the electrons are highly organized.

I want to consider a two dimensional electron gas with an additional
magnetic field perpendicular to the plane. Classically one would say
that the electrons move in circles. In quantum mechanics the energies of
the electrons will be quantized in terms of the cyclotron frequency
@xmath , so that each electrons can have an energy of @xmath . These
levels are called Landau Levels (LL). The Lowest Landau Level (LLL)
contains all the states with @xmath . Taking the spin into account, it
is filled at @xmath . With increasing magnetic field both the number of
states and the energy difference of the Landau Levels will increase. So
for high enough magnetic fields and low enough temperatures one can
always restrict oneself to the LLL and ignore the higher energy levels.

As stated earlier the QHE is described as a quantum liquid. In the IQHE
all the states of the LL are filled. If one tries to compress the liquid
one would have to excite electrons to a higher energy level. However
this requires a finite energy due to the energy gap between the LL. This
will prevent the compression and thus lead to the very low
compressibility.

For the FQHE at filling fraction @xmath the explanation is a little bit
more subtle as, in that case, there are vacant states in the LLL. The
energy gap is in this case provided by the large Coulomb repulsion of
the electrons. The system can be described as neutral plasma which will
try to spread out the electrons as homogeneously as possible. By
compressing the plasma one has to overcome this large Coulomb repulsion.

However the system can also be described with help of composite
particles, i.e. particles to which flux quanta are bound. This can be
achieved by a Chern-Simons field. If it binds 2p flux quanta to each
fermion, it will become a composite fermion, moving in a reduced
effective magnetic field:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thereby it will fill the LLL and the effect can be described as the IQHE
of these composite fermions. If it binds @xmath flux quanta to the
electron then a composite boson will be formed. These bosons will
experience no effective magnetic field at all and therefore will
condense into a Bose condensate. This condensate is then incompressible
by a many-body Coulomb effect. [ 6 ]

In addition it’s interesting to see what happens when we insert or take
away an electron: the system at filling @xmath will react as if m
quasielectrons resp. quasiholes have been inserted, each having a
fractional charge of @xmath and also fractional spin. This also
emphasizes again the fact that the appropriate description for the QHE
is by a Chern-Simons theory.

#### 1.3.3 BF-theory for superconductors

In my discussion I will use a Chern-Simons like theory, usually referred
to as a BF theory. As I also consider vortices, two Chern-Simons fields
are needed. The name is simply reflecting that the second gauge field
normally is denoted by b. The two fields will couple to two different
currents. In my case @xmath will couple to the spin current @xmath ,
while @xmath will couple to the vortex current @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

The coefficients in the Lagrangian are chosen to give the correct
braiding statistics. When a quasiparticle goes around a vertex, the wave
function should pick up a minus sign. In this case the different
components of @xmath commute with each other, the same for @xmath . But
one obtains nontrivial canonical commutation relations between @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Calculating the Euler-Lagrange equations for the Lagrangian gives the
current conservation for both currents:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

After separating the imaginary time and space components and doing some
partial integrations, the BF action can be written in the following
form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

Analogously to the discussion of the general Chern-Simons theory, @xmath
and @xmath can be regarded as Lagrange multipliers and the solutions for
@xmath and @xmath have to fulfill:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

#### 1.3.4 BF theory on the torus

By imposing periodic boundary conditions, one turns the Euclidean plane
into a compact manifold, a torus. It can visualized by taking a
parallelogram and identifying opposite sides. It’s straightforward to
solve ( 1.3.3 ) on a torus:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

where @xmath and @xmath are periodic functions on the torus and @xmath
and @xmath are spatially constant. After reinserting ( 1.3.4 ) into ( 7
), the action is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The second and the third term vanish, as they are total space
derivatives of periodic functions. The first term can be integrated by
parts and written as @xmath . This term vanishes also, as the
derivatives commute with each other. The final Lagrangian is given in
terms of the spatially constant functions @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The quasiparticle and vortex number are quantized. This requires the
corresponding gauge fields to be compact: @xmath and @xmath to be
angular variables defined only modulo @xmath . In a superconductor, the
flux is quantized in multiples of @xmath . Therefore, both gauge field
can have only two different values, 0 (for no flux quanta present) and
@xmath (for one flux quanta present).

One can also approach this problem with algebraic methods. For this
purpose one defines operators which generate non-contractible loops.
With only one type of quasiparticle present, there are three such
operators, two which take the quasiparticle j around the two cycles of
the torus, @xmath and @xmath , and one taking quasiparticle j around
another one, @xmath . Any process can be written as a product of these
basic ones. @xmath commutes with the other operators, but @xmath and
@xmath don’t. Assume you want to measure the flux through both cycles.
By taking the quasiparticle around one cycle, you measure the enclosed
flux. However, at the same time you create a flux through the other one.
Therefore, the two measuring processes don’t commute with each other: a
result of the non-zero commutation relations between the different
spatial components of the gauge field.

With two types of particles the braid group becomes more complex. In
particular, one has much more operators to deal with. Therefore, I
restrict the discussion to just one quasiparticle on the torus. Then the
only non-contractible paths left are the ones around the cycles of the
torus.

For each gauge field you can define two corresponding Wilson loops given
by: @xmath and @xmath . Acting, for example, with @xmath can either be
seen as measuring the a-flux in the j-direction or as inserting a b-flux
in the other direction. Each set of eigenvalues for the Wilson loops
@xmath and @xmath defines a sector. They can be connected by tunneling
processes: a vortex antivortex pair is created and recombines after
having moved along eg. the non-contractible loop in x-direction. This
process creates a flux quanta in the y-direction and moves the system
from one sector to another.

In the fully gapped case in an s-wave superconductor both types of
quasiparticles are massive. Thus, tunneling processes are suppressed and
the different sectors are separated by an energy barrier. Each sector
has a unique ground state, so there is a four-fold degeneracy of the
ground state on the torus [ 1 ] .

### 1.4 Casimir effect

The Casimir effect is a manifestation of the zero point fluctuations of
the vacuum. The simplest example of is two neutral, conducting plates
hanging parallell to each other at a small distance. Classically, there
is no interaction between the plates, but quantum-mechanically, the
electromagnetic fields oscillate even at zero temperature and cause an
effective, small, but measurable, attractive force between them. The
size of this ”Casimir force” was first calculated by H. Casimir. The
total zero point energy (per unit volume) of the electromagnetic field
is infinite, simply because there is one harmonic oscillator for each
point in space and their zero point energies are all summed up.
Nevertheless, the difference in zero point energy for different
positions of the plates is finite. ³ ³ 3 This is true for an
electromagnetic field in the presence of perfect conductors, but in a
more general context, the Casimir energy does not have to be finite. It
is this finite energy difference that is manifested in the Casimir
force.

In a more general setting, the Casimir force can be thought of as the
finite response of an (interacting) field theory to varying boundary
conditions. Also, there might be couplings to external potentials. In
our case, 2d fermions are coupled to a (topological) gauge field in the
presence of a point like impurity potential. Since the theory is defined
on a torus @xmath , the relevant quantity is the energy density, @xmath
.

In order to calculate the Casimir energy, the ultraviolet (UV)
divergences in the sum of the energy levels in the Dirac sea, (or in the
case of bosons, the sum over the zero point fluctuations) must be
regularized, and the interactions renormalized, in order to extract a
finite and physically meaningful result. The actual procedure will be
briefly outlined in the next subsection, and described in detail in
section 4.4 below. Since the full description is rather technical,
however, I will first give a non-technical summary of the logic:

1.  Since the gauge field is topological, it does not have any local
    degrees of freedom. More precisely, there are no fluctuations in the
    topological gauge field which could contribute to the Casimir
    energy.

2.  I will neglect the coupling between the fermions and the gauge
    field, except for the coupling to the external fluxes threading the
    torus. Technically this means that I will only consider diagrams
    with a single fermion loop.

3.  I will assume that the impurity potential is weak, and can be
    treated in perturbation theory. The leading order term thus
    correspond to a free fermi theory coupled to external gauge fluxes
    defining the various sectors described in the previous sections.

4.  There are several ways to calculate the Casimir energy of the
    noninteracting theory, but I will use a method that will generalize
    to the interacting case. I relate @xmath to the full interacting
    fermion Greens function @xmath on the torus, and the free field case
    amounts simply to use the free Greens function @xmath .

5.  In order to isolate and subtract the leading free field theory
    divergence, I write the full torus propagator as @xmath , where the
    sum is over windings (in multiples of @xmath ) around the cycles of
    the torus. This representation isolates the short distance
    singularity in the first term (corresponding to the free case) which
    can be directly subtracted as described in section 4.2.

6.  Interactions with the impurity potential introduces new
    singularities, and in order to cancel these, the impurity
    interaction has to be renormalized - the procedure is described in
    section 4.5 .

7.  The respresentation of the full propagator as a sum over windings is
    valid only when the sum actually converges. As is shown in section
    4.5 this is not the case for @xmath in one of the flux sectors. This
    introduces a spurious infrared divergence, and the associated
    technicalities are explaind in section 4.5.1

### 1.5 Regularization and renormalization of the impurity potential

It is a well-known problem in QFT that point like interactions lead to
divergent integrals. Those have to be renormalized in order to extract
physical quantities. In the second part of this work, I consider a
magnetic point impurity, which is a singular potential and causes
similar problems. The quasiparticles scatter at the impurity, which
shifts the energy levels. We are interested in the sum of all these
shifts. However, as discussed above, this sum is in general infinite. To
define the expressions we must first regularize and then renormalize the
interaction. The divergencies first arise in second order perturbation
theory, where the particles scatter two times at the impurity. If one
considers this process in free space, it is well-known that it gives a
divergent contribution which must be isolated and subtracted in order to
calculate the renormalized Casimir energy. The cause of the divergence
is the singular nature of the impurity. It scatters into all momentum
states with the same strength. When the particle scatters at the same
point, the potential does not provide a natural momentum cutoff for the
integral over the internal momentum. This is nothing but a loop in QFT
and we can use the same techniques to regularize it. As soon as the
particle travels along a non-contractible path between the scattering
events, the minimal length of this path provides a cut-off and makes the
expressions convergent.

There are various ways to provide a momentum cutoff @xmath . The
detailed form of the regularization does not effect physical results as
long as it does not break any symmetry of the theory. Here, the
regularization is achieved by point-splitting, i.e. by considering the
interaction to happen at two different points @xmath and @xmath . As
long as @xmath is considered finite, though very small, the expressions
are finite. Taking the limit, @xmath , restores the original theory and
gives rise to divergencies. In order to cancel the divergencies, I add
local counterterms in the Lagrangian. As we are interested in
topological features of the model, it is important that we don’t have to
introduce nonlocal counterterms in order to regularize the expressions.

Consider first the case where the quasiparticles are massive. In order
to distinguish between the different topological sectors, the
quasiparticles have to travel along non-contractible paths. On a torus,
these are the paths around the two handles. The different topological
sectors are given by the flux quanta through the holes of the torus.
When the particles are massive ⁴ ⁴ 4 In this work, I use both the notion
of mass from particle physics and the notion of gapped particles from
condensed matter interchangeably. , each path around a hole is
suppressed by a factor @xmath , where m is the mass of the particle,
@xmath the torus size and @xmath the winding number. Therefore, windings
are suppressed in the limit of a large torus. As a result, the ground
states in the different sectors are degenerate. If a local impurity is
inserted, the quasiparticles scatter on this impurity. However, as long
as the windings are suppressed, a local impurity can not change the
degeneracy of the ground states or, more generally, any topological
feature. However, by inserting a non-local perturbation, windings could
be facilitated and topological features could be destroyed. The same is
true for nonlocal counterterms.

In presence of gapless excitations, the situation becomes more involved.
The exponential factor vanishes for zero mass and windings around the
handles are no longer suppressed. As a consequence, the ground state
degeneracy is lifted. In contrast to the case where all quasiparticles
are massive, even a local impurity can induce different energy shifts
for the ground states in the different sectors. The issue addressed here
is whether the energy shift shows some regularity. Also in the case of
gapless excitations it is important to just consider local perturbations
and to regularize them with local counterterms.

## 2 Dirac Theory

### 2.1 Quantization of Dirac Theory

In the superconducting phase the electrons form Cooper pairs. To break
these Cooper pairs, energy is needed. In normal superconductors this
energy does not depend on the direction in @xmath -space: the gap
function has s-wave symmetry. This is different in high- @xmath
superconductors. There the gap function has d-wave symmetry

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So along two lines in @xmath space, @xmath the gap function will be
identically zero. Thus there will be four points on the Fermi surface
where the excitations are massless. I will denote these with @xmath ,
@xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

First the quasiparticle fields are expanded around around the nodes to
obtain the low-energy description. Because of the d-wave symmetry of the
gap function, the obtained model will be linear in both the time and the
spatial derivatives. This indicates that Dirac theory is the natural
language to describe these excitations. The quasiparticle fields can be
seen as massless fermions, which are coupled to a gauge field @xmath .
Therefore I will give a short review of two-dimensional massless Dirac
theory. I start with the massive case and then discuss the massless case
in detail.

Normally two dimensional @xmath -matrices are sufficient to describe
this theory. The most convenient choice is to use the three Pauli
matrices as Dirac matrices. However, I will need to use four-dimensional
matrices.

After the expansion, there are two independent fields at each node, for
spin-up and spin-down respectively. If the particles at every node act
independently of the other nodes, then a two-dimensional description
would be possible, consisting only of spin-up and spin-down particle at
a given node. However, the nature of the interaction is to couple
particles with opposite momentum and opposite spin. Thus, the spin-up
particle at node 1 can not be treated independently of the spin-down
particle at node 3. Due to this interaction, you need not consider an
eight-dimensional analysis. The quasiparticles are created by destroying
Cooper pairs. In the Hamiltonian there are two types of terms: @xmath
and @xmath . It is easy to see, that e.g. quasiparticles at node 1 don’t
interact with those at node 2 and node 4. So, the theory can be
restricted to one pair of nodes.

In BCS theory of superconductors, the conserved quantity is spin, not
charge. The goal, therefore, is to find a formulation, where the spin
current can be identified with the conserved Dirac current. The naive
choice for the spinors is to put all fermion fields into the spinor
@xmath and their adjoint into @xmath . However, it is quite easy to see,
that this is not an appropriate choice. First of all, because it does
not even enable you to write it as an Dirac equation. But if one wants
to interpret spin as the conserved charge, the spinor needs to be an
eigenstate of the spin operator. Therefore, you combine spin-up
operators with the adjoint spin-down operators in the spinor, see [ 4 ]
. Although I use a four-dimensional matrix representation, the theory
itself is two-dimensional. Therefore, only three of the four Dirac
matrices are needed. The third, @xmath is redundant. It is still useful,
though, to define it. It will appear later in the discussion as one of
generators of the chiral symmetry of the two-dimensional system.

Throughout the whole discussion I use the metric @xmath . The Lagrangian
for the spinor fields can be written in following form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

using natural units where @xmath . It is helpful to expand the spinor
fields in eigenfunctions of the Dirac equation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

@xmath and @xmath are operator valued coefficients. @xmath and @xmath
are the eigenfunctions of the Dirac equation for positive and negative
energy and @xmath is chosen to be positive. The factor @xmath was
introduced as the spinors are normalized to @xmath instead of 1. The
Hamiltonian is diagonal in the operators @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

@xmath creates a particle with momentum @xmath , @xmath destroys one
with momentum @xmath . This can also be interpreted as creating a hole
in the Dirac sea with positive momentum.

### 2.2 Massless Fermions

In the absence of a mass term, an additional symmetry arises, chirality.
In 3+1 space dimension, one can define a matrix, @xmath , which is
self-adjoint and anticommutes with the Dirac matrices:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

For every spinor @xmath , which is a solution of the Dirac equation,
@xmath is also a solution. As @xmath , its eigenvalues are @xmath .
Thus, the eigenstates of the Lagrangian can be chosen to have a definite
chirality, they are called right-handed for chirality @xmath ,
left-handed for chirality @xmath .

In 2+1 dimensions, there are only three Dirac matrices instead of four.
Analogous to the three dimensional case, one can define a @xmath by
claiming that it has to fulfill the Clifford algebra. So there are two
matrices, @xmath and @xmath , which anticommute with the Dirac matrices
and one, which commutes, @xmath . These matrices don’t commute with each
other. Instead they form an SU(2) algebra like a spin. So the chirality
in 2+1 dimensions has the same structure as the spin symmetry. Each
matrix can be linked to a direction and only one can be chosen to be
diagonal.

### 2.3 The Effective Lagrangian

First I will give a short review on BCS theory. I start with a rather
general ansatz for the Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

@xmath and @xmath are the usual fermion operators and obey canonical
anti-commutation relations: @xmath . The interaction term, @xmath is
invariant under global charge U(1) and spin SU(2) symmetries and
conserves both, momentum and spin. In BCS theory two electrons with
opposite momentum and opposite spin form a Cooper pair. You expect,
therefore, a non-zero expectation value for terms like the pair
operator: @xmath . You also assume, that the fluctuations in the pair
operator are small, so you are allowed to make a mean-field
approximation by introducing the superconducting order parameter (or
gapfunction), @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

You can now identify @xmath with the center of mass momentum of a Cooper
pair, and also define a spatially varying gap function by a Fourier
transformation to real space:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

If the electrons form a pair with zero total momentum, the gap function
is constant: @xmath . With magnetic flux tubes present, Cooper pairs
have non-zero momentum and the order parameter becomes a function of
their center or mass coordinates, @xmath .

The Hamiltonian for our system is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where the dependence on the center of mass is coded in @xmath .
Furthermore, I will take the gap function to have d-wave symmetry. As I
am interested in the low energy physics, I will expand the creation and
annihilation operators in terms of continuous fields @xmath for @xmath
values near the nodes and integrate out the high energy degrees of
freedom:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

As we have restricted the momenta to regions near the nodes, it is
legitimate to linearize both the energy and the gapfunction.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is the momentum parallel to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
denotes the Fermi velocity. Inserting this relation into ( 16 ) gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

One can simplify this expression by introducing two 4-spinors

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

and writing it as a matrix equation. Furthermore I will write the gap
function as @xmath . For simplicity I assume that the only space
dependence lies in the phase @xmath , since amplitude fluctuations are
costly in energy.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Now do a Fourier transformation back to real space.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Note the ”-” sign in the second line of ( 2.3 ). This convention ensures
that the spinors Fourier transform in a simple way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

We would have obtained the same low energy fields, if we had expanded
the fermion fields in @xmath -space:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In general, the phase of the order parameter will be space dependent. In
the Dirac theory the matrices are constants. So in order to rewrite (
2.3 ) as a Dirac equation, I will redefine the spinors and, thus, remove
the phase from the matrices. If the phase @xmath is well-defined at any
point on the torus, there is no problem since it can then be removed by
a regular gauge transformation. The phase is divided equally between the
spin-up and spin-down fields and the transformed spinor fields are still
single-valued. However, @xmath is an angular variable, so generally it
is not single valued. Consider a magnetic flux through one of the holes
in the torus. The magnetic field on the torus will be zero, but the
electromagnetic gauge potential is not. Instead, it will wind around the
magnetic flux. By going around the hole including the flux tube, the
phase does not return to its original value. As the magnetic flux in
superconductors is quantized, the phase picks up an additional @xmath .
If now the phase is divided equally between the two fields, they are not
single-valued anymore. Thus, the naive choice how to transform the
spinors does not work. I will denote that part of the phase as the
singular part.

There are different approaches to deal with that problem. In [ 4 ] the
author considers vortices in a superconductor. Those vortices are
divided into two groups, labeled A and B. The spin-up fields are
transformed with the singular part of the phase, which comes from the
vortices in group A, spin-down with those in group B. Finally, you
average over all possibilities to distribute a given number of vortices
into the two groups to get rid of the anisotropy you introduced. In this
paper, a similar but much simpler method is applied. Here for
simplicity, no vortices are present. The singular behaviour of the phase
arises only of the fluxes in the holes of the torus. In general, the
phase has both a regular and a singular piece. The regular part of the
phase will be divided symmetrically to both fields, the singular part,
however, only to spin-up particles. Thereby, I also create an anisotropy
between spin-up and spin-down particles. This will become manifest at
the analysis of the ground state degeneracy. I include also an
electromagnetic gauge potential to include external magnetic fields in
the analysis. The transformation of the spinor fields is then given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

this is equivalent to transforming the spinors by a unitary matrix U:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

As a result of performing this transformation there will appear
additional terms in the effective Hamiltonian. As in the Chern-Simons
theory you can either choose to have multi-valued wave functions or you
can keep them single-valued by introducing a Chern-Simons gauge field
@xmath . I introduce two matrices:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

They correspond to the @xmath matrices in the conventional Dirac theory.
The additional terms which appear in ( 24 ) after doing the gauge
transformation, can be rearranged into two current terms coupling to
different gauge fields. The Chern Simons gauge field:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

couples to the conserved Noether current, which in our model is not the
em current but the spin current. The total phase, that is both the
Chern-Simons field and the electromagnetic gauge field, couples to the
em current. The spin current is denoted by @xmath while the
electromagnetic current is @xmath . A more detailed derivation of the
spin current, is given in Appendix A.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

With this, we can define the covariant derivative @xmath and write the
Hamiltonian in Dirac form,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The Hamiltonian and the spin current depend on two velocities, one being
just the normal Fermi velocity, @xmath . The other, @xmath ,
characterizes excitations parallel to the Fermi surface. In cuprates,
these velocities are not equal to each other. This anisotropy has
consequences on the symmetries of the system. A more detailed analysis
can be found in the discussion of the symmetries of the model.

## 3 The Effective Lagrangian for a d-wave superconductor

To analyze our model, it is convenient to use a Lagrangian description,
where the time dependence is included. For later convenience I will also
transform the effective Lagrangian to Euclidean space. I will also
include a dynamical term for the @xmath field, @xmath , and introduce a
vortex current, parameterized by a gauge potential @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

I account for the phase fluctuations by also introducing a mass term:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The mass @xmath will depend on the size of the torus and go to zero in
the limit of @xmath I will also introduce @xmath . As we are in
Euclidean space, the gamma matrices have to fulfill the Clifford algebra
for Euclidean space:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

which leads to the following definition of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The effective low energy Lagrangian is then given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

I introduced the abbreviation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The conserved Noether current in our model is not the electromagnetic
current but the spin current given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Which in detail reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For a more detailed discussion of the spin current see Appendix A.

### 3.1 Derivation of the effective BF action

First I note that the regular phase can be absorbed by a regular gauge
transformation and then I identify @xmath where @xmath is a ”small”
quantity. In the obtained equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

the @xmath field can be integrated out. In the final equation we
identify again the @xmath field as the singular piece of the gauge field
@xmath and set @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (43)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

In order to simplify the analysis, I will assume that the vortex current
vanishes: @xmath and I will keep only lowest order terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

### 3.2 BF-action on a torus

First I will discuss the BF part in Minkowski space. It is illuminating
to rearrange the terms in the BF-Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (45)
              @xmath   @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

There are no time derivatives acting on @xmath and @xmath , so they can
be regarded as Lagrange multipliers. As described in the introduction,
they enforce constraints on the spatial gauge fields. Although in this
case, the constraints look more complicated:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The second constraint is easily solved using Hodge’s theorem

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

For @xmath there will be an additional term in the solution.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are periodic functions on the torus and @xmath ,
as well as @xmath , is spatially constant. So far the analysis followed
the standard BF-theory, described in the introduction. The new feature
is the inhomogeneous part in the differential equation for @xmath . In
general, you can always solve these equations with help of Green’s
function, in this case the Green’s function for a torus, denoted by:
@xmath . The interesting (topological) behavior is given by @xmath and
@xmath . As @xmath is invariant under the transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath            @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

@xmath is only allowed to change up to an additional @xmath . With the
definition of @xmath the Wilson loops @xmath and @xmath can be 1 or
@xmath . If a quasiparticle encircles a flux quantum, it picks up an
additional minus sign. Otherwise, it’s wave function remains unchanged
under a transformation along a closed path.

After inserting this into ( 45 ), the Lagrangian is simplified
considerably:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Also @xmath can be regarded as a Lagrange multiplier which ensures the
current conservation. @xmath and @xmath form a canonical conjugated pair

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In contrast to the s-wave case, the BF-Hamiltonian is not identically
zero. Instead, the conserved current, in this case the spin current,
couples to a (spatially) constant gauge field.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

So the Wilson loops, set up by the @xmath , commute with the Hamiltonian
for both i, while the ones for the @xmath do not. @xmath measures the
magnetic flux. In other words, the number operator of the magnetic flux
can be simultaneously diagonalized with the energy. Thus, the ground
state is labeled by the number of fluxes. Creating quasiparticles does
not require a finite energy, therefore their particle number is not
fixed in the ground state. The total electric flux is measured by @xmath
. Due to the commutation relations of the @xmath with the Hamiltonian,
the ground states can not be labelled by the number of electric fluxes.
Note, however, that the Wilson loops cannot distinguish a positive from
a negative flux quantum. @xmath takes the same value for @xmath and
@xmath . In addition, you can’t count flux quanta with help of the
Wilson loops. Two flux quanta give rise to a phase of @xmath and are,
therefore, not distinguishable by any other, even number of vortices.
Each Wilson loop has the eigenvalues 1 and -1, for even respectively odd
number of flux quanta present.

### 3.3 Dirac Hamiltonian

I use ( 53 ) to write down the final result for the Hamiltonian. Note
that @xmath is spatially constant. Thus, the Hamiltonian can be treated
as in the field-free case. The topological phase only shifts the
momentum by a constant amount. The Dirac Hamiltonian is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

It is block diagonal and, therefore, splits into two two-component
equations. The two equations differ only by an overall minus sign, so I
will concentrate on one. The eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian can be
expanded in momentum space by writing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are solutions of the Dirac equation for positive resp.
@xmath for negative energies. Here E will always denote a positive
quantity. There are nontrivial solutions for @xmath if the determinant
of the matrix equation vanishes:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

for node 1 and 3, I denote this pair by (1/3). For the other pair of
nodes, (2/4), you obtain the same expression but with x and y
interchanged. So

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The total energy is given by the sum of the partial energies.

As we’re on the torus, we need to specify boundary conditions for the
spinor fields. On the torus, the points @xmath and @xmath are
identified. In general, the spinor fields can differ by a phase @xmath
at both points. The phase of the adjoint fields is then given by @xmath
. Both combined give the relation of the spinors at both points:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

With U given by: @xmath The Lagrangian has to be the same for @xmath and
@xmath . Therefore, the matrices have to fulfill following constraints:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The first one is trivially satisfied, while the second one gives a
non-trivial constraint on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This determines the boundary conditions to be either periodic or
antiperiodic. Which one is chosen is not important as long as I also
include all the flux sectors. Inserting a magnetic flux changes the
boundary conditions from periodic to antiperiodic ones and vice versa
and will only change the labelling of the different sectors but not the
overall structure. Here I chose the antiperiodic one which sets @xmath
to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This choice makes sure that the ground state is unique for @xmath .

I introduce @xmath in order to shorten the notation and to make it
uniform in the different sectors. The solutions for the spinors @xmath
and @xmath depend on the value of @xmath and the Chern-Simons
potentials. The cases, where one or both of the @xmath ’s are zero, have
to be treated separately. However, it is still possible to write down a
closed expression for the spinor fields with momentum-dependent
coefficients.

In the sector @xmath , and also for an excited state in any other
sector, both @xmath and @xmath are nonzero. The additional ”nodon”
symmetries, see Appendix B, allow me to treat the two pairs of nodes
separately. I will therefore only solve the equations for the pair
(1/3). Solving for the other pairs is completely analogous. As the
theory is not relativistic I chose to normalize the spinors to 1 instead
of the more common @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath , the energy will be given solely by the canonical
momentum in the y-direction. In this case, the quasiparticles will be an
equal mixture of particles and holes.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In the case where @xmath and @xmath the gap function does not have any
effect. The Hamiltonian is already diagonal. However, I choose a
representation of the eigenvectors, which simplifies later computations.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Finally consider the zero mode: @xmath . In this case, the Hamiltonian
for the ground state is equal to zero. Thus, the eigenspinors can be
chosen freely. The simplest choice is most convenient in this case, as
it gives the most convenient representation for the spin operators.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In general, the new operators, @xmath and @xmath , are a mixture of
particles and holes, similar to the s-wave case. In order to express the
Hamiltonian in the new creation and annihilation, you have to rotate the
spinors by a (momentum-dependent) unitary matrix U( @xmath . You have to
do this in each sector separately. After this rotation, the Hamiltonian
is diagonal and can be written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

In all the sectors, apart from the one where @xmath , the energy is
nonzero for all momenta. Thus, by filling up all the states with
negative energy and leaving all the other ones empty, one obtains a
unique ground state. In the forth case, the ground state has zero energy
and at first it seems arbitrary, whether to fill it or not. For each
node, the zero mode can be empty, completely filled or occupied by
either a spin-up or a spin-down particle. For the node pair (1-3) this
means a 16-fold degeneracy of the ground state. In order to label the
ground states one needs to find a set of commuting operators. The
eigenvalues of those operators don’t change under adiabatically
switching on a magnetic flux. Later, we will see that only two of the 16
ground states can be connected to the ground states of the other sectors
by adiabatic processes.

In a Cooper pair, the electrons have opposite spin and momentum.
Breaking up a pair and, thus, creating a pair of quasiparticles does not
conserve the charge but it does conserve spin and momentum. However, the
spinors are defined in a way that spin-up particles have positive
momenta, while spin-down particles have negative ones. So momentum does
not provide additional information for the states and I will ignore it.
An additional quantum number is needed to give a complete
characterization of the states. As mentioned earlier, the chirality is
an appropriate choice. In the following section I will derive how to
obtain the quantum numbers and discuss their physical meaning.

### 3.4 Symmetries

The original Hamiltonian is invariant under SU(2) spin rotations, so the
spin current is conserved and the spin in the z-direction, together with
the total spin, are good quantum numbers. However, when I introduced the
spinors, I obscured this symmetry. For a detailed analysis of how to
obtain the spin in the different directions, see Appendix A.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (66)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The momentum is also diagonal in the new set of operators.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (67)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

However, spin-up is coupled to positive momenta and spin-down to
negative. Therefore, the momentum does not provide any new information
and I will omit it.

Analogous to the 3+1 dimensional case, one can construct a fourth @xmath
-matrix, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

which fulfills the Clifford algebra. In the 3+1 dimensional case, the
chirality is defined by a symmetry transformation, which leaves the
massless Dirac equation invariant. Its (hermitian) operator is given by
the product of all @xmath -matrices:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (69)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

In 2+1 dimensions, @xmath is redundant for the Dirac equation and can,
therefore, be combined with @xmath to give a bigger internal symmetry
group. Both matrices anticommute with the other @xmath -matrices.
Therefore, there is a set of three hermitian matrices, which anticommute
with each other but commute with the matrices @xmath and @xmath .
Explicitly, they are given by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . One of these
can be included into the set of commuting operators. I will use @xmath
as it is already diagonal. Using another notation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

it is easy to see that they fulfill the spin algebra:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The eigenvalue of @xmath , I call chiral charge, in analogy to spin and
electric charge.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (72)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

To gain further insight into the chirality, I rewrite it in the old
variables.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

From ( 73 ) it is apparent that @xmath does nothing else than count the
difference of the number of particles at the node pair (1-3). In
contrast, the ordinary number operator @xmath is not a good quantum
number and does not commute with the Hamiltonian. This is what you would
expect, since the quasiparticles are massless around the nodes. Thus,
their number is not conserved. However, these quasiparticles are created
by destroying a Cooper pair. Creating a quasiparticle at eg. node 1 is
always connected with creating one at node 3. The difference of the
number of particles at node 1 and node 3 is unchanged by this process.

In the isotropic case, @xmath , the chirality forms an U(4) symmetry
group. For a more detailed analysis of this symmetry see [ 4 ] . By
letting both velocities differ from each other, U(4) breaks down to
U(2)xU(2). For each pair of nodes, the chirality behaves as the
well-known spin algebra. Measurements on cuprates show, that the Fermi
velocity is approximately one order of magnitude bigger than the
velocity tangential to the Fermi surface, so the U(2)xU(2) description
is appropriate. Thus, it is legitimate to regard the chirality as an
isospin variable.

### 3.5 Ground State Degeneracy

I will now discuss the ground state degeneracy. The only non-trivial
case is the fourth sector, where both @xmath and @xmath are non-zero. In
the other sectors, the energy gap is always finite. The ground state is
determined by filling all the negative energy states and leaving the
positive ones empty. However, in the fourth sector there are states with
zero energy and there is an arbitrariness, whether to fill these states
or not.

Let @xmath be the momentum of this state, fulfilling

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be the state, where the zero mode is empty,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Creating particles with momentum @xmath does not require energy.
Therefore, acting on @xmath with @xmath , @xmath or a product of these
operators, will also generate a ground state. As these operators fulfill
anti-commutation relations, you can construct 16 linearly independent
ground states and label these states with spin and chirality. Both
symmetries form one triplet, four doublets and five singlets. For a
detailed analysis, see Appendix C.

The ground states of the different sectors can be connected by tunneling
processes as described in [ 1 ] . Consider creating a vortex-antivortex
pair. Then move the vortex along a non-contractible, closed path and let
them recombine afterward. Moving the vortex around a hole in the torus,
creates a magnetic flux in that hole and changes the singular part of
the corresponding gauge field, @xmath or @xmath , by @xmath . Thus,
doing this adiabatically, connects the different sectors. This adiabatic
process corresponds to slowly switching on the flux, @xmath respectively
@xmath .

For each value of the flux, the spin in z-direction @xmath , the total
spin @xmath , the chirality @xmath , which describes the difference of
numbers of particles and @xmath commute with the Hamiltonian. During an
adiabatic process, the states remain eigenstates of these operators.

So first I want to compute the eigenvalues of spin and chirality for the
unique vacua in the other sectors. As @xmath , it is straightforward to
see that the unique vacua are eigenstates to all the operators with
eigenvalue zero. In the degenerate sector, there are only two states
which also fulfill these requirements: the first is a linear combination
of the completely empty and the completely filled state, the other one
is a combination of 2 excitations each:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Thus, if you consider the system under adiabatic processes, the huge
degeneracy is reduced from 16 to two. Depending on the order in which
the fluxes were turned on, one of those two is obtained. If the flux in
the x-direction is switched on first, one obtains @xmath at the nodal
pair (1,3) and @xmath at nodal pair (2,4). Taking both nodes into
account, there are four states which are singlets in spin and chirality.
However, only two of those can be reached by the tunneling processes I
considered.

### 3.6 Summary of the first part

In the first part of my thesis, I derived the effective low-energy
theory of d-wave superconductors. As it could be expected, the
appropriate description is a massless Dirac Lagrangian, given by
equation ( 43 ). Furthermore, we saw that the conserved current is
nothing else than the spin current which couples to a topological gauge
field @xmath . We then proceeded by analyzing the topological theory on
the torus ⁵ ⁵ 5 including magnetic flux tubes through the holes and
solving for the energy. The results we found, differ mainly in two
aspects from the ones you expect in a conventional topological theory
(with gapped quasiparticles): the ground states in the four different
sectors are not degenerate, in contrast to the gapped case. In addition,
in one sector the ground state is not unique but there is instead a
rather huge degeneracy, in total given by 256 states. Finally, we argued
why you could focus on only two of these ground states. These were the
ones, which could be connected to the ground states of the other sectors
by tunneling processes. The structure we obtained for d-wave
superconductor differs from the one for s-wave superconductors. It does
not show topological features, such as the ground state degeneracy on
the torus. The second part of this thesis deals with the question
whether there are other regularities in the theory due to the topology.

## 4 Effects of a local perturbation

### 4.1 general remarks

In the first part, I derived a topological description for the
low-energy excitations and solved for the energy spectrum on a torus in
the different flux sectors. I proceeded by discussing the novel features
that arise because of the gapless excitations, emphasizing that there
are several important differences to the fully gapped case. The most
significant being, that gapless modes destroy the (topological) ground
state degeneracy and make the system sensitive to local perturbations.
However, I will argue that perhaps there are topological features left,
even in the presence of gapless particles.

For s-wave superconductors, one obtained a four-fold ground state
degeneracy on the torus, which was solely determined by the topology [ 1
] . The ground states of the different sectors can be connected by
adiabatic tunneling processes. The energy gap of the ground states in
the different sectors is proportional to the exponential factor @xmath ,
where @xmath is the energy of the quasiparticle, n the winding number, L
the size of the torus and c a normalization constant . Hence, the ground
states become degenerate in the limit of a large torus ⁶ ⁶ 6 In this
limit, tunneling processes are suppressed as the action of the
quasiparticle @xmath gives an exponential fall-off in Euclidean space .
This argument does not hold if there are gapless excitations. The
quasiparticles are massless and free to tunnel, even if the torus
becomes very large. Therefore, it is to be expected that the degeneracy
between the different sectors is lifted. The gapless modes also cause
one of the sectors to behave exceptionally as they give rise to a zero
mode and, thus, to a large ground state degeneracy. I argued that only
two of the states can be connected to the other sectors via adiabatic
processes. In the following discussion I focus on these two states and
their behavior in relation to the unique ground states in the other
sectors.

I have already argued that some characteristics of topological orders
(such as the topological degeneracy on the torus) are destroyed by the
gapless excitations. However, the superconductor is still described by a
topological theory and even in the presence of gapless modes, there may
be topological features left. In order to analyze this possibility, I
consider local perturbations and study their effects on the ground state
energies. In particular, we look for quantities which show some
regularities in the different sectors. The idea is, to include a
magnetic point defect at point @xmath with strength @xmath : @xmath .
The coordinates of the impurity are arbitrary. They do not affect
physical results as the the torus is translational invariant. In the
fully gapped case, such an impurity does not effect the ground state
degeneracy. In order to distinguish between the different sectors, the
quasiparticles have to travel around large cycles and measure the flux
through the holes. Those paths are not suppressed any longer in the
gapless case and the local perturbation will shift the energy levels.
However, it is not obvious, whether these shifts are distinct for each
sector or whether some regularity reflects the topological degeneracy of
the gapped system.

The perturbed Hamiltonian is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (75)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The characteristic quantity for the vacuum is given by the Casimir
energy. It is distinct for each flux sector and is, in general, shifted
by the perturbation. The shift, however, could be a quantity which is
independent of the sectors and only determined by the topology. In the
following sections I calculate the energy shift in the Casimir energy in
all four sectors and compare the results.

The most convenient method to calculate the Casimir energy is, as
mentioned earlier, by using Green’s functions. In section 4.2, I derive
how the Green’s function is related to the vacuum energy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the full propagator.

The reader may note that special care is needed, when zero modes are
concerned. Whether this mode is filled or not, affects the shift of all
the energy levels. This contribution can be computed in two ways. One
possible way is to include this mode in the Green’s function. An
occupied zero mode simply shifts the Green’s function by a constant.
Another option is to exclude the zero mode explicitly and calculate its
contribution separately. The Green’s function representation I use to
compute the Casimir energy, is not suitable when there is a zero mode
present. To first order, both approaches are equivalent and I will
compute the shift in both ways. However, to compute the shift to second
order you have to exclude the zero mode from the Green’s function as it
gives raise to a (fake) infrared divergence.

At this point some general remarks on the interaction potential are in
order. Choosing a point defect is certainly the simplest perturbation,
one can consider. However, there are some well-known difficulties with a
singular interaction. It scatters into all momentum states with the same
strength. Therefore, it does not provide a cutoff for high momenta and
leads to ultraviolet divergencies. Normally, this divergence occurs
already in the integrals for the first order shift. In our case,
however, only scattering at the impurity can change momentum, whereas
the insertion of @xmath at @xmath is momentum conserving. Therefore, to
first order only scattering processes contribute, where the interaction
does not change the momentum eigenvalue of the quasiparticles.

The Casimir energy is obtained by regularizing the vacuum energy on the
torus as well as in free space. When the vacuum energy on the torus is
expressed as a sum over windings, the free space vacuum energy is
subtracted by omitting the term with no windings. As soon as windings
are included, the size of the torus yields a natural length scale and
provides a cutoff for high momenta. This is sufficient to ensure a
finite expression for the energy up to the first order shift, but fails
for second order. When the particle scatters two times at the impurity,
it may have any momentum between the two scattering events. This
scattering process yields an infinite result, even after the subtraction
of the free space vacuum energy. The energy shift can be regularized by
splitting the point of interaction and assuming a finite distance
between both scattering events. If the quasiparticle does not wind
around one of the holes of the torus, then one encounters a short
distance divergence in the limit where both points coincide. However,
windings between the scattering events are not sufficient to render the
integrals finite. The integration over the torus surface diverges also
when the interaction points coincide. In addition to subtracting the
vacuum energy of the free space, one must also renormalize the
interaction strength by adding local counterterms.

As mentioned earlier, the delta potential does not conserve momentum.
More specifically, it introduces an interaction between particles at
arbitrary momentum. Thus, the decoupling of the node pairs is not valid
any more and particles get scattered between different nodal pairs. To
first order, this process is irrelevant as @xmath is momentum
independent and the trace ensures an overall momentum conservation.
There the different nodal pairs can still be regarded as independent and
the total shift is given by the sum of two independent contributions. In
the second order approximation, the nodal pairs (1,3) and (2,4) can mix.
As there are two scattering events, the overall momentum conservation
does not prohibit the particle to be scattered to another node pair. The
way to implement such processes is straightforward. The divergent
behaviour and the corresponding regularization techniques are the same
for both nodal pairs. They differ only in the coupling of the x- and
y-direction to the characteristic velocities and @xmath matrices: @xmath
and @xmath . Therefore, the only difference is given in the dependence
on the parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

### 4.2 Casimir energy

In this section, I first give a general derivation of how the Green’s
function (in Euclidean space) can be related to the vacuum energy
density. We obtain the Casimir energy density by subtracting the free
space energy density from the one on the torus. I also give a derivation
how the Green’s function looks like in our specific case of 2d massless
fermions on the torus. For each sector without a zero mode, there will
be a unique Green’s function which will, in general, lead to different
energy densities in the different sectors. I also derive, how the zero
mode affects the Green’s function and specify it for the degenerate
ground states in that sector.

In general, the fermionic Green’s function is written as the
time-ordered product of the spinor fields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

expressed in imaginary time @xmath . It is connected to the real-time
Green’s function by @xmath . The spinors can be expanded in the
(positive and negative) energy eigensolutions @xmath of the total
Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (78)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

with the convention that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To calculate the vacuum energy, all the negative energies @xmath have to
be summed up. For that purpose, I assume ⁷ ⁷ 7 to choose @xmath ensures,
that the sum runs over the filled levels in the Fermi sea, for @xmath
one sums instead over all empty states @xmath and take the derivative of
the Green’s function with respect to @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

By using the anticommutation relations it is straightforward to see that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

This sum ⁸ ⁸ 8 In the formula above, you can already see that the
Green’s function formalism may be problematic in presence of the zero
modes as it is ambigous whether you include the zero mode (and its
shift) in the sum or not. is still regulated by @xmath and finite as
long as @xmath . In the limit @xmath , the vacuum energy is obtained:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (81)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

This integral diverges in the limit @xmath and it must be regularized.
In addition, one has to subtract the part which corresponds to free
space. For that purpose, it is helpful to rewrite the propagator. A
formal derivation of the Poisson resummation formula can be found in
Appendix D. However, you can also give an argument on how to rewrite the
propagator by looking at the path integral formalism.

Consider the probability amplitude @xmath for a particle to go from some
initial point @xmath to a final point @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

As you can only measure absolute values of the probability amplitude,
you can also add a constant phase @xmath to the action @xmath . On the
torus, all paths can be divided into classes. Two paths are in the same
class, if they can be continuously transformed into each other. As paths
around the handles of the torus can not be contracted to a point, it is
clear that the classes can be labeled by the winding numbers. Thus, the
sum over all paths can be broken into two sums, where the one over
windings encodes all the information of the topology. The remaining sum
yields nothing else but the probability amplitude in free space. In each
of the classes, the phase @xmath has to be constant, but as the paths of
different classes cannot be transformed continuously into each other,
they may be different constants in different classes. In this example,
the phase can be related to the magnetic flux quanta enclosed by the
path by @xmath .

In my case, there is also a further contribution originating from the
boundary conditions. In order to obtain a unique ground state in the
non-flux sector, I chose the boundary conditions on the spinor fields to
be antiperiodic. This boundary conditions has the same effect as
inserting one flux quantum into each one of the holes. More
specifically, by inserting flux quanta, one can switch between periodic
and antiperiodic boundary conditions. Windings around a hole with no
flux quanta (more generally, an even number of flux quanta) have an
alternating factor. Adding one flux quanta, consequently, eliminates
that factor.

Now we can insert the (total) Green’s function into ( 81 ) and compute
the Casimir energy and its shift in presence of a perturbing potential.
The interaction will be regarded as small and we switch to the
interaction picture:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Then, the Green’s function in expression ( 80 ) is expanded with regard
to the interaction strength @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (84)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

By using Wick’s theorem, one can write the time ordered product as the
normal ordered product and the sum over all contractions. The
contractions are nothing but the non-interacting propagators. In the
sum, I neglect all contributions which correspond to disconnected
Feynman diagrams. Note that the non-interacting propagator is always
”located” at one node pair ⁹ ⁹ 9 The nodal pairs (1,3) and (2,4) are
independent without the perturbing potential . I denote the pair (1,3)
with a superscript (I) and (2,4) with a superscript (II) respectively.

The impurity is taken to be rigid. It can transfer momentum but not
energy to the scattering particles. All Green’s functions are,
therefore, evaluated at the same frequency @xmath . This can also be
shown formally, by doing a Fourier transform of each Green’s function.
The time integrals then enforce energy conservation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (85)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

With @xmath I denote the unperturbed propagator on the torus, whereas
@xmath is the full interacting propagator. For simplicity, I chose to
omit the index for the different sectors. However, I keep the index for
the nodal pairs explicit as it will be needed in the calculations for
the second order shift.

To keep track of the various terms in the expansion, it is convenient to
introduce Feynman diagrams to label the different summands. The notation
originates from the standard notation for the expansion of a propagator
going from an initial point @xmath to a final point @xmath . All the
propagators are assumed to be at the same frequency @xmath .

According to ( 81 ), the initial and final point are identified with
each other. Thus, each diagram is closed into a loop. Moreover, the
operator @xmath is inserted at point @xmath . The trace and both
integrations are implicit in all expressions. For the Feynman diagrams
of the total Casimir energy, see figure 4

Each propagator @xmath can be written as a sum over windings of the free
propagators @xmath . The free propagator itself can be separated into
two pieces, which differ in their short distance behaviour. One couples
to @xmath , the other to @xmath . As the commutation relations for the
Dirac matrices give constraints on the diagrams, it is convenient to
label each propagator by the Dirac matrix which is picked up. In
addition, the winding number can be specified. The index for the node
pair is, however, kept implicit in all diagrams. The free propagator at
the different nodes differ only in its dependence on the parameters
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (86)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath and @xmath for the nodal pair (1,3). For the other nodal
pair, the velocities have to be switched. The full propagator is written
as a sum over windings of the free propagators.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (87)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where the winding numbers are given in multiples of @xmath . In this
thesis, I will mostly write @xmath instead of @xmath and keep the
dependence on the nodes implicit in the expressions.

Special care is needed in the zero mode sector. In general, the time
ordered product of operators is given by the normal ordered product and
the contractions. When there is a zero mode, this mode can be partly
filled. This will of course change the notion of normal ordering. When
one writes all creation operators to the right of the destruction
operators, this order will, in general, not destroy the ground state if
this state is not empty. The zero mode is special in that respect, that
it does not depend on time or the spatial variables. Thus, the Green’s
functions for the different ground states differ only by a constant.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (88)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The constant contribution becomes simple, when we look at @xmath instead
as @xmath is diagonal. Using the anticummutation relations, it is easy
to see, which matrices you pick up when the zero mode is occupied by a
quasiparticle:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Analogously, for states with several quasiparticles the total
contribution is obtained by the sum of the single ones. For example, the
ground states @xmath and @xmath give the same contribution:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The different notion of normal ordering does not give any contribution
for the non-interacting case, as the zero mode contribution is cancelled
by the time derivative and does not give any contribution to the Casimir
energy. However, we will have to take it into account in other orders of
perturbation theory.

### 4.3 Numerical results in zeroth order

The Casimir energy in absence of a perturbing potential can be written
in a closed form, given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the winding numbers @xmath are given in multiples of @xmath and
@xmath denotes the alternating factors which depend on the sector j.

After inserting the definition of the Green’s function and using the
trace properties of the @xmath -matrices, it is straightforward to see
that only the term coupled to @xmath survives. Both integrals can then
be performed. The one over space is trivial and gives just the surface
of the torus. The sum is regularized by omitting the term without
windings and a finite energy is obtained in all four sectors.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (92)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

First, one can try to draw some conclusions from the analytic
expression. For example, one can compare the sectors, where there is one
flux tube through one of the holes. The energy shift of these sectors
differs only in the dependence on the torus length. You would expect the
ground states in these two sectors to behave similarly because of
symmetries in the original d-wave descripton. In fact, if the length
scales are the same @xmath , their energy shift is exactly the same.
However, the more the two length scales differ, the more differs also
the Casimir energy in both sectors. This is not a coincidence, but
originates in the way we quantized the momentum in the first place.
After expanding around the nodes, we rotated the coordinate system and
chose to quantize the theory in terms of the new coordinates. Thereby,
we assigned the different length scales to the node pairs in an
arbitrary manner. If we had chosen to quantize in the old set of
coordinates, the energy dependence on the length scale would most
probably have been symmetric at the two nodal pairs and, thus, also
their behaviour for varying this scales. Of course the way to quantize
the momentum should not make a difference in the final result. However,
the description would be more involved when quantized in terms of the
old coordinate system and it is not straightforward to see that the
argumentation can be generalized to different boundary conditions in a
simple way.

For the numerical calculation, I assume the two lengths of the torus to
be equal to each other: @xmath . Using that choice ensures that the two
nodal pairs act in the same way. In addition, the velocities @xmath and
@xmath differ approximately by one order of magnitude in cuprates,.
Therefore, I assume @xmath in the calculations. After inserting these
values, the Casimir energy is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (93)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Wilson loops introduced in section 3.2.
The Casimir energy can easily be computed in units of @xmath in the four
sectors:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One finds that the the Casimir energy of the first sectors ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 with
no magnetic fluxes present is lowest, while the sector with the
degenerate ground states has the highest Casimir energy. The other two
sectors with only one flux quantum have the same energy ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 as both
lengths coincide which lies approximately in the middle of the other
two. The splitting of the ground state energies is algebraic in L,
@xmath instead of the exponential splitting in the s-wave case.

### 4.4 Perturbation theory to first order

The first order shift in the Casimir energy corresponds to the physical
process were a quasiparticle scatters once at the impurity. It is
calculated by inserting the first order pertubation of ( 85 ) into ( 81
). Using the trace formulas of the Dirac matrices, only two terms
survive:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

However, both expressions are odd in @xmath while the integrals extends
over all values from @xmath to @xmath . Thus, every contribution from a
positive frequency is cancelled by an equally big one for the negative
counterpart and the integral vanishes. Therefore, the energy shift to
first order vanishes in the sectors without the zero mode.

Note, that this argument does not apply for @xmath , so the contribution
of the zero mode must be computed in an alternative way. As it is just
one mode, one can use standard degenerate perturbation theory. The
matrix elements of the perturbing potential are given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (95)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

To first order perturbation theory, the potential does change neither
the energy nor the momentum of the scattering quasiparticle. This can be
seen from the Feynman diagrams as explained above, but it is also a
straightforward consequence of degenerate perturbation theory. In first
order, the perturbation scatters only to other state in the degenerate
manifold. However, when restricted to @xmath , the interaction becomes
diagonal in the quasiparticle operators and is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Generally, the perturbing potential lifts the degeneracy. In this case,
the degeneracy is only partly lifted. The kets are chosen as the spin
and chirality eigenstates which are defined in appendix B. In this
representation the impurity interaction is diagonal and the energy shift
is proportional to the difference in the number of particles and
antiparticles.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (97)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

As particles have a ”charge” @xmath and antiparticles @xmath , the
energy shift is proportional to the total charge, i.e. the spin
eigenvalue of the state. Consequently, the ground states which have
@xmath -eigenvalue 0 are not shifted and behave as the ground states in
the other three sectors. The two states which can be connected to the
ground states in the other sectors are spin singletts, and therefore,
their energy shift (to first order) is the same as for the other
sectors.

However, first order perturbation does not distinguish whether the
states are singlets in chirality. So the energy levels are unperturbed
also for other states than the ones, which can be connected to the other
three sectors by adiabatic tunneling processes. Thus, it is of interest
to consider also the shift in second order perturbation theory and see
whether this shift distinguishes between the chirality eigenstates.

The same calculation can be done using Green’s functions. In first order
perturbation theory, one needs to consider

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (98)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The normal ordered product I abbreviate by @xmath : it depends only on
the state @xmath . The sum combined with the integral over the torus
gives an integral over all space which can be performed easily:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (100)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The matrix @xmath can be read off from ( 4.2 ). If the ground state
@xmath has the same amount of particles as antiparticles, the trace
vanishes and the energy shift is zero. This method gives exactly the
same result as when we calculated the energy shift with help of
degenerate perturbation theory.

### 4.5 Perturbation theory to second order

The Dirac delta function yields infinite energy shifts to second order
in perturbation theory. As the theory is two-dimensional and its energy
relation is linear, one expects the divergence to be linear. The special
form of the Casimir energy takes out the linear divergence leaving a
logarithmic one. All the divergencies I discussed so far arise in every
sector and can be cancelled by local counterterms. In the three sectors
without a zero mode, a finite expression is obtained after introducing
the counterterms. The summation over the windings leads to a
well-defined expression for the Green’s function and the integral over
the frequency @xmath can be performed. This is not the case, when there
is a zero mode.

The energy shift involves now the product of three Green’s functions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (101)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Even though this does not cause any fundamental difficulties, it makes
the numerical calculations much more involved. Due to the commutation
relations of the Dirac matrices, only certain terms in ( 101 ) survive
after performing the trace. All the remaining terms are even functions
in @xmath and the integration over the frequency gives a finite result.
So, second order perturbation theory gives the first non-vanishing
contribution to the Casimir energy shift in all sectors. In fact, there
are only four kinds of diagrams which have to be computed as all the
other terms are cancelled by the trace properties. Only two of them give
a finite contribution to the Casimir energy after the regularization,
see figure ( 8 ):

The most obvious divergency arises, when the quasiparticles scatter two
times without winding around the torus in between. The Green’s function
becomes singular when the two points of interaction coincide.

Another divergence is given by the spatial integral, which may look
surprising at first sight. It is instructive to take a closer look on
that particular divergence in the fourth sector, where the spatial
integral (together with one of the sums) can be performed easily and
gives nothing but a delta function in momentum space.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The regularization must be done for both momentum integrals. Windings in
between the scattering events regularize only the loop at @xmath .

There are also two asymmetric diagrams which could give a contribution
to the energy shift. It is easiest to look at the sum of both integrals:

The two diagrams can be seen as the same one, but with different
directions for the @xmath integration. In first order perturbation
theory, I argued that such diagrams should not contribute to the energy
shift. I will show that the contribution of the sum of those two,
indeed, vanishes.

All the divergencies I discussed so far arise in every sector and can be
cancelled by local counterterms. In the three sectors without a zero
mode, a finite expression is obtained after introducing the
counterterms. The summation over the windings leads to a well-defined
expression for the Green’s function and the integral over the frequency
@xmath can be performed. This is not the case, when there is a zero
mode. The zero mode sector is special in that respect that the spatial
integral can be performed, yielding a delta function in momentum space.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

When you consider only the @xmath part in the propagator, you can
replace each propagator by @xmath . The expression you obtain is
ill-defined and diverges at the lower limit of the @xmath integral:
@xmath . Thus, in the fourth sector you need a low-energy cut-off for
this integral. Such a cut-off is provided by excluding the zero mode.
Once it is excluded, the integral over the frequency becomes finite. The
contribution of the zero mode has to be calculated in an alternative
way. As was the case for the first order shift, the zero mode is
insensitive to the symmetries in the theory. Therefore, its divergence
is linear, instead of logarithmic.

In the Green’s function representation as a sum over windings, this
divergence appears to be an infrared divergence. However, there should
not be an infrared divergence on the torus as it has a finite volume
and, therefore, only a finite number of zero modes. The contradiction is
solved by realizing that the representation of the Green’s function as a
sum over windings is a good one, if the summation converges. This is not
the case for @xmath and therefore, we need to use an alternative way to
calculate its contribution to the energy shift. When the energy shift of
the zero mode is expressed in terms of single particle perturbation
theory, also an interpretation of the divergence is provided: it is then
easy to see that the divergence occurs for the scattering into high
momenta and is not an infrared, but an ultraviolet divergence.

#### 4.5.1 Proof of finiteness

Even though the divergent integrals originate from the same short
distance divergence, I am going to use two different approaches to deal
with them. During this whole paragraph, I will keep the expressions as
general as possible, so that the discussion is valid for both nodal
pairs and in all sectors.

First, I consider the divergence which arises from the zero mode. As
said earlier, in order to provide a low-energy cut-off for the integral
over the frequency @xmath , I exclude the zero mode from two of the
Green’s functions. In the remaining Green’s function I assume that the
quasiparticle winds at least once around the torus. The case without
windings is considered later as it is completely analogous to the other
three sectors. To see that the divergence is removed, it is sufficient
to look at the low-energy behaviour of the regularized Green function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It has to be finite for @xmath otherwise the integral over the frequency
is divergent.

As the sum over windings is responsible for the @xmath divergence, I
neglect the first terms and focus on winding numbers where @xmath . For
large @xmath the difference whether you integrate over the torus or
whether you choose a specific point on the torus becomes negligible and
the two terms cancel. By doing a Taylor expansion around @xmath , I show
that the subtraction of the zero mode effectively regularizes the
Green’s function. In fact, it is sufficient to show that @xmath is
regularized. The properties for @xmath follow from it.

The first non-vanishing contribution from the Taylor expansion is second
order in @xmath . The first derivative, @xmath as well as the mixed term
in the second order @xmath vanish because of symmetry reasons.
Therefore, the first contribution comes from

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (106)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

Both terms are finite in the limit where @xmath . Once the zero mode is
excluded from one of the Green’s functions, the integration over @xmath
becomes finite.

The missing contribution of the zero-mode is computed with help of
degenerate perturbation theory. There it is well-known that the Dirac
delta function gives rise to a (in our case linear) divergence and
regularization techniques have been developed, [ 11 ] . I excluded the
zero mode from the Green’s function when there were windings between the
scattering. The term with no windings must be omitted in the
calculation. Thus, the energy shift for the scattering in free space
must be subtracted:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the sum runs over all states with finite energy @xmath . To show
the convergence of ( 107 ), it is most convenient to expand the
integrand in a Taylor expansion. As the divergence is linear, there
could be a subdivergent term, which is logarithmic in @xmath . By
powercounting, the logarithmic divergence must sit in the first
derivative in the expansion. However, this term vanishes because of the
integration. The first non-vanishing term is proportional to @xmath and
is therefore finite.

Now I want to consider the term when there are no windings between two
scattering events:

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath   @xmath            (108)
                          @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the sectors are encoded in @xmath . Setting @xmath to zero gives
an undefined expression. When the second scattering site is displaced by
a vector @xmath , the expression becomes finite for @xmath :

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

For small separations, the Besselfunction can be replaced by its
asymptotic behaviour:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Euler constant and @xmath is labeled by the nodal
pair. @xmath is given by @xmath . The first three terms give finite
contributions for the case where there are no windings. The last can be
cancelled by a local counterterm.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which gives a non vanishing contribution in first order perturbation
theory:

  -- -- -------- -- -- -------
        @xmath         (111)
  -- -- -------- -- -- -------

The expression above can be separated into two terms. First consider the
term where both propagators contribute a @xmath to the trace. That term
cancels exactly with ( 4.5.1 ) if @xmath is chosen to be:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The term, where both propagator contribute with a @xmath is needed for
the second diverging diagram:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

As in the previous diagram, this diagram has a divergence when the
quasiparticles do not wind between the scattering events. We split the
point of interaction in the same way as above:

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath   @xmath            (113)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------

The term where @xmath is treated in the same way as above. The
Besselfunction is replaced by its asymptotic behaviour at the origin and
the singular piece is cancelled by @xmath .

The other divergence arises for @xmath but @xmath . In order to obtain
the same divergent behaviour in a first order diagram, this counterterm
needs to couple to @xmath , see figure ( 9 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This counterterm includes also finite contributions to the energy shift:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Only the first term is logarithmic divergent when @xmath . When @xmath
is set to @xmath it cancels the divergence in ( 113 ) in the limit where
@xmath . The spatial integration over the sum of both divergent terms
becomes finite:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The divergence arises for small @xmath , so by reducing the area of
integration such that @xmath the leading divergence cancels. Note, that
it is not important at which nodal pair the Green’s function is located.
Their contribution differs by a finite amount, while the divergent part
is exactly the same for both node pairs.

Finally, I consider the sum of the asymmetric diagrams:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
                             (116)
                             
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

For @xmath the diagrams vanish because of symmetry reasons. For zero
windings, the diagrams in equation ( 116 ) are not properly defined as
one of the Besselfunctions diverges, while the expression in the
parenthesis becomes zero. When the point of interaction is splitted, (
116 ) becomes finite and one can study the limiting behaviour for @xmath
. For the nodal pair (1,3), @xmath is given by @xmath . For the other
node pair, the velocities are switched. In the following discussion, I
also include a subscript on @xmath to keep track of the different
dependence of the velocities:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

The limiting behaviour for the Besselfunctions is known, each diagram
for itself diverges linearly in @xmath . The sum of both diagrams will
take out the leading order in the divergence. But there may still be a
divergence in subleading order left. Therefore, I analyze how the
expression in the parenthesis acts for small separations @xmath . For
derivating the Bessel functions I use:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

so that the result can be written in terms of these two functions, only.
The total contribution from the two asymmetric diagrams can be written
as:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (119)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

Where @xmath is a unit vector with direction @xmath . The first two
terms give finite contributions to the energy shift, but the others
exhibit a subleading divergence which is logarithmic in @xmath . The
counterterms which we have introduced so far are not able to cancel this
divergence as it is direction dependent. Point splitting introduced a
specific direction which was not present in the original graph. This can
be remedied either by integrating over all directions or by a
counterterm which is also direction dependent. The former is more
intuitive. Moreover, it is quite straightforward to see that the
divergent part vanishes, when integrated over all directions. However,
it is much simpler to compute the finite contribution with help of
counterterms and, therefore, I use this method instead. In the end, both
methods give the same result, namely that the asymmetric diagrams do not
contribute to the energy shift:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (120)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

In order to cancel the divergence in ( 119 ), @xmath must be chosen as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In that case, the counterterm cancels not only the divergent term but
also all the remaining, finite terms from ( 4.5.1 ). A finite
contribution from the asymmetric diagrams would have been inconsistent
with the underlying symmetry. Furthermore, there is no specific
direction in the model. A local impurity on the torus cannot introduce a
direction dependent energy shift.

#### 4.5.2 second order results

In this section, I am going to summarize the results for the energy
shift to second order perturbation theory. The analytic expressions I
obtained are finite and can be computed numerically. As there are a lot
of terms to take into account, I organize the results by the diagrams
which they originate from. The total energy shift to second order in
@xmath is most conveniently written as a sum of five diagrams:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath               (121)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The first two contributions are analogous in all sectors. In the
previous section I derived that both @xmath and @xmath are finite in all
sectors. In the three sectors without a zero mode, @xmath does not need
regularization. In the zero mode sector, I excluded the zero mode from
two of the Green’s functions. In that sector, I need to compute the
shift @xmath , which is due to the zero mode, separately. I will use the
notion of the Wilson loops @xmath and @xmath , introduced in section
3.2, to give an explicit dependence of the energy shifts on the sectors.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (123)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the non-zero mode sectors, the contribution from the other summands
is trivial to write down:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (124)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the zero mode sector, I replace the non-interacting Green’s function
with the one, where the zero mode is excluded:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (125)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and insert the modified Green’s functions in ( 4.5.2 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (126)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Even though I replaced only two of the three Green’s functions ¹² ¹² 12
The Green’s function @xmath is unchanged and could, in principle, give
different contributions for the different ground states. , one finds
that the energy shift of all the filled levels is independent of whether
the zero mode is (partly) filled or not. However, the energy shift of
the zero mode itself to the Casimir energy is, in general, distinct for
the different ground states:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The expressions do not show a simple dependence on the windings. It is
not possible to extract some significant features from the analytic
results. In addition, the computation of the sums is very
time-consuming. For low frequencies, the convergence of the sums is very
slow. In addition, the expressions are given by modified Bessel
functions. While this does not give any fundamental problems, it makes
the numerical calculations very slow. With a computational program like
mathematica or matlab, the expressions can not be computed in an
acceptable time intervall.

### 4.6 Conclusions of the second part

In the second part of this work, we considered a local perturbation,
namely a magnetic point defect, and studied its effects on the Casimir
energy in the different sectors. The total Casimir energy can be written
in terms of Green’s functions and be calculated perturbatively. I showed
that the Casimir energy (in case of no perturbing potential) is distinct
for different sectors ¹³ ¹³ 13 as could be expected in presence of
gapless particles and looked for regularities in the energy shift
induced by the magnetic defect. In the discussion I focused on the three
unique ground states in the non-zero mode sectors and the two
(degenerate) ground states in the zero-mode sector which were connected
to the other ones by adiabatic tunneling processes.

A major result of this discussion is that there are, indeed, some
regularities for these ground states as their energy shift to first
order perturbation theory vanishes. Note that the first order shift is
not generically zero, but that there are certain ground states energies
which are shifted by the perturbation.

I also derived the analytic expressions for the energy shift in second
order. As the singular perturbation introduced new UV divergencies, I
renormalized the interaction and showed that the contributions are
finite in all sectors. To write the programs which are necessary to
calculate the second order shift is beyond the scope of this work and
will be left for later work.

## 5 Final conclusions and Outlook

The 2+1 Dirac theory proves an appropriate model for the d-wave
superconductor. In general, a two-dimensional representation is
sufficient to describe a two-dimensional Dirac theory. The
four-dimensional representation has, however, several advantages, when
it comes to the interpretation of the physical properties. In a
two-dimensional representation, there are no closed expressions for the
spin charge or the spin current. Combining the fermion fields of
opposite nodes into a four dimensional spinor, provides a simple
interpretation for the density as the spin and the conserved current as
the spin current.

An equal copy of the representation arises for the other node pair.
There are various versions of how to distribute the fermion operators
into the spinors and the suitable choice depends strongly on the
quantities you want to study and which symmetries you want to keep
manifest in the model. As I wanted to study the coupling to magnetic
flux, it was most convenient to take an approach which masks the spin
rotational symmetry. On the other hand, it allows us to identify @xmath
with the spin density and to write down the spin current in a simple
form.

The most delicate part in the derivation of the Dirac theory, is the
point where you have to eliminate the topological phase in order to
obtain spatially independent matrices. As I already mentioned earlier,
the naive choice to distribute the phase equally to spin-up and
spin-down leads to multi-valued spinors. To distribute it solely to
spin-up particles gives a reasonable result, but one has to keep in mind
that this induces an artificial asymmetry in the behavior of the fermion
operators. The spin current is only coupled to the topological phase, a
result which remains true, even if you choose another way of attaching
the topological phase to spin, see [ 4 ] .

The effective theory you obtain, looks like an ordinary Dirac theory for
massless spin 1/2 fermions. In order to analyze the theory for
topological properties, it is convenient to consider a torus as the
underlying manifold. Further, you neglect vortices to simplify the
analysis. Magnetic fluxes are now implemented by flux tubes through the
holes of the torus and can be measured by taking quasiparticles along
non-contractible paths around these holes. The gauge field, that enters
the effective theory, can be regarded as spatially constant and
classifies four different sectors, one for each configuration of flux
quanta. For an s-wave superconductor, the structure of each of the
sectors is identical. The ground state can be labeled by either the
magnetic or the electric flux as both, quasiparticles and vortices, are
gapped. In the d-wave case, only magnetic fluxes can be used to describe
the different topological sector. You find, that one of the sectors
behaves exceptional. Which one it is, depends on the boundary conditions
you impose on the fermion operators. The ground state is highly
degenerate in this sector. It is 16-fold degenerate for each pair of
nodes. The complete degeneracy is, thus, given by 256, as both pairs can
be treated independently.

In order to describe the degenerate ground state, the observables spin,
momentum and charge are not sufficient. As stated earlier, there is also
another quantity, besides spin and momentum, which is conserved. The
chiral charge measures the difference in the number of quasiparticles at
opposite nodes. It provides the missing tool to label each one of the
degenerate states uniquely. However, by changing boundary conditions,
you can change which of the sectors behaves exceptional. This suggests,
that this (huge) degeneracy in one of the sectors might not be
fundamental. As in the s-wave case, you can connect the different
sectors by tunneling processes. Doing this adiabatically, in particular
when going from a (unique) ground state to the degenerate sector, you
pick out one particular ground state out of all degenerate ones. One
finds, that the obtained state depends on the sector you started from.
In the end, there are only two states which can be obtained by adiabatic
tunneling processes. They look very similar to each other and can be
translated into each other by replacing @xmath .

As the quasiparticles are massless, the ground states in the different
sectors are not degenerate and generally the different sectors will mix
due to tunneling processes. It is an interesting question whether some
regularity still reflects the topological order. In this thesis, we
chose to examine the response of the Casimir energy to a local impurity.
For gapped quasiparticles, local impurities do not affect the ground
state energy. We found that this is also true in case of massless
particles to first order perturbation theory. The Casimir energy of the
two states which could be connected to the ground states in the other
sectors, are not shifted and, thus, behave as the ground states of the
other sectors. In second order perturbation theory, I derived the
analytic expression for the energy shift in second order. The
calculations become much more involved and the expressions become
divergent. The divergencies can be canceled by local counterterms and
the interaction strength @xmath is renormalized. The expressions show no
simple dependence on the winding modes and there is no possibility to
make statements on the second order energy shift without numerical
calculation. However, the numerical results require a lot of time and
computational power and will not be presented in this thesis.

Some experiments indicate that cuprates do not have a pure d-wave
pairing but rather a mixture of d- and s-wave pairing. As the cuprates
are anisotropic, the relative strength of the order parameters depends
on the direction and is, therefore, tunable. In appendix D I show, how
the excitation spectrum changes, if a (small) s-wave contribution is
added. It would also be interesting to see, what happens to the
degenerate ground states if you (slowly) switch on this s-wave
contribution. With an s-wave contribution, there is a unique ground
state in all four sectors. By a perturbative calculation, one should be
able to find out, which one is selected.

Another interesting feature is to discuss the effect of shifting the
nodes away from the position @xmath . This certainly effects the energy
spectrum. The simplest possibility is just to rotate the nodes with a
small angle. This should not change the structure of the ground state in
a qualitative way. Actually, by expanding the field operators around the
nodes and changing to relative coordinates, namely changing from @xmath
to @xmath , the absolute position of the nodes becomes less important
and is reflected only in the parameter @xmath . The only needed feature
is the symmetric arrangement of the nodes. This should lead to a certain
robustness of the structure against rotations. Deviations of the
symmetric arrangement, however, should affect the ground state
structure.

In addition, I completely neglected vortices on the torus by setting the
vortex current @xmath . By allowing vortices only as thin fluxes through
the holes, the theory remains regular on the surface of the torus. The
next step would be to consider stationary thin flux tubes on the torus.
If the core of the flux tube is much smaller than the magnetic length,
it is still a good approximation to consider the absolute value of the
order parameter to be constant.

## Appendix A Spin Current

As mentioned in the main text, the spin current is the conserved Noether
current of our model. However, our choice of spinors masks the
invariance under the SU(2) spin rotation group. In order to derive the
Noether current, another choice of the spinor representation [ 3 ] is
more useful as it leaves the rotational invariance manifest:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The minus sign for @xmath was chosen so that @xmath transforms as a
spinor. With this convention, spin transformation can be written as
matrices, but the chiral symmetry is obscured.

With this choice of the spinor, it is now easy to formulate the operator
for spin rotations. It is obvious that the Lagrangian will be invariant
under this (global) transformation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath being the well-known Pauli matrices:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

With our choice of spinors, see ( 23 ), the spin transformations are
more cumbersome to write down because of two reasons: first, we chose
the spinors to have definite spin, @xmath having spin @xmath and @xmath
having @xmath . Therefore, a spin rotation mixes @xmath and @xmath and
thus, it is not possible to represent it as a matrix as in [ 3 ] .
Secondly, although @xmath looks local in @xmath -space it is not. Note
the convention, I used to define the fermionic operators ( 2.3 ). @xmath
was defined in such a way, that it gives the direction of the spin
current. Spin rotations on the other hand are local operations. For
example flipping the spin of a particle reverses its contribution to the
spin current, changing @xmath to @xmath .

In order to derive the correct form of the spin operators, it is
convenient to write down the transformations for the original fermionic
operators @xmath and translate this expression to the linearized ones.
The original operators transform in the usual way under rotations with
angle @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The spin operators themselves are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Using equation ( 2.3 ), these expressions can be written in terms of the
linearized fermion operators. After transforming to @xmath -space, one
has to attach the singular phase to spin-up operators. Then, I use the
relations ( 3.3 ) to ( 3.3 ), to obtain the final expression for the
spin operators. I do this calculation explicitely for @xmath . @xmath is
obtained in a completely analogous way, while @xmath is even simpler to
derive.

Due to the definition of the fermionic field operators, the spin in the
x- and y-directions looks nonlocal in the linearized version. Although
the sign convention may seem unnecessary complicated it is nevertheless
crucial, to write ( 19 ) as a Dirac equation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A-6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and after transforming back to @xmath -space:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A-7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The next step is to attach the singular flux to the spin-up field
operators. I neglect regular gauge transformations, as their phase
contributions cancel anyway. For clarity, I introduce a new notation for
the fermionic field with attached flux:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The Fourier transforms of the @xmath fields are defined exactly as for
the @xmath fields, namely that both spin components transform with
opposite momentum.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

However, as the singular phase is space dependent, it changes the
coupling of the fermionic fields. Without a singular gauge
transformation, spin-up and spin-down couple with ”opposite” @xmath
values. The presence of the gauge field shifts one of these momenta.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A-11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In order to obtain the shift, one needs to find the value of the
functions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

You can take @xmath to be given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After inserting this expression into ( A ), the integrals can be
computed easily to give:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the following discussion, I keep writing @xmath instead of @xmath in
order to shorten the notation. The reader should, however, keep the
equivalence in mind. Note, that the spin operator is now non-local in
momentum space because of the attachment of the singular phase. The
remaining step is to express the obtained expression for the spin in
terms of the quasiparticle operators, @xmath and @xmath which
diagonalize the Hamiltonian. Even though the eigenspinors form an
orthonormal basis for each momentum, scalar products such as @xmath are
generally non-zero.

First note that @xmath and @xmath are linear combinations of
quasiparticle operators with the same energy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A-13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Assume that neither @xmath nor @xmath is equal to zero. To perform the
computation, it is favorable to introduce 2-dimensional vectors:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the same normalization constant c as in ( 3.3 ). The vectors
fulfill the relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As the spin operator is summed over all momenta, we are allowed to
relabel @xmath and it can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A-16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By using the relations ( A ), one obtains a rather simple result:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A-17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The same calculations can be done for ( 3.3 ) and ( 3.3 ). In the case
that @xmath , you obtain the same result as for ( 3.3 ). In the case
that only @xmath but not @xmath , you obtain the same result but with
@xmath interchanged. All these cases can be summarized by introducing

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (A-18)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

In the last case, ( 3.3 ), I chose the eigenvectors in such a way, that
the spin operator looks the same for all momenta:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The computation of @xmath and @xmath can be done in a similar way. The
operators can be written in a compact way as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A-19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix B Symmetries of the Effective Lagrangian

The effective Lagrangian exhibits additional symmetries, which were not
present at the original Hamiltonian. This is mostly due to that the node
pairs (1-3) and (2-4) are completely decoupled after expanding @xmath
and @xmath around the nodes.

Thus the Lagrangian will be invariant if we apply separate SU(2) spin
rotations on the two pairs of nodes @xmath and @xmath . This is also
true for U(1) charge transformations. As was pointed out in [ 3 ] , this
implies two new conserved charges, called nodon charges, @xmath . It was
also mentioned that additional interaction terms, e.g. Umklapp
scattering processes, will not conserve the nodon charge while being
consistent with the original U(1) and SU(2) symmetries.

In our case there is even one more symmetry due to our choice of
distributing the phase of the gap function @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B-1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

( B ) introduces a new gauge symmetry, where the singular and the
regular phase are transformed simultaneously:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B-2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Written in the spinor fields @xmath this looks like the U(1) gauge
transformation.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B-3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Again two different values of @xmath are allowed for the different pairs
of nodes. The invariance under U(1) charge transformations implies that
the @xmath fields are neutral while this obviously does not apply to
@xmath .

## Appendix C Analysis of Spin and Chirality

Here I want to sketch, how to derive the structure in sector four. Due
to the zero mode, there are 16 linearly independent states with zero
energy: these consist of quasiparticles with momentum @xmath and can be
labeled by spin and chirality, see Table 1 .

Both, spin and chirality, can be represented by one triplet, four
doublets and five singlets. There are four states with eigenvalue zero
for spin and chirality. In order to see, which ones are singlets and
which belong to the triplets, you need to compute the eigenvalues to the
Casimir operators, @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C-1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Let’s look at the spin part first. I rewrite the Casimir operator in
terms of the ladder operators, @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C-2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C-3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Singlets will be eigenstates to @xmath with eigenvalue zero.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C-4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Thus, three states are singlets in spin, namely:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath               (C-5)
                 @xmath      
                 @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

The remaining state,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

forms a spin triplet, together with @xmath and @xmath .

The same analysis can be done for the chirality operators. They can be
computed by @xmath and @xmath . Explicitly, they are given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C-6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The ladder operators are computed analogously to the spin case:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C-7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Again, one can act with the ladder operators on the states, computing
the effect of @xmath . They pick another state to be the member of the
(chirality) triplet:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C-8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Thus, there are also three chirality singlet states:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath               (C-9)
                 @xmath      
                 @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

The triplet is given by

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath               (C-10)
                 @xmath      
                 @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

Now it is easy to see the structure of the ground state: there are two
states, which are singlets, both in chirality and spin:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath               (C-11)
                 @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

The state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is singlet in spin but not chirality and the state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is singlet in chirality but not in spin. These ground states can now be
compared to the (unique) ground states in the other sectors.

## Appendix D The Poisson resummation formula

The Poisson resummation formula gives a relation between a function
@xmath and its corresponding Fourier transform @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D-1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where both m and n are integers. This equality can be used to transfer
the sum over momenta to a sum over windings on the torus. First, I
express the Green’s function in terms of dimensionless variables :
@xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D-3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . The additional factor is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is independent of @xmath and can be transferred to the right hand
side. It gives a modified Fourier transform of @xmath for each sector.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D-4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The next step is to calculate the Fourier transform of @xmath (assuming
@xmath to be a continuous variable) and use Poissons resummation
formula:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D-5)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

here: @xmath and @xmath for the nodal pair (1,3). For the other pair,
@xmath and @xmath have to be exchanged. The final expression is obtained
by inserting ( D-5 ) into ( D-3 ) and using( D-1 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D-6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The Poisson formula restates the problem in terms of the free space
Green’s functions which are much easier to compute than the ones on a
torus. The sums over windings can simply be regularized by omitting the
term without any winding. This term is divergent and corresponds to the
free space Green’s function.

## Appendix E S-wave Contribution

In several experiments there has been found evidence that the pairing in
high- @xmath Superconductors may not be of pure d-wave but rather a
mixture of s- and d-wave symmetry. The s-wave contribution prohibits
zero-modes: every energy eigenvalue is finite, due to the constant
energy gap at the Fermi surface. Moreover, the s-wave gap introduces
further anisotropies between the direction perpendicular and the one
parallel to the Fermi surface. In the d-wave case, the only anisotropy
arises from different values for the characteristic velocities @xmath
and @xmath . For the mixed case, the s-wave contribution permits
additional excitations perpendicular to the Fermi surface but none in
the other. Also, the energy gap affects the excitations differently. To
describe the situation, I replace the gap function by: @xmath , assuming
s-wave symmetry for the function @xmath . It can also be expanded around
the nodes to first order:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (E-1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

For simplicity I neglect vortices, so @xmath and @xmath are assumed to
be real. After inserting ( E-1 ) into ( 19 ), the Hamiltonian is given
by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E-2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the pure d-wave Hamiltonian. Although this looks very similar
to the former case, there are some new aspects to discuss.

The s-wave contribution does not effect the conservation of the nodon
charge. Thus, for simplicity I restrict the discussion again to the
nodal pair 1/3. The most important feature is that the new Hamiltonian
does not have any zero modes. There are four distinct energy
eigenvalues:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E-3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

each leading to a unique ground state. It is easy to see, that the
energy gap acts differently depending on the direction of the
excitations. It appears as a mass term for the excitations in the
x-direction, analogously to the normal s-wave case. However, it only
shifts the excitation spectrum in the y-direction. As the gap function
is constant over the Fermi surface, excitations along the Fermi surface
see the gap only as an overall shift of energy: a chemical potential.

I can also be shown that the chiral symmetry is partially broken. The
3-direction of the chiral charge is given by the difference of the
number of particles at node 1 and 3. This conservation is a consequence
of the formation of Cooper pairs and is not changed by the introduction
of an additional s-wave term. However, in the d-wave case, all three
components of the chirality were equal to each other. I could have
chosen any of these to be diagonal. The s-wave contribution picks the
3-direction and breaks the symmetry of the other two.

## Appendix F Frequency dependence of the Green’s function

We want to extract the frequency dependence of the Green’s functions
after the sums over windings are performed:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be divided into two parts, which I discuss separately:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F-1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F-2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For simplicity, I set @xmath , assumed @xmath and neglected all
constants. Naively, you would think that there should not arise any
problems as both, (1) and (2) are well-defined, finite expressions for
each winding. In addition, the Besselfunctions decay exponentially for
large arguments, thus the sum is truncated for large enough winding
numbers. In fact, this argument holds for any finite @xmath . However,
for small @xmath there are approximately @xmath terms for which the
argument of the Besselfunction has to be assumed as small, that is
@xmath . So for decreasing frequency, the number of terms which which
must be summed up is growing quadratically in @xmath . Without the
alternating factors, this results in a @xmath behaviour for small @xmath
. The Green’s function is ill-defined at @xmath and the contribution of
the zero mode to the energy shift has to be calculated in an alternative
way. In the other sectors, there is no zero mode. So physically, there
should be no contribution from @xmath to the energy as there is a low
energy cut-off. Due to the alternating factors, the terms in the sum can
take out each other partly and destroy the @xmath divergence.

As the sum cannot be calculated analytically, I approximate it by an
integral. This is a good approximation, as long as the frequency @xmath
is small and gives the correct asymptotic behaviour for @xmath . The
each alternating factor @xmath is approximated by @xmath functions. It
is enough to include one of these, as the problem becomes spherically
symmetric when written as an integral:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F-3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

For the second term, one can derive a similar expression:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F-4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Although the integrals look complicated, they can be solved exactly.
Their asymptotic behaviour is the same in both cases for small and large
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F-5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The approximation we made becomes very bad for large frequencies. In
fact, for large @xmath the Green’s function shows an exponential decay,
instead of the algebraic one in ( F-5 ). However, the approximation
becomes better the smaller the frequencies are. The asymptotic behaviour
for small frequencies is, therefore, accurate. The Green’s function
approaches a finite constant in the sectors without a zero mode. When
calculating the energy, one integrates over all frequencies and inserts
an additional @xmath in the expression ( 76 ). In the end, there is
indeed no contribution to the energy from @xmath in absence of a zero
mode. The same asymptotic behaviour can be expected when the zero mode
is excluded from the propagator. All remaining modes are gapped and the
low-energy behaviour should therefore be analogous to the non zero mode
sectors.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F-6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

As the sum is responsible for the @xmath divergence, I neglect the first
terms and focus on winding numbers where @xmath . For large @xmath the
difference whether you integrate over the torus or whether you choose a
specific point on the torus becomes negligible and the two terms cancel.
By doing a Taylor expansion around @xmath , I show that the subtraction
of the zero mode effectively regularizes the Green’s function. In fact,
it is sufficient to show that @xmath is regularized. The properties for
@xmath follow out of it.

The first non-vanishing contribution from the Taylor expansion is second
order in @xmath . The first derivative, @xmath as well as the mixed term
in the second order @xmath vanish because of symmetry reasons.
Therefore, the first contribution comes from

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (F-7)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

Performing the sum, one obtains that the Green’s function actually goes
to zero for @xmath which is even more convergent than one would have
expected from the beginning. This is due to the symmetry on the torus.