Real Legendrian subvarieties are classical objects of differential
geometry and classical mechanics and they have been studied since
antiquity (see [ Arn74 ] , [ Sła91 ] and references therein). However,
complex Legendrian subvarieties are much more rigid and have more
exceptional properties. The most remarkable case is the Legendrian
subvarieties of projective space and prior to the author’s research only
few smooth examples of these were known (see [ Bry82 ] , [ LM07 ] ).
Strong restrictions on the topology of such varieties have been found
and studied by Landsberg and Manivel ( [ LM07 ] ).

This dissertation reviews the subject of Legendrian varieties and
extends some of recent results.

The first series of results is related to the automorphism group of any
Legendrian subvariety in any projective contact manifold. The connected
component of this group (under suitable minor assumptions) is completely
determined by the sections of the distinguished line bundle on the
contact manifold vanishing on the Legendrian variety. Moreover its
action preserves the contact structure. The relation between the Lie
algebra tangent to automorphisms and the sections is given by an
explicit formula (see also [ LeB95 ] , [ Bea07 ] ). This summarises and
extends some earlier results of the author.

The second series of results is devoted to finding new examples of
smooth Legendrian subvarieties of projective space. The examples found
by other researchers were some homogeneous spaces, many examples of
curves and a family of surfaces birational to some K3 surfaces. Further
the author found a couple of other examples including a smooth toric
surface and a smooth quasihomogeneous Fano 8-fold. Finally, the author
proved both of these are special cases of a very general construction: a
general hyperplane section of a smooth Legendrian variety, after a
suitable projection, is a smooth Legendrian variety of smaller
dimension. We review all of those examples and also add another
infinitely many new examples in every dimension, with various Picard
rank, canonical degree, Kodaira dimension and other invariants.

The original motivation for studying complex Legendrian varieties comes
from a 50 year old problem of giving compact examples of
quaternion-Kähler manifolds (see [ Ber55 ] , [ LS94 ] , [ LeB95 ] and
references therein). Also Legendrian varieties are related to some
algebraic structures (see [ Muk98 ] , [ LM01 ] , [ LM02 ] ). A new
potential application to classification of smooth varieties with smooth
dual arises in this dissertation.
