##### Contents

-    A Introduction
    -    A.1 State of art
        -    A.1.1 Contact manifolds and quaternion-Kähler manifolds
        -    A.1.2 Lines on contact Fano manifold
        -    A.1.3 Legendrian subvarieties of projective space
    -    A.2 Topics of the dissertation
    -    A.3 Open problems
-    B Notation and elementary properties
    -    B.1 Vector spaces and projectivisation
    -    B.2 Bilinear forms and their matrices
    -    B.3 Complex and algebraic manifolds
    -    B.4 Vector bundles, sheaves and sections
    -    B.5 Derivatives
    -    B.6 Homogeneous differential forms and vector fields
    -    B.7 Submersion onto image
    -    B.8 Tangent cone
    -    B.9 Secant, tangent and dual varieties
-    C Vector fields, forms and automorphisms
    -    C.1 Vector fields, Lie bracket and distributions
    -    C.2 Automorphisms
    -    C.3 Line bundles and @xmath -bundles
    -    C.4 Distributions and automorphisms preserving them
    -    C.5 Lifting and descending twisted forms
-    D Elementary symplectic geometry
    -    D.1 Linear symplectic geometry
        -    D.1.1 Symplectic vector space
        -    D.1.2 Subspaces in a symplectic vector space
        -    D.1.3 Symplectic reduction of vector space
        -    D.1.4 Symplectic automorphisms and weks-symplectic matrices
        -    D.1.5 Standard symplectic structure on @xmath
    -    D.2 Symplectic manifolds and their subvarieties
        -    D.2.1 Subvarieties of a symplectic manifold
        -    D.2.2 Examples
    -    D.3 The Poisson bracket
        -    D.3.1 Properties of Poisson bracket
        -    D.3.2 Homogeneous symplectic form
        -    D.3.3 Example: Veronese map of degree 2
-    E Contact geometry
    -    E.1 Projective space as a contact manifold
    -    E.2 Legendrian subvarieties of projective space
        -    E.2.1 Decomposable and degenerate Legendrian subvarieties
    -    E.3 Contact manifolds
        -    E.3.1 Symplectisation
        -    E.3.2 Contact automorphisms
    -    E.4 Legendrian subvarieties in contact manifold
-    F Projective automorphisms of a Legendrian variety
    -    F.1 Discussion of assumptions
    -    F.2 Preservation of contact structure
    -    F.3 Some comments
-    G Toric Legendrian subvarieties in projective space
    -    G.1 Classification of toric Legendrian varieties
    -    G.2 Smooth toric Legendrian surfaces
    -    G.3 Higher dimensional toric Legendrian varieties
-    H Examples of quasihomogeneous Legendrian varieties
    -    H.1 Notation and definitions
    -    H.2 Main results
        -    H.2.1 Generalisation: Representation theory and further
            examples
    -    H.3 @xmath -action and its orbits
        -    H.3.1 Invariant subsets
        -    H.3.2 Action of @xmath
    -    H.4 Legendrian varieties in @xmath
        -    H.4.1 Classification
        -    H.4.2 Degenerate matrices
        -    H.4.3 Invertible matrices
-    I Hyperplane sections of Legendrian subvarieties
    -    I.1 Hyperplane section
        -    I.1.1 Construction
        -    I.1.2 Proof of smoothness
    -    I.2 Linear sections of decomposable Legendrian varieties
    -    I.3 Extending Legendrian varieties
    -    I.4 Smooth varieties with smooth dual

### Acknowledgements

The monograph is built on the author’s PhD thesis [ Buc08a ] .

The author was supported by the research project N20103331/2715 funded
by Polish financial means for science from 2006 to 2008.

The author would like to thank especially his patient advisor Jarosław
Wiśniewski for his comments, support and for answering numerous
questions. Parts of the thesis were written while the author enjoyed the
hospitality of Insong Choe at KIAS (Korea Institute for Advanced Study),
Mark Gross at University of California, San Diego and Joseph
M. Landsberg at Texas A&M University. The author is grateful for their
invitation, financial support and for creating a stimulating atmosphere.
Also the author acknowledges many enlightening discussions with Michel
Brion, Stephen Coughlan, Zbigniew Jelonek, Grzegorz Kapustka, Michał
Kapustka, Michał Krych, Joseph M. Landsberg, Adrian Langer, Laurent
Manivel, Sung Ho Wang and Andrzej Weber. Finally, the author is grateful
to the referees of the thesis: Sławomir Cynk, Laurent Manivel, Henryk
Żołądek and the anonymous referee of this mongraph — their comments have
helped to improve the presentation.

## Chapter A Introduction

]

### a.1 State of art

In this monograph we study algebraic and geometric properties of complex
Legendrian subvarieties. The main motivation for our research comes from
the classification problem of contact Fano manifolds ¹ ¹ 1 A complex
manifold @xmath is called a contact manifold if there exists a rank
@xmath vector subbundle @xmath of the tangent bundle, such that the map
@xmath determined by the Lie bracket is nowhere degenerate (see Chapter
E for more details). A projective manifold is Fano if its anticanonical
line bundle is ample. .

#### a.1.1 Contact manifolds and quaternion-Kähler manifolds

There are two known families of complex projective contact manifolds:
projectivisations of cotangent bundles to projective manifolds (see
Example E.8 ) and certain homogeneous spaces, namely the unique closed
orbit of the adjoint action of a simple Lie group @xmath on @xmath ,
where the @xmath is the Lie algebra of @xmath (see § D.2.2 and Example
E.7 and for more details). These orbits are also called the adjoint
varieties . The following theorem summarises works of Demailly [ Dem02 ]
and Kebekus, Peternell, Sommese and Wiśniewski [ KPSW00 ] :

###### Theorem A.1.

If @xmath is a complex projective contact manifold, then either @xmath
is a projectivisation of the cotangent bundle to some projective
manifold @xmath or @xmath is a Fano manifold with second Betti number
@xmath .

The following conjecture would be an important classification result in
algebraic geometry and it claims that known examples are all existing
examples:

###### Conjecture A.2 (LeBrun, Salamon).

If @xmath is a Fano complex contact manifold, then @xmath is an adjoint
variety.

This conjecture originated with a famous problem in Riemannian geometry.
In 1955 Berger [ Ber55 ] gave a list of all possible holonomy groups ² ²
2 Given an @xmath -dimensional Riemannian manifold @xmath , the holonomy
group of @xmath is the subgroup of orthogonal group @xmath generated by
parallel translations along loops through @xmath . of simply connected
Riemannian manifolds. The existence problem for all the cases has been
solved locally. Compact non-homogeneous examples with most of the
possible holonomy groups were constructed, for instance the two
exceptional cases @xmath and @xmath were constructed by D. Joyce — see
an excellent review on the subject [ Joy00 ] . Since then all the cases
from Berger’s list have been illustrated with compact non-homogeneous
examples, with the unique exception of the quaternion-Kähler manifolds ³
³ 3 A Riemannian @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath is called
quaternion-Kähler if its holonomy group is a subgroup of @xmath . .
Although there exist non-compact, non-homogeneous examples, it is
conjectured that the compact quaternion-Kähler manifolds must be
homogeneous (see [ LeB95 ] and references therein).

###### Conjecture A.3 (LeBrun, Salamon).

Let @xmath be a compact quaternion-Kähler manifold. Then @xmath is a
homogeneous symmetric space (more precisely, it is one of the Wolf
spaces — see [ Wol65 ] ).

The relation between the two conjectures is given by the construction of
a twistor space @xmath , an @xmath -bundle of complex structures on
tangent spaces to a quaternion-Kähler manifold @xmath . If @xmath is
compact, it has positive scalar curvature, and then @xmath has a natural
complex structure and is a contact Fano manifold with a Kähler-Einstein
metric. In particular, the twistor space of a Wolf space is an adjoint
variety. Hence Conjecture A.2 implies Conjecture A.3 . Conversely,
LeBrun [ LeB95 ] observed that if @xmath is a contact Fano manifold with
Kähler-Einstein metric, then it is a twistor space of a
quaternion-Kähler manifold.

A number of attempts have been undertaken to prove the above
conjectures. They were proved in low dimension: for @xmath by N. Hitchin
[ Hit81 ] and Y. Ye [ Ye94 ] , @xmath by Y.S. Poon and S.M. Salamon [
PS91 ] and S. Druel [ Dru98 ] and Conjecture A.3 for @xmath by
H.&R. Herrera [ HH02 ] . Moreover A. Beauville, J. Wiśniewski,
S. Kebekus, T. Peternell, A. Sommese, J.P. Demailly, C. LeBrun,
J-M. Hwang and many other researchers have worked on this problem.

#### a.1.2 Lines on contact Fano manifold

If @xmath is a contact complex manifold, then a subvariety @xmath of
pure dimension @xmath is Legendrian if it is maximally @xmath
-integrable — see Chapter E for the details.

Let @xmath be a contact Fano manifold not isomorphic to a projective
space. A rational curve @xmath is a contact line if its intersection
with the anticanonical line bundle is minimal possible, i.e. equal to
@xmath . Contact lines on @xmath are an instance of minimal rational
curve on uniruled manifold and they are extensively studied by numerous
researchers. Wiśniewski [ Wiś00 ] and Kebekus [ Keb01 ] , [ Keb05 ] have
studied geometric properties of contact lines. The following theorem is
due to Kebekus [ Keb05 ] , but some parts of it were known before:

###### Theorem A.4.

With @xmath as above choose a point @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the subscheme parametrising contact lines through @xmath , let @xmath
be the locus of these lines (i.e. the subset swept out by contact lines
through @xmath ) and let @xmath be the projectivised tangent cone to
@xmath at @xmath (so that @xmath is the set of tangent directions at
@xmath to lines through @xmath ). Then:

1.  @xmath is projective and @xmath is closed in @xmath .

2.  @xmath is a Legendrian subvariety and @xmath and @xmath is a
    non-degenerate Legendrian subvariety in @xmath .

3.   If @xmath is a general point, then @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath
    (in other words every line through @xmath is determined by its
    tangent direction) and @xmath is smooth.

4.   If @xmath is a general point, then @xmath is isomorphic to the
    projective cone @xmath over @xmath . This isomorphism maps the
    contact line through @xmath tangent to @xmath onto the line @xmath .
    In particular two distinct lines through @xmath do not intersect
    except at @xmath . Moreover the distinguished line bundle @xmath
    restricted to @xmath is identified with @xmath via this isomorphism.

Note that in [ Keb05 , Thm 1.1] Kebekus also claims that a certain
irreducibility holds for @xmath . However it was observed by Kebekus
himself together with the author that there is a gap in the proof ⁴ ⁴ 4
This gap is on page 234 in Step 2 of proof of Proposition 3.2 where
Kebekus claims to construct “a well defined family of cycles”. This is
not necessarily a well defined family of cycles: condition (3.10.4) in [
Kol96 , §I.3.10] is not necessarily satisfied. As a consequence the map
@xmath is not necessarily regular at non-normal points of @xmath . .

Thus contact lines through a general point behave very much like
ordinary lines in a projective space. Moreover their geometry is
described by a nondegenerate smooth Legendrian subvariety @xmath in
@xmath . If @xmath is one of the adjoint varieties, then @xmath will be
a homogeneous Legendrian subvariety called a subadjoint variety (see [
LM07 ] , [ Muk98 ] ). Proving that there is an embedding of @xmath into
a projective space which maps contact lines to ordinary lines would
imply Conjecture A.2 . Moreover it is proved by Hong [ Hon00 ] , that if
@xmath is homogeneous, then so is @xmath . Therefore contact lines and
particularly the Legendrian varieties determined by them are important
objects, useful in the study of Conjecture A.2 .

#### a.1.3 Legendrian subvarieties of projective space

Prior to the author’s research the following were the only known
examples of smooth Legendrian subvarieties of projective space (see [
Bry82 ] , [ LM07 ] ):

1.  linear subspaces;

2.  some homogeneous spaces called subadjoint varieties (see Table A.1
    ): the product of a line and a quadric @xmath and five exceptional
    cases:

    -   twisted cubic curve @xmath ,

    -   Grassmannian @xmath of Lagrangian subspaces in @xmath ,

    -   full Grassmannian @xmath ,

    -   spinor variety @xmath (i.e. the homogeneous @xmath -space
        parametrising the vector subspaces of dimension @xmath contained
        in a non-degenerate quadratic cone in @xmath ) and

    -   the 27-dimensional @xmath -variety in @xmath corresponding to
        the marked root: [] ;

3.  every smooth projective curve admits a Legendrian embedding in
    @xmath (see [ Bry82 ] );

4.  a family of smooth surfaces birational to the Kummer @xmath
    -surfaces (see [ LM07 ] ).

The subadjoint varieties are expected to be the only homogeneous
Legendrian subvarieties in @xmath (for @xmath ). Many partial results
are known. For instance the following Theorem is traditionally known:

###### Theorem A.5.

If @xmath is homogeneous and Legendrian and the Legendrian embedding is
equivariant (i.e. the automorphisms of @xmath extend to linear
automorphisms of @xmath ), then @xmath is one of the subadjoint
varieties.

To the author’s best knowledge the statement of the theorem has not been
explicitly written down before, but according to J.M. Landsberg, already
E. Cartan have known which homogeneous spaces are Legendrian. Also the
theorem immediatelly follows from various resources. As one instance,
the subadjoint varieties are the only smooth irreducible Legendrian
varieties whose ideal is generated by quadratic polynomials (see [ Buc06
] ). But it is a well known theorem of Kostant, that homogeneous space
in its equivariant embedding has the ideal generated by quadrics (see
for instance [ Pro07 , §10.6.6] ).

Also Landsberg and Manivel proved [ LM07 , Thm. 11] :

###### Theorem A.6.

Let @xmath be a homogeneous space with Picard number one. Suppose that
@xmath admits a Legendrian embedding into @xmath , not necessarily
equivariant a priori. Then @xmath is subadjoint. In particular, the
Legendrian embedding is the equivariant subadjoint embedding.

The subadjoint varieties are strongly related to the group they arise
from. In Landsberg and Manivel [ LM02 ] use the subadjoint varieties to
reconstruct the adjoint variety they arise from. And thus the subadjoint
varieties are one of essential ingridients of their proof of the
classification of simple Lie groups by means of projective geometry
only. Also Mukai [ Muk98 ] relates the subadjoint Legendrian varieties
with another algebraic structure: simple Jordan algebras. In [ LM01 ]
the authors give a uniform description of the exceptional cases (arising
from @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ).

For an arbitrary Legendrian subvariety in projective space, Landsberg
and Manivel proved certain restrictions on its topology, the simpliest
of which is:

###### Theorem A.7.

Let @xmath be a smooth Legendrian variety, let @xmath be the hyperplane
class and @xmath be the @xmath -th Chern class of @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives in particular the following restrictions on @xmath :

-   @xmath cannot be an abelian variety or parallelisable variety.

-    If @xmath for @xmath , then @xmath is a linear subspace.

-    Suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath and the Legendrian embedding is
    the Segre embedding.

-    If @xmath , the total space of a @xmath bundle over some smooth
    variety @xmath , then @xmath .

Note that the statement in [ LM07 , Prop. 3] suggests that the Chern
class identities hold in @xmath , yet their proof uses cohomologies with
rational coefficients (they use @xmath and Chern character @xmath ).

Further restrictions on topology of @xmath where derived if @xmath , see
[ LM07 ] for details.

Also the authors there proved [ LM07 , Prop. 17(2)] :

###### Proposition A.8.

Let @xmath be a non-degenerate Legendrian variety. Then:

-    the secant variety @xmath fills out @xmath (i.e. it is of expected
    dimension).

-    if @xmath is in addition smooth, then the tangent variety @xmath
    and the dual variety @xmath are hypersurfaces isomorphic via @xmath

See § B.9 for definitions of secant, tangent and dual varieties. See §
B.2 for definition of @xmath . Here the symplectic form @xmath is the
form associated with the contact structure on @xmath (see Example E.10
). The statement about secant variety is contained in the proof [ LM07 ,
Prop. 17(2)] .

For tangent and dual varieties, we note that original formulation in [
LM07 ] omits the smoothness assumption. If @xmath is not smooth however,
their proof does not work and the decomposable Legendrian varieties (see
§ E.2.1 ) are counterexamples. In the proof the authors freely
interchange the tangent variety @xmath (which by definition is the union
of the limits of secants through two points approaching a third fixed
point) and the closure of the union of embedded tangent spaces at smooth
points. These are the same for @xmath smooth. The tangent variety @xmath
is indeed a hypersurface in the secant variety @xmath . The closure of
the embedded tangent spaces at smooth points is indeed isomorphic to
@xmath .

### a.2 Topics of the dissertation

This dissertation addresses two complementary problems regarding
Legendrian varieties:

-   write explicit restrictions on the properties of Legendrian
    varieties;

-   give examples of smooth Legendrian varieties.

The first problem we address by giving a very precise understanding of
the embedded automorphism group of a Legendrian variety. The second
problem is solved by proving that a general hyperplane section of a
smooth Legendrian variety admits a Legendrian embedding.

In [ Buc03 ] , we prove that the quadratic part of the ideal of a
Legendrian subvariety @xmath of projective space @xmath produces a
connected subgroup of projective automorphisms of @xmath . In [ Buc06 ]
we improve this result by observing that this group is actually the
maximal connected subgroup of automorphisms of the contact structure on
@xmath preserving the Legendrian subvariety. This relation is
explicitely defined:

###### Theorem A.9.

Let @xmath be a Legendrian subvariety. Consider the following map @xmath
:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the matrix of @xmath and @xmath is the matrix of the
symplectic form on @xmath associated with the contact structure on
@xmath . Let @xmath be the vector space of quadrics containing @xmath .
Then:

-   @xmath is a Lie subalgebra of @xmath tangent to a closed subgroup

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    We have the natural action of @xmath on @xmath . The group @xmath
    is the maximal connected subgroup in @xmath which under this action
    preserves @xmath .

For proof see [ Buc06 , Cor. 4.4, Cor. 5.5, Lem. 5.6] .

In the present dissertation we extend this result further. Firstly, we
replace projective space @xmath with an arbitrary contact manifold
@xmath :

###### Theorem A.10.

Let @xmath be a compact contact manifold and let @xmath be a Legendrian
subvariety. Then the connected component of the subgroup of @xmath that
preserves both the contact structure and @xmath , is completely
determined by those sections of a distinguished line bundle @xmath on
@xmath that vanish on @xmath .

See Corollary E.23 for proof. In Theorem E.13 (quoted from [ Bea98 ] )
we also make explicit how to obtain an infinitesimal automorphism of
@xmath from a given section of @xmath (the analogue of the map @xmath in
Theorem A.9 ).

Secondly, we try to remove the assumption that the automorphisms
preserve the contact structure. By applying the results of [ LeB95 ] and
[ Keb01 ] on the uniqueness of contact structures we can deal with this
problem for most projective contact Fano manifolds (see Corollary E.23
). The remaining cases are the projectivised cotangent bundles and the
projective space. The first case is not very interesting, as all the
Legendrian subvarieties are classified for these contact manifolds (see
Corollary E.17 ). On the other hand the case of projective space is the
most important and interesting. It is described precisely in Chapter F .
We present there the following theorem originally proved in [ Buc07 ] :

###### Theorem A.11.

If @xmath is a smooth irreducible Legendrian subvariety which is not a
linear subspace and @xmath is a connected subgroup preserving @xmath ,
then the action of @xmath on @xmath necessarily preserves the contact
structure. Thus in this case the group @xmath from Theorem A.9 is also
the maximal connected subgroup in @xmath which preserves @xmath .

Our methodology for finding new examples of smooth Legendrian
subvarieties is the following. We pose questions of classification of
smooth Legendrian varieties satisfying certain additional conditions.
For instance, we assume that the variety is toric (see Chapter G , which
follows [ Buc07 ] ):

###### Theorem A.12.

Every smooth toric Legendrian variety of dimension at least @xmath in a
projective space, whose embedding is torus equivariant is isomorphic to
one of the following:

-    a linear subspace,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath

-    or @xmath blown up in three non-colinear points.

For proofs see Corollaries G.6 and G.10 . The linear subspace is not
really interesting, the products @xmath and @xmath are well known (see §
A.1.3 ). The last case of blow up was an original example of [ Buc07 ] .

We also classify those smooth Legendrian varieties, which are contained
in a specific @xmath -cointegrable variety (see Chapter H , which
follows [ Buc09 ] ). In this way we produce a few new smooth examples
including a quasihomogeneous Fano 8-fold:

###### Theorem A.13.

A general hyperplane section of @xmath admits a Legendrian embedding
into @xmath .

Finally following [ Buc08b ] we generalise this and prove that a general
hyperplane section of a smooth Legendrian variety admits a Legendrian
embedding into a smaller projective space:

###### Theorem A.14.

Let @xmath be an irreducible Legendrian subvariety, which is smooth or
has only isolated singularities. Then a general hyperplane section of
@xmath admits a Legendrian embedding into a projective space of
appropriate dimension via a specific subsystem of the linear system
@xmath .

More generally, assume @xmath is an irreducible Legendrian subvariety
with singular locus of dimension @xmath and @xmath is a general
hyperplane. Then there exists a variety @xmath whose singular locus has
dimension at most @xmath and which has an open subset isomorphic to the
smooth locus of @xmath such that @xmath admits a Legendrian embedding.

The specific linear system and construction of @xmath is described in §
I.1.1 and there we prove that the resulting variety is Legendrian. The
proof that for a general section the result has the required smoothness
property is presented in § I.1.2 .

This simple observation has quite strong consequences. Many researchers,
including Landsberg, Manivel, Wiśniewski, Hwang and the author of this
dissertation, believed that the structure of smooth Legendrian
subvarieties in projective space had to be somehow rigid at least in
higher dimensions. So far the only non-rational examples known were in
dimensions 1 and 2 (see § A.1.3 ) and these were also the only known to
come in families. Already by a naive application of the theorem to the
subadjoint varieties we get many more examples with various properties:

###### Example A.15.

The following smooth varieties and families of smooth varieties admit
Legendrian embedding:

-    a family of @xmath surfaces of genus 9;

-    three different types of surfaces of general type;

-    some Calabi-Yau 3-folds, some Calabi-Yau 5-folds and some
    Calabi-Yau 9-folds;

-    some varieties of general type in dimensions 3, 4 (two families for
    every dimension), 5,6,7 and 8 (one family per dimension);

-    some Fano varieties, like the blow up of a quadric @xmath in a
    codimension 2 hyperplane section @xmath , a family of Del Pezzo
    surfaces of degree 4 and others;

-    infinitely many non-isomorphic, non-homogeneous Legendrian
    varieties in every dimension arising as a codimension @xmath linear
    section of @xmath .

Example (a) agrees with the prediction of [ LM07 , §2.3] . Examples (b)
and (d) give a partial answer to the question of a possible Kodaira
dimension of a Legendrian variety (also see [ LM07 , §2.3] ). Example
(f) is a counterexample to the naive expectation that Legendrian variety
in a sufficiently high dimension must be homogeneous.

We also note that the previous non-homogeneous examples also arise in
this way. Example (e) for @xmath is the toric example described in
Example G.4 . Hyperplane sections of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are
studied in more details in Chapter H . Also non-homogeneous examples of
the other authors, Bryant [ Bry82 ] , Landsberg and Manivel [ LM07 ] can
be reconstructed by Theorem A.14 from some varieties with only isolated
singularities (see § I.3 ).

In this monograph we also demonstrate a more refined construction, using
the decomposable Legendrian varieties, which also uses Theorem A.14 (see
§ E.2.1 ). This makes even bigger list of examples, in particular we
obtained varieties of general type in every dimension:

###### Theorem A.16.

Asume @xmath and @xmath are two integers such that either:

-   @xmath and @xmath or

-   @xmath and @xmath .

Then there exist a smooth irreducible projective variety @xmath of
dimension @xmath , Kodaira dimension @xmath and rank of Picard group
@xmath which admits Legendrian embedding into projective space @xmath .

With this method we are also able to give new examples from old ones
without dropping the dimension. This is described in detail in § I.2 .

All the varieties arising from Theorem A.14 and our construction in §
I.1.1 are embedded by a non-complete linear system. Therefore a natural
question arises: can the construction be inverted? So for a given
Legendrian but not linearly normal embedding of some variety @xmath ,
can we find a bigger Legendrian variety @xmath , such that @xmath is a
projection of a hyperplane section of @xmath ?

Following [ Buc08b ] and building upon ideas of Bryant, Landsberg and
Manivel we suggest a construction that provides some (but far from
perfect) answer for this question in § I.3 :

###### Theorem A.17.

Let @xmath be an irreducible Legendrian subvariety. Then there exist a
Legendrian subvariety @xmath , a hyperplane @xmath and a irreducible
component of @xmath , such that @xmath is the image of this component
under the projection described in § I.1.1 .

This theorem is a simplified version of Theorem I.9 .

In particular, we represent the example of Landsberg and Manivel as a
hyperplane section of a 3-fold with only isolated singularities and the
examples of Bryant as hyperplane sections of surfaces with at most
isolated singularities.

Chapter B is devoted to introducing our notation and presenting some
elementary algebro-geometric facts.

Chapter C revises the differential geometric properties of infinitesimal
automorphisms that are necessary for Chapter E , but can be expressed
without any explicit reference to the contact structure.

Chapter D is a brief revision of symplectic geometry that will be used
in our discussion of contact manifolds. Also some statements from [
Buc06 ] are generalised to this context.

Chapter E contains an independent review of local geometry of contact
manifolds, with emphasis on their infinitesimal automorphisms. There we
compare (after [ LeB95 ] and [ Bea07 ] ) two natural Lie algebra
structures related to a contact manifold @xmath : the Lie bracket of
vector fields and the Poisson bracket on the structure sheaf of the
symplectisation of @xmath . We use this comparison to prove the first
theorem on embedded automorphisms of Legendrian subvarieties (see
Theorem A.10 ).

In Chapters F – I we turn our attention to Legendrian subvarieties of a
projective space.

In Chapter F we continue the topic of automorphisms of Legendrian
varieties. We prove the second theorem on embedded automorphisms of
Legendrian subvarieties in a projective space (see Theorem A.11 ). The
results of this chapter are published in [ Buc07 ] .

In Chapter G we illustrate, in the case of subvarieties of projective
space, how to classify toric Legendrian subvarieties and we give the
list of all smooth cases (see Theorem A.12 ) Also the results of that
chapter are published in [ Buc07 ] .

Chapter H contains the classification of Legendrian varieties, which are
contained in a specific @xmath -cointegrable variety. Another new
example arises in this way: the smooth quasihomogeneous 8-fold (see
Theorem A.13 ). Also we present two other variants of the construction,
producing a smooth 5-fold and a smooth 14-fold. The contents of that
chapter are published in [ Buc09 ] .

Finally Chapter I describes a Legendrian embedding of a hyperplane
section of a Legendrian variety (see Theorem A.14 ). Also a variant of
an inverse construction (i.e. to describe a bigger Legendrian variety
from a given one, such that a hyperplane section of the big one is the
original one) is presented and is applied to Bryant’s, Landsberg’s and
Manivel’s examples of smooth Legendrian varieties (see Theorem A.17 ).
Parts of that chapter are published in [ Buc08b ] . The new parts of
this chapter are § I.2 , where we construct a new series of examples
(see Theorem A.16 ) and § I.4 , where we explain the relation of certain
Legendrian varieties with smooth varieties with smooth dual.

### a.3 Open problems

Keeping in mind the elegant results sketched in § A.1 and having many
new examples of smooth Legendrian varieties (as well as families of
such), several natural questions remain unanswered.

##### New contact manifolds?

Can we construct a new example of a contact manifold, whose variety of
tangent directions to contact lines is one of the new Legendrian
varieties (or is in the given family)? If Conjecture A.2 is true, then
the answer is negative. If the answer is negative, then what are the
obstructions, i.e., what conditions should we require on the Legendrian
variety to make the reconstruction of contact manifold possible?

##### Further applications to algebra?

Can the new Legendrian varieties be used in a similar manner as the
subadjoint cases and will they prove themselves to be equally
extraordinary varieties? The first tiny piece of evidence for this is
explained in § H.2.1 . On the other hand, it is unlikely that such a big
variety of examples can have analogous special properties.

##### Self-dual varieties?

Another problem we want to mention here is a classical question in
projective geometry: what are the smooth subvarieties of projective
space, whose dual variety ⁵ ⁵ 5 Given a subvariety @xmath , the dual
variety @xmath is the closure of the set of hyperplanes tangent to
@xmath , see § B.9 for details. is also smooth? So far the only examples
of these are the self-dual varieties. Thanks to L. Ein [ Ein86 ] , the
classification of smooth self-dual varieties @xmath is known when @xmath
. In Corollary I.16 we prove that the problem of classifying smooth
varieties with smooth dual can be expressed in terms of Legendrian
varieties and possibly we can apply the techniques of Legendrian
varieties to finish the classification.

##### Projectively and linearly normal Legendrian varieties?

We dare to conjecture:

###### Conjecture A.18.

Let @xmath be a smooth linearly normal ⁶ ⁶ 6 A subvariety @xmath is
linearly normal if it is embedded by a complete linear system.
Legendrian variety. Then @xmath is one of the subadjoint varieties.

In the view of Theorems A.14 and A.17 , the classification of linearly
normal Legendrian varieties might be a necessary step towards a
classification of Legendrian varieties.

Furthermore, the conjecture might also contribute to the proof of
Conjecture A.2 . For instance assume Conjecture A.18 holds and @xmath is
a contact Fano manifold, for which the variety cut out by contact lines
through a general point is normal. Then by applying Theorem A.4 we get
that the associated Legendrian variety @xmath is projectively normal ⁷ ⁷
7 A subvariety @xmath is projectively normal if its affine cone is
normal. If @xmath is projectively normal, then it is also linearly
normal by [ Har77 , Ex. II.5.14(d)] and by the conjecture and results of
[ Hon00 ] the manifold @xmath is an adjoint variety.

The author is able to prove Conjecture A.18 if @xmath , but this is not
an elegant argument nor does it have important applications. We omit the
proof here until we manage to improve the argument or to generalise it
to higher dimensions.

## Chapter B Notation and elementary properties

In the present monograph we always work over the field of complex
numbers @xmath .

### b.1 Vector spaces and projectivisation

Let @xmath be a vector space over @xmath . By @xmath we mean the naive
projectivisation of @xmath , i.e. the quotient @xmath .

If @xmath , then by @xmath we denote the line spanned by @xmath .

Analogously, if @xmath is a vector bundle, by @xmath we denote the naive
projectivisation of @xmath . Let @xmath be the zero section of @xmath .
If @xmath , then by @xmath we denote the line spanned by @xmath in the
appropriate fibre of @xmath .

### b.2 Bilinear forms and their matrices

Let @xmath be a complex vector space of dimension @xmath and @xmath a
bilinear form on @xmath . Fix a basis @xmath of @xmath and let @xmath be
the @xmath -matrix such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary column vectors of @xmath . We say
that @xmath is the matrix of @xmath in the basis @xmath .

In particular if @xmath is a symplectic form (see § D.1.1 ), @xmath and
@xmath is a symplectic basis, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover in such a case @xmath is also the matrix of the linear map
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

in the basis @xmath on @xmath and the dual basis on @xmath .

Similarly, if @xmath is a quadratic form on @xmath , then we denote by
@xmath the matrix of @xmath in the basis @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### b.3 Complex and algebraic manifolds

Our main concern is with complex projective manifolds and varieties.
This is where two categories meet: complex algebraic varieties and
analytic spaces (see [ Gri74 ] ). Since the author’s origins lie in
algebraic geometry, this monograph’s intention is to study algebraic
Legendrian varieties. However, for some statements there is no reason to
limit to the algebraic case, so we state them also for the analytic
situation.

So @xmath will be usually the ambient manifold (for example contact or
symplectic manifold), either a complex manifold or smooth algebraic
variety. Some statements are local for @xmath (in the analytic
topology), hence it is enough to prove them for @xmath , where @xmath is
a complex disc.

Our main interest is in @xmath , which will be either an analytic
subspace (if @xmath is a complex manifold), or an algebraic subvariety
(if @xmath is algebraic). For short, will always say @xmath is a
subvariety.

### b.4 Vector bundles, sheaves and sections

Given an analytic space or algebraic variety @xmath , we denote by
@xmath both the structure sheaf (consisting of either holomorphic or
algebraic functions on @xmath in the appropriate analytic or Zariski
topology) and the trivial line bundle. If @xmath is a subvariety, then
by @xmath we mean the sheaf of ideals in @xmath defining @xmath .

Given a vector bundle @xmath on @xmath we will use the same letter
@xmath for the sheaf of sections of @xmath . To avoid confusion and too
many brackets (for example @xmath ) given an open subset @xmath and a
sheaf (or vector bundle) @xmath , we will write @xmath rather than
@xmath to mean the value of the sheaf at the open subset @xmath (or
sections of vector bundle). By @xmath we mean the sheaf (or vector
bundle) restriction of @xmath to the open subset @xmath .

Where there can be no confusion, given a sheaf @xmath which does not
have any natural vector bundle structure we will write @xmath to mean:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, if @xmath is a vector bundle, then by @xmath , we
mean that @xmath is a vector in the bundle.

Given a vector bundle @xmath , we denote by @xmath the dual vector
bundle:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a map of sheaves or vector bundles and @xmath , then by
@xmath we mean the image section of @xmath .

### b.5 Derivatives

Given a complex manifold or smooth algebraic variety @xmath and a
holomorphic or algebraic @xmath -form @xmath by @xmath we denote the
exterior derivative of @xmath . This convention is also valid for @xmath
-forms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By @xmath we mean the tangent vector bundle. Nevertheless we keep in
mind, that a vector field @xmath can also be interpreted as a derivation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, we can define the Lie bracket of two vector fields @xmath
as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This convention is in agreement with [ Arn74 ] .

Given a holomorphic or algebraic map @xmath , by @xmath we mean the
derivative map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath , then by @xmath we mean the contracted @xmath
-form. For example, if @xmath for 1-forms @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### b.6 Homogeneous differential forms and vector fields

Let @xmath , @xmath be two complex manifolds and let @xmath be a
holomorphic map. For a @xmath -form @xmath , by @xmath we denote the
pull-back of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now assume we have a @xmath -action on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath is homogeneous of weight @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For example, assume @xmath and @xmath acts via homotheties. We say
@xmath is constant , if it is a @xmath -linear combination of @xmath .
Constant @xmath forms are homogeneous of weight @xmath (not of weight 0
as one could possibly expect). Conversely, if @xmath is homogeneous of
weight @xmath , then it is constant, because every global form can be
written as @xmath . Since @xmath are already of weight @xmath , it
follows that @xmath are constant functions.

Let @xmath be a vector field. We say @xmath is homogeneous of weight
@xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma B.1.

Let @xmath , @xmath be complex manifolds, both with a @xmath -action.
Moreover assume @xmath is a @xmath -equivariant map, @xmath is a
homogeneous @xmath -form for some @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are two
homogeneous vector fields.

1.  @xmath is homogeneous and @xmath ;

2.  @xmath is homogeneous of weight @xmath and @xmath is homogeneous of
    weight @xmath ;

3.  @xmath is homogeneous of weight @xmath .

Proof. This is an immediate calculation. For instance (i) :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

### b.7 Submersion onto image

We recall the standard fact, that every algebraic map is generically a
submersion on the closure of the image.

###### Lemma B.2.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two algebraic varieties over an algebraically
closed field of characteristic 0 and let @xmath be a map such that
@xmath . Then for a general @xmath , the derivative @xmath is
surjective.

Proof. See [ Har77 , Cor. III.10.7] .

@xmath

As a corollary, we prove an easy proposition about subvarieties of
product manifolds.

###### Proposition B.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two smooth algebraic varieties and suppose
@xmath is a closed irreducible subvariety. Let @xmath be the closure of
the image of @xmath under the projection @xmath onto @xmath . Assume
that for a Zariski open dense subset of smooth points @xmath the tangent
bundle to @xmath decomposes as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a sum of two vector bundles. Then @xmath .

Proof. Since @xmath is irreducible, so is @xmath and @xmath and clearly
@xmath . So it is enough to prove that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, the maps @xmath are surjective onto @xmath and hence applying
Lemma B.2 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

### b.8 Tangent cone

We recall the notion of the tangent cone and a few among many of its
properties. For more details and the proofs we refer to [ Har95 ,
Lecture 20] and [ Mum99 , III.§3,§4] .

For an irreducible Noetherian scheme @xmath over @xmath and a closed
point @xmath we consider the local ring @xmath and we let @xmath be the
maximal ideal in @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is just the whole of @xmath . Now we define the tangent
cone @xmath at @xmath to @xmath to be @xmath .

If @xmath is a subscheme of an affine space @xmath (which we will
usually assume to be an affine piece of a projective space), the tangent
cone at @xmath to @xmath can be understood as a subscheme of @xmath .
Its equations can be derived from the ideal of @xmath . For simplicity
assume @xmath and then the polynomials defining @xmath are the lowest
degree homogeneous parts of the polynomials in the ideal of @xmath .

Another interesting point-wise definition is that @xmath is a closed
point if and only if there exists a holomorphic map @xmath from the disc
@xmath to @xmath , such that @xmath and the first non-zero coefficient
in the Taylor expansion in @xmath of @xmath is @xmath , i.e.:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We list some of the properties of the tangent cone, which will be used
freely in the proofs:

-   The dimension of every component of @xmath is equal to the dimension
    of @xmath .

-   @xmath is naturally embedded in the Zariski tangent space to @xmath
    at @xmath and @xmath spans (as a scheme) the tangent space.

-   @xmath is regular at @xmath if and only if @xmath is equal (as a
    scheme) to the tangent space.

### b.9 Secant, tangent and dual varieties

Let @xmath be a vector space of dimension @xmath . Let @xmath be any
subvariety.

We denote by @xmath its secant variety , i.e., closure of the union of
all projective lines through @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath vary
through all pairs of different points of @xmath .

By @xmath we denote the tangent variety of @xmath , i.e. the closure of
the union of limits of secant lines as @xmath converges to @xmath .

Also:

###### Definition.

We let @xmath be the closure of the set of hyperplanes tangent to @xmath
at some point:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say @xmath is the dual variety to @xmath .

## Chapter C Vector fields, forms and automorphisms

In the course of this dissertation, particularly in Chapter E we use
some differential geometric facts, which we summarise in this chapter.
Although all these facts are standard or follow easily from the standard
material, we reproduce or at least sketch most of the proofs. We do this
for the sake of completeness of the material presented in the monograph
and also because various authors of textbooks use various notations and
combining them one can get very confused (at least this has happened to
the author of this monograph).

### c.1 Vector fields, Lie bracket and distributions

Let @xmath be a complex manifold or a smooth algebraic variety, let
@xmath be a corank @xmath subbundle ¹ ¹ 1 One could also consider @xmath
to be a corank @xmath subbundle for any @xmath . Some of the statements
below can be generalised to any @xmath (not necessary @xmath ), but the
proofs get more complicated, especially in notation. We restrict our
considerations to the @xmath case, as this is the only one used in the
dissertation. and let @xmath be the quotient map, so that the following
sequence is exact:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also assume @xmath is an open subset. We say that a (possibly singular)
subvariety @xmath with its smooth locus @xmath is @xmath -integrable if
@xmath is contained in @xmath .

###### Proposition C.1.

With the assumptions as above:

1.  @xmath gives a well defined map of @xmath -modules:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We refer to this map as the twisted 2-form @xmath .

2.   Assume @xmath and @xmath are two vector fields on @xmath , both
    contained in @xmath . Then @xmath . In particular @xmath does not
    depend on the vector fields, but only on their values at @xmath .

3.   Again assume @xmath and @xmath are two vector fields on @xmath ,
    but now only @xmath is contained in @xmath . Then again @xmath
    depends only on the value of @xmath at @xmath , but not on the whole
    vector field. In other words the map of sheaves @xmath given by
    @xmath is @xmath -linear and hence it determines a map of vector
    bundles @xmath .

4.   If @xmath is @xmath -integrable, then @xmath . In particular:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Proof. All the statements are analytically local, so it is enough to
assume that @xmath is a disc @xmath with coordinates @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and that @xmath is a nowhere vanishing section of @xmath (the
choice of the trivialisation of @xmath is of course not unique):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the collection @xmath (respectively @xmath ) we denote by @xmath
(respectively @xmath ). Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To prove (i) note that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We must check that this does not depend on the choice of the
trivialisation @xmath of @xmath . So assume @xmath is a different
trivialisation, so there exists @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We must prove that @xmath restricted to @xmath transforms in the same
manner:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To prove (ii) let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for some holomorphic functions @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath are contained in @xmath we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore for every @xmath or @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We note that the above calculation is a special case of [ KN96 ,
Prop. I.3.11] , though the reader should be careful, as the notation in
[ KN96 ] is different than ours and as a consequence a constant factor
@xmath is “missing” in our formula.

The proof of (iii) is identical as the beginning of the proof of (ii) .

Finally to prove (iv) just use (ii) and the fact that the Lie bracket of
two vector fields tangent to @xmath must be tangent to @xmath .

@xmath

### c.2 Automorphisms

Here we introduce the notation about several types of automorphisms of a
manifold @xmath and its subvariety @xmath . Also we recall some standard
properties and relations between them.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold (or respectively, smooth algebraic
variety) and let @xmath be an open subset in analytic (or respectively,
Zariski) topology. By @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) we denote the group
of holomorphic (respectively, algebraic) automorphisms of @xmath . By
@xmath we mean either @xmath or @xmath , whenever specifying is not
necessary.

Assume that a complex Lie group (respectively, an algebraic group)
@xmath acts on @xmath , i.e. we have a group homomorphism @xmath . Also
let @xmath be the Lie algebra of @xmath . By @xmath we denote the the
connected component of identity in @xmath .

An infinitesimal automorphism of @xmath is a vector field @xmath .
Differentiating the action map @xmath by the first coordinate we get the
induced map @xmath or more precisely @xmath . This map preserves the Lie
bracket (see [ Akh95 , Thm in §1.7] ) and if the action is faithful,
then it is injective (see [ Akh95 , Thm in §1.5] ).

The particular case is when @xmath . Then we get a map @xmath and we set
@xmath to be the image of @xmath under this map. We say @xmath is the
vector field related to the @xmath -action. Note that @xmath is
homogeneous of weight @xmath .

The infinitesimal automorphisms make a sheaf @xmath of Lie algebras,
which at the same time is an @xmath -module. The two multiplication
structures are related by the following Leibniz rule:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following theorem comparing infinitesimal, algebraic and holomorphic
automorphisms for a projective variety is well known and standard:

###### Theorem C.4.

Let Y be a projective variety. Then:

1.  @xmath is a complex Lie group.

2.   Every holomorphic automorphism of @xmath is algebraic and hence

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   By @xmath we denote the tangent Lie algebra to @xmath . Every
    infinitesimal automorphism is tangent to some 1-parameter subgroup
    of @xmath , so that @xmath .

Proof. Part (i) is proved in [ Akh95 , §2.3] . Part (ii) is a
consequence of [ Gri74 , Thm IV.A] . Part (iii) is explained in [ Akh95
, Prop. in §1.5 & Cor. 1 in §1.8] .

@xmath

Clearly @xmath is a representation of @xmath and hence also of @xmath .
We also have the following Lie algebra action of the sheaf of
infinitesimal automorphisms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is given by the derivation in the direction of the vector field.

The action of @xmath on @xmath is the composition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a subvariety. By @xmath we denote the respective subgroup
of @xmath preserving the intersection @xmath . If @xmath is projective,
then by @xmath we mean the Lie algebra tangent to @xmath . By @xmath we
denote the Lie algebra of infinitesimal automorphisms of @xmath
preserving @xmath , i.e.:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the sheaf of ideals of @xmath .

Clearly, if @xmath preserves @xmath , then the image of @xmath is
contained in @xmath . Conversely, if the image is contained in @xmath ,
then the action of the connected component @xmath preserves @xmath .

###### Corollary C.5.

If @xmath is projective, then @xmath .

@xmath

Moreover @xmath makes in @xmath a subsheaf of Lie algebras and @xmath
-modules.

### c.3 Line bundles and @xmath-bundles

Let @xmath be complex manifold or a smooth algebraic variety and let
@xmath be a line bundle on @xmath . By @xmath we denote the principal
@xmath -bundle over @xmath obtained as the line bundle @xmath with the
zero section removed. Let @xmath be the projection @xmath .

Let @xmath be the sheaf of graded @xmath -algebras @xmath on @xmath .
Given an open subset @xmath the ring @xmath consists of all the
algebraic functions on @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath is the set of homogeneous functions of weight @xmath
(see § B.6 ).

###### Lemma C.6.

Let @xmath be a smooth algebraic variety and let @xmath be a line bundle
on @xmath . Then @xmath and the map @xmath is induced by the projection
@xmath .

Proof. The Picard group of the total space of @xmath is isomorphic to
@xmath and the isomorphisms are given by the projection and the zero
section @xmath . Further, @xmath is a Cartier divisor linearly
equivalent to any other rational section @xmath . Therefore @xmath and
hence by [ Har77 , Prop. 6.5(c)] the following sequence is exact:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

@xmath

The relative tangent bundle, i.e. @xmath is trivialised by the vector
field @xmath related to the action of @xmath (see § C.2 ) and hence we
have the short exact sequence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular @xmath .

### c.4 Distributions and automorphisms preserving them

Let @xmath be a corank 1 vector subbundle. Our particular interest will
be in the case where @xmath is a contact distribution - see § E.3 for
the definition. But what follows holds true for any @xmath . By @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we denote the appropriate
automorphisms or infinitesimal automorphisms preserving @xmath and
possibly the subvariety @xmath .

For instance,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also @xmath makes a sheaf of Lie algebras, but usually it is not an
@xmath -submodule of @xmath . To see that take any @xmath for @xmath
small enough. Assume for all @xmath we have @xmath . Then by Leibniz
rule (see Equation C.3 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can only happen if either:

-   @xmath or

-   @xmath , i.e. @xmath is the rank 0 bundle.

We will see that the first case does not happen if @xmath is a contact
distribution (unless @xmath , see Theorem E.13 (1) ). In fact, one can
prove that it never happens for all @xmath (remember that @xmath is
small enough), unless @xmath .

If @xmath acts on @xmath and preserves the distribution @xmath , then
the map @xmath factors through @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath is
connected, it acts on @xmath and the map @xmath factors through @xmath ,
then the action of @xmath preserves @xmath . As a consequence we get:

###### Corollary C.8.

If @xmath is projective and @xmath is a subvariety, then:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

Proof. This follows from the above considerations and from Theorem C.4 .

@xmath

Further, let @xmath be the quotient bundle and @xmath be the quotient
map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the action of @xmath on @xmath extended to @xmath preserves @xmath ,
then in the obvious way we get the induced action of @xmath on the total
spaces of @xmath and @xmath . These actions preserve the zero sections.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in § C.3 .

By analogy with above we want to define the action of @xmath on @xmath .
In other words, we define a special lifting of the vector fields from
@xmath to vector fields on @xmath .

First observe that the sheaf of Lie algebras @xmath acts on the sheaf
@xmath : if @xmath , then choose an open subset @xmath small enough and
any lifting @xmath , @xmath and let @xmath act on @xmath locally by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

By Equation ( C.7 ) defining @xmath , this does not depend on the choice
of @xmath and hence, by elementary properties of sheaves, it glues
uniquely to an element of @xmath . Hence we get a Lie algebra
representation @xmath .

Secondly, we can extend the action of @xmath on the locally free sheaf
@xmath defined in Equation ( C.9 ) to an action on @xmath , by
requesting that the action must satisfy the Leibniz rule:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

— locally every section of @xmath can be written as a sum of products of
sections of @xmath (or their inverses, if @xmath ).

Finally, we can extend this action to @xmath , again requesting the
Leibniz rule. Eventually, we get the action, which we will call the
induced action of @xmath on @xmath . The following property justifies
the name:

###### Proposition C.11.

If the action of @xmath preserves @xmath , then the tangent action to
the induced action of @xmath on @xmath is the composition of @xmath and
the induced action of @xmath on @xmath .

@xmath

For a fixed @xmath , the induced map @xmath is a derivation, so it
corresponds to a vector field @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

By construction we also have @xmath .

### c.5 Lifting and descending twisted forms

In this section we explain how to lift the twisted form @xmath to a form
@xmath on @xmath . Later we study the derivative @xmath and show its
relation to @xmath . Finally we prove the homogeneity of @xmath and
@xmath and thus explicitly set conditions when a @xmath -bundle together
with a @xmath -form @xmath arises as @xmath from some distribution
@xmath .

With the notation and assumptions as in the previous sections, we have a
canonical isomorphism of line bundles @xmath : if @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , then we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We let @xmath : ² ² 2 In [ Bea98 ] , [ LeB95 ] the authors denote @xmath
simply as @xmath , since the other maps are natural. This is a bit
confusing to some people (including the author of this monograph, but
see also a comment in [ SCW04 ] about a small mistake in [ KPSW00 ] )
and therefore we underline that @xmath is the composition of three maps.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma C.13.

For every @xmath the induced infinitesimal automorphism @xmath preserves
@xmath , i.e.:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Lie derivative operator and @xmath is the local
1-parameter group of transformations of @xmath determined by @xmath .

Proof. For the simplicity of notation assume @xmath is a global
transformation. The following diagram of vector bundles is commutative:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where by @xmath we mean the automorphism of @xmath , which is determined
by @xmath and @xmath ; similarly @xmath is determined by @xmath and
@xmath . The composition of the whole upper row is equal to @xmath . The
composition of the left most vertical arrow and the whole lower row is
equal to @xmath . Since the right arrow is the identity on the second
component @xmath and since the diagram is commutative, both forms take
the same values on every vector @xmath , hence are equal and the claim
follows.

@xmath

We also give a local description of @xmath and @xmath . So now assume
@xmath and let @xmath be some coordinates on @xmath . Let @xmath be a
linear coordinate on the fibre of @xmath . This means that @xmath
determines a section of @xmath which trivialises @xmath over @xmath . So
we can think of @xmath as of a holomorphic @xmath -form on @xmath
depending only on @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s. Let @xmath be any point of
@xmath and let @xmath be any vector tangent to @xmath at @xmath . We
write @xmath , where @xmath is the component tangent to @xmath , while
@xmath is tangent to @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or more concisely (in local coordinates)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since in this notation @xmath is a homogeneous 1-form of weight @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are homogeneous forms of weight 1 (see §
B.6 ).

In the above coordinates, the vector field @xmath related to the @xmath
-action can be expressed as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition C.16.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold or smooth algebraic variety and let
@xmath be a line bundle on @xmath . Also let @xmath be the principal
@xmath -bundle over @xmath as in § C.3 and let @xmath be the vector
field on @xmath associated to the action of @xmath . Finally, let @xmath
be a homogeneous closed 2-form on @xmath of weight @xmath . Then:

1.  @xmath ;

2.   There exists a unique twisted 1-form @xmath , such that @xmath ,
    where @xmath is defined from @xmath as above;

3.   Moreover, @xmath is nowhere vanishing if and only if @xmath is
    nowhere vanishing. If this is the case, then @xmath is
    non-degenerate if and only if @xmath is non-degenerate.

Proof. To prove (i) let @xmath be a local coordinate linear on the
fibres of @xmath . Since @xmath is closed, locally it is exact, so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some function @xmath and 1-form @xmath , both homogeneous of weight
0. However,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set @xmath , so that @xmath . Note that although @xmath and @xmath are
not uniquely determined, @xmath is the unique homogeneous 1-form of
weight 0 such that @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , as claimed in (i) .

To prove (ii) , define @xmath to be locally the form @xmath from the
above argument. One must verify that @xmath glues uniquely to a twisted
1-form @xmath .

Part (iii) follows from the local descriptions of @xmath and @xmath ,
see Equations ( C.14 ) and ( C.15 ). For instance, if @xmath , then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath is non-degenerate at a given point if and only if
@xmath does not vanish at that point and @xmath is non-degenerate on the
kernel of @xmath .

@xmath

###### Lemma C.17.

Let @xmath be any subvariety and @xmath its smooth locus. Then @xmath is
@xmath -integrable if and only if @xmath vanishes identically on the
tangent space to @xmath .

Proof. First assume @xmath is @xmath -integrable. Then @xmath vanishes
on @xmath by Proposition C.1 (iv) and @xmath vanishes by definition.
Hence from the local description of @xmath (see Equation ( C.15 )) we
get the result.

On the other hand if @xmath , since

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

then in particular

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath (see Proposition C.16 (ii) ), hence @xmath is @xmath
-integrable and therefore @xmath is @xmath -integrable.

@xmath

For @xmath , by @xmath we denote the lifting of @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

Hence we have two different possibilities of lifting an infinitesimal
automorphism @xmath to an object on @xmath : either we lift it to vector
field @xmath (see Equation ( C.12 )) or we lift @xmath to function
@xmath . We will compare these two liftings and how they behave with
respect to the Lie bracket of vector fields in the following statements.

###### Lemma C.18.

We have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. By Equation ( C.9 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath . By Equation ( C.12 ), this is equal to @xmath .

@xmath

###### Proposition C.19.

If @xmath , then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. The following proof is quoted from [ Bea98 , Prop. 1.6] . Since
@xmath (see Lemma C.13 ), by [ KN96 , Prop. I.3.10(a)] we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining the two equalities, we get the result.

@xmath

###### Corollary C.20.

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. This combines Lemma C.18 and Proposition C.19 .

@xmath

## Chapter D Elementary symplectic geometry

We introduce some elementary facts from symplectic geometry, having in
mind the needs of subsequent chapters. Most of this material is
contained in (or can be easily deduced from) classical textbooks on
symplectic geometry, such as [ MS98 ] , although we rewrite this over
the ground field @xmath rather than @xmath .

### d.1 Linear symplectic geometry

In this section we study linear algebra of vector space, which has a
symplectic form. Although it is elementary, it is very important for our
considerations as it has threefold application: Firstly, the content of
this section describes the local behaviour of symplectic manifolds (see
§ D.2 ), particularly the symplectisations of contact manifolds (see §
E.3.1 ). Secondly, it describes very much of global geometry of
projective space as a contact manifold (see Example E.10 , but also look
through Chapters F – I ). Finally, it explains the fibrewise behaviour
of contact distribution (see § E.3 ).

#### d.1.1 Symplectic vector space

A symplectic form on a vector space @xmath is a non-degenerate
skew-symmetric bilinear form. So @xmath is a symplectic form if and only
if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or equivalently the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism.

If a vector space @xmath has a symplectic form @xmath , we say that
@xmath (or @xmath if specifying the form is important) is a symplectic
vector space . In such a case the dimension of @xmath is even and there
exists a basis @xmath (where @xmath ) of @xmath such that @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Such a basis is called a symplectic basis
.

By @xmath we denote the corresponding symplectic form on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that if @xmath , @xmath is a symplectic basis of @xmath and @xmath
, @xmath is the dual basis of @xmath , then @xmath is a symplectic basis
of @xmath . In such a case @xmath are also called symplectic coordinates
on @xmath .

#### d.1.2 Subspaces in a symplectic vector space

Assume @xmath is a vector space of dimension @xmath and @xmath is a
symplectic form on @xmath . Now suppose @xmath is a linear subspace. By
@xmath we denote the @xmath perpendicular complement of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the natural projection @xmath . We say that the
subspace @xmath is:

  isotropic                                       @xmath   @xmath                                         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath is coisotropic;
  ----------------------------------------------- -------- ---------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -------- ------------------------
  coisotropic (or sometimes called involutive )   @xmath   @xmath                                         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath is isotropic;
  Lagrangian                                      @xmath   @xmath is isotropic or involutive and @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath is Lagrangian;
  symplectic                                      @xmath   @xmath is a symplectic form on @xmath          @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath is symplectic.

#### d.1.3 Symplectic reduction of vector space

With the assumptions as above let @xmath be any linear subspace and let
@xmath . Define @xmath to be the following bilinear form on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a symplectic vector space.

The particular case we are mostly interested in is when @xmath is a
hyperplane or more generally a coisotropic subspace.

Note the following elementary properties of this construction:

###### Proposition D.1.

For a subspace @xmath let @xmath be the image of @xmath in @xmath .

1.   If @xmath is isotropic (resp. coisotropic or Lagrangian) in @xmath
    , then @xmath is isotropic (resp. coisotropic or Lagrangian) in
    @xmath .

2.   Conversely, if @xmath is coisotropic, @xmath and @xmath is
    isotropic (resp. coisotropic or Lagrangian) in @xmath , then @xmath
    is isotropic (resp. coisotropic or Lagrangian) in @xmath .

@xmath

#### d.1.4 Symplectic automorphisms and weks-symplectic matrices

A linear automorphism @xmath of a symplectic vector space @xmath is
called a symplectomorphism if @xmath i.e.:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We denote by @xmath the group of all symplectomorphisms of @xmath and by
@xmath its Lie algebra:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A linear automorphism @xmath of @xmath is called a conformal
symplectomorphism if @xmath for some constant @xmath . We denote by
@xmath the group of all conformal symplectomorphisms of @xmath and by
@xmath the tangent Lie algebra.

Fix a basis @xmath of @xmath and note that a matrix @xmath is in the
symplectic algebra @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . For the sake of Chapter F we also need to define a
complementary linear subspace to @xmath :

###### Definition.

A matrix @xmath is weks-symplectic ¹ ¹ 1 A better name would be
skew-symplectic or anti-symplectic , but these are reserved for some
different notions. if and only if it satisfies the equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The vector space of all weks-symplectic matrices will be denoted by
@xmath (even though it is not a Lie subalgebra of @xmath ).

We immediately see that a matrix is weks-symplectic if and only if it
corresponds to a linear endomorphism @xmath , such that for every @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is a coordinate free way to describe @xmath .

Assume that our basis @xmath is symplectic. In particular @xmath .

###### Remark D.3.

For a matrix @xmath we have:

-   @xmath is a symmetric matrix;

-   @xmath is a skew-symmetric matrix.

@xmath

Note that if @xmath , then we can write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the first component @xmath is in @xmath , while the second @xmath is
in @xmath . Obviously, this decomposition corresponds to expressing the
matrix @xmath as a sum of symmetric and skew-symmetric matrices.

We list some properties of @xmath :

###### Proposition D.4.

Let @xmath . The following properties are satisfied:

-    Write the additive Jordan decomposition for @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is semisimple and @xmath is nilpotent. Then both @xmath
    and @xmath .

-    For @xmath , denote by @xmath the @xmath -eigenspace of @xmath .
    For any @xmath two different eigenvalues @xmath is @xmath
    -perpendicular to @xmath .

-    If @xmath is semisimple, then each space @xmath is symplectic.

@xmath

#### d.1.5 Standard symplectic structure on @xmath

Let @xmath be any finite dimensional vector space. Set @xmath and there
is a canonical symplectic form on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is any basis of @xmath and @xmath is the dual basis of @xmath
, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a symplectic basis of @xmath . In particular, we have the natural
embedding

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We note the following elementary lemma:

###### Lemma D.5.

Let @xmath be any linear subspace. Then @xmath is a Lagrangian subspace.

@xmath

### d.2 Symplectic manifolds and their subvarieties

Symplectic manifolds will serve us to understand some geometric and
algebraic structures of the symplectisations of contact manifolds (see §
E.3.1 ).

A complex manifold or a smooth complex algebraic variety @xmath is a
symplectic manifold if there exists a global closed holomorphic 2-form
@xmath with @xmath which restricted to every fibre is a symplectic form
on the tangent space. In other words, @xmath is a nowhere vanishing
section of @xmath . The form @xmath is called a symplectic form on
@xmath .

Similarly as in the case of the vector space, the symplectic form
determines an isomorphism:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The theory of compact (or projective) complex symplectic manifolds is
well developed and has a lot of beautiful results (see for example [
Leh04 ] , [ Huy03 ] and references therein). Yet here we will only use
some non-compact examples as a tool for studying contact manifolds and
we will only need a few of their basic properties. Also some extensions
of the symplectic structure to the singularities of @xmath are studied,
but we are interested only in the case where @xmath is smooth.

#### d.2.1 Subvarieties of a symplectic manifold

Let @xmath be a symplectic manifold. For a subvariety @xmath we say
@xmath is respectively

1.   isotropic ,

2.   coisotropic ,

3.   Lagrangian ,

if and only if there exists an open dense subset @xmath (equivalently,
for any open dense subset @xmath ) of smooth points of @xmath , such
that for every @xmath the tangent space @xmath is respectively

1.  isotropic,

2.  coisotropic,

3.  Lagrangian.

Or equivalently, for every @xmath the conormal space @xmath is
respectively

1.  coisotropic,

2.  isotropic,

3.  Lagrangian.

Note that a subvariety is Lagrangian if and only if it is isotropic (or
coisotropic) and the dimension is equal to @xmath .

#### d.2.2 Examples

The following examples are important for our considerations, as they
will appear as symplectisations of projective contact manifolds (see §
E.3.1 ).

##### The affine space

Our key example is the simplest possible: an affine space of even
dimension. So assume @xmath is a symplectic vector space of dimension
@xmath . Then take the affine space @xmath of the same dimension, whose
tangent space at every point is @xmath and globally @xmath . Then @xmath
trivially extends to the product and it is a symplectic form on @xmath .

By an abuse of notation, we will denote the affine space by @xmath as
well (so in particular a @xmath is fixed in the affine space and the
action of @xmath by homotheties is chosen). In this setup, the form
@xmath is homogeneous of weight 2 (see § B.6 ).

##### Products

Assume @xmath and @xmath are two symplectic manifolds with symplectic
forms @xmath and @xmath respectively. Clearly @xmath is a symplectic
manifold with the symplectic form @xmath , where the @xmath ’s are the
appropriate projections.

Next, let @xmath be two subvarieties. Both the @xmath ’s are
respectively

1.  isotropic,

2.  coisotropic,

3.  Lagrangian,

if and only if the product @xmath is respectively

1.  isotropic

2.  coisotropic,

3.  Lagrangian.

##### Cotangent Bundle

Let @xmath be a complex manifold or a smooth algebraic variety of
dimension @xmath . Set @xmath to be the total space of the cotangent
vector bundle @xmath and let @xmath be the projection map. If @xmath are
local coordinates on @xmath , then @xmath form the local coordinates on
@xmath . Then we can set:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and these glue to a well defined symplectic form @xmath . This
symplectic form is homogeneous of weight @xmath with respect to the
usual @xmath -action on the cotangent spaces.

Since for @xmath , @xmath we have @xmath this example of symplectic
manifold, generalises the standard symplectic structure on @xmath (see §
D.1.5 ). The following example generalises Lemma D.5 :

###### Example D.6.

Let @xmath be any subvariety. Define @xmath to be the conormal variety
to @xmath , i.e. the closure of the union of conormal spaces to smooth
points of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a Lagrangian subvariety in @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be a smooth point and let @xmath . Then one can choose
appropriate local coordinates on @xmath around @xmath and an appropriate
local trivialisation of the cotangent bundle @xmath , such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is a Lagrangian subspace by Lemma D.5 .

@xmath

###### Lemma D.7.

Conversely, assume @xmath is a smooth algebraic variety and @xmath is
the total space of @xmath . Moreover assume @xmath is an irreducible
closed Lagrangian subvariety invariant under the @xmath -action on
@xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be a general point and let @xmath . So @xmath is a
point in @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is @xmath -invariant, under the above identification

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We want to prove that @xmath and this will follow if we prove

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma B.2 the map @xmath is surjective, so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is Lagrangian, we also have the dual equality:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath as claimed and therefore @xmath . Since @xmath was a
general point of @xmath and both @xmath and @xmath were irreducible, we
have @xmath and by dimension counting @xmath .

@xmath

##### Adjoint and coadjoint orbits

Let @xmath be a semisimple complex Lie group and consider the coadjoint
action on the dual of its Lie algebra @xmath . Let @xmath be an orbit of
this action. The tangent space at @xmath is naturally isomorphic to
@xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes the Lie algebra operation in @xmath . For @xmath let
@xmath and @xmath be the corresponding vector fields on @xmath
determined by @xmath and @xmath . We define:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a symplectic form on @xmath , which is called the
Kostant-Kirillov form, see for instance [ Bea98 , (2.1)] .

Now assume @xmath is simple and @xmath is invariant under homotheties
(for instance @xmath is the unique minimal nonzero orbit — see [ Bea98 ,
Prop. 2.2 and Prop. 2.6] ). Then the actions of @xmath and @xmath
commute (because @xmath acts on @xmath by linear automorphisms, @xmath
via homotheties and every linear map commutes with a homothety).
Therefore the vector fields of the form @xmath for some @xmath are
homogeneous of weight 0 and hence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. @xmath is homogeneous of weight @xmath .

We can identify @xmath and @xmath by Killing form (see [ Hum75 ] ), so
equally well we can consider adjoint orbits. Therefore if @xmath is as
above, then it is isomorphic to a @xmath -bundle over an adjoint variety
(see § A.1.1 ). More precisely @xmath is a symplectisation (see § E.3.1
) of the adjoint variety.

##### Open subsets

Let @xmath be a symplectic manifold and let @xmath be an open subset.
Then @xmath is again a symplectic manifold.

### d.3 The Poisson bracket

The Poisson bracket is an important algebraic structure of a symplectic
manifold. In Corollary E.12 we observe that given a contact manifold and
its symplectisation, the Poisson bracket descents from the
symplectisation to a bracket on a specific sheaf of rings on the contact
manifold. Moreover, this descended structure is strictly related to the
automorphisms of the contact manifold (see Theorem E.13 ).

Let @xmath be a symplectic manifold and let @xmath be the sheaf of
holomorphic (or algebraic) functions on @xmath . Given @xmath let @xmath
be the unique vector field such that @xmath . Then we set:

  ------------------ -------- -------- -- --
                     @xmath   @xmath      
  or equivalently:                        
                     @xmath   @xmath      
  ------------------ -------- -------- -- --

The bilinear skew-symmetric map @xmath is called the Poisson bracket .

###### Lemma D.8.

The Poisson bracket satisfies the Jacobi identity and therefore makes
@xmath into a sheaf of Lie algebras. The compatibility between the
Poisson bracket and the standard ring multiplication on @xmath is given
by the following Leibniz rule:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. See for example [ Arn74 , §40] — the proof is identical to the
real case.

@xmath

The Poisson bracket is determined by the symplectic form and moreover it
is defined locally. Hence we have the following property:

###### Proposition D.9.

Assume @xmath and @xmath are two symplectic manifolds of dimension
@xmath . Assume moreover, that we have a finite covering map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath . Then the Poisson structures are compatible: for
@xmath we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath

###### Theorem D.10.

Assume @xmath is a symplectic manifold.

1.   Suppose @xmath is a coisotropic subvariety. Then the sheaf of
    ideals @xmath is a subalgebra with respect to the Poisson bracket.

2.   Conversely, suppose @xmath is a closed, generically reduced
    subscheme and that @xmath is preserved by the Poisson bracket. Then
    the corresponding variety @xmath is coisotropic.

Versions of the theorem can be found in [ Cou95 , Prop. 11.2.4] and in [
Buc06 , Thm 4.2] . We follow more or less the proof from [ Buc06 ] :

Proof. Let @xmath be the locus of smooth points of @xmath . We must show
that @xmath if and only if @xmath is a Lie subalgebra sheaf in @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is any point, @xmath is an open neighbourhood of
@xmath and that @xmath are some functions vanishing on @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. @xmath , so extending the equality to the closure of @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath is a Lie subalgebra.

Conversely, if @xmath is a Lie subalgebra, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an epimorphism of vector spaces for each @xmath and for @xmath
sufficiently small, we have @xmath .

@xmath

#### d.3.1 Properties of Poisson bracket

In our considerations on contact manifolds and their various
subvarieties we will need the three lemmas that are explained in this
subsection. These lemmas refer to Proposition D.10 — we have seen that
there is a relation between coisotropic varieties and Lie subalgebras of
@xmath that are ideals under the standard ring multiplication.

The first lemma claims that to test if an ideal is a subalgebra it is
enough to test it on an appropriate open cover of @xmath .

###### Lemma D.11.

Let @xmath be a symplectic manifold and let @xmath be a coherent sheaf
of ideals. In such a case @xmath is preserved by the Poisson bracket if
and only if there exists an open cover @xmath of @xmath such that for
each @xmath :

-    if @xmath is another open subset, then the functions in @xmath are
    determined by the functions in @xmath — this means that if @xmath is
    algebraic variety (respectively, analytic space), then the elements
    of @xmath can all be written as quotients (respectively, Taylor
    series) of elements of @xmath ; such property holds for instance if
    @xmath is affine or if @xmath is biholomorphic to a disk @xmath or
    it is biholomorphic to @xmath ;

-    and the ideal @xmath is preserved by the Poisson bracket.

Proof. One implication is obvious, while the other follows from the
Leibniz rule (see Lemma D.8 ) and from elementary properties of coherent
sheaves.

@xmath

The second lemma asserts that for an isotropic subvariety @xmath , only
functions constant on @xmath can preserve @xmath by Poisson
multiplication.

###### Lemma D.12.

Assume @xmath is a symplectic manifold, @xmath is a closed irreducible
isotropic subvariety. Let @xmath be any function such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is constant on @xmath .

Proof. Choose an arbitrary @xmath , a small enough open neighbourhood
@xmath of @xmath , and take any @xmath .

Since @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath can be taken so small that @xmath span the conormal
space we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath vanishes on @xmath and hence @xmath is constant on @xmath .

@xmath

Finally the third lemma states that for isotropic @xmath , very few
subvarieties @xmath can have the property that @xmath .

###### Lemma D.13.

Assume @xmath is a symplectic manifold, @xmath is a closed irreducible
isotropic subvariety and @xmath is a closed subvariety. If @xmath , then
either @xmath is contained in the singular locus of @xmath or @xmath is
Lagrangian and @xmath .

Proof. The proof goes along the lines of the proof of [ Buc06 , Thm 5.8]
. Suppose @xmath is not contained in the singular locus of @xmath , so
that a general point @xmath is a smooth point of both @xmath and @xmath
. Let @xmath be an open neighbourhood of @xmath . Then for all @xmath
and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Therefore we have all inclusions becoming equalities and in particular

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath . Moreover @xmath , where @xmath is a general point of
@xmath , so @xmath is Lagrangian.

@xmath

#### d.3.2 Homogeneous symplectic form

###### Lemma D.15.

Assume @xmath is a symplectic manifold with a @xmath -action and that
@xmath is homogeneous. Let @xmath be a @xmath -invariant open subset and
let @xmath be some homogeneous functions. Then @xmath is homogeneous of
weight @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be such a vector field, that @xmath . By Lemma B.1 (i)
we have @xmath and since @xmath , the claim follows from Lemma B.1 (i)
and (iii) .

@xmath

#### d.3.3 Example: Veronese map of degree 2

The following example is important for our considerations, as it proves
that for the contact manifold @xmath , we can equally well consider the
Poisson structure on @xmath (as we do in [ Buc03 ] and [ Buc06 ] ) and
the Poisson structure on @xmath (as naturally will arise from the point
of view of contact manifolds — see § E.3.1 ). Also this example will be
used to illustrate that every contact structure on @xmath comes from a
symplectic structure on @xmath . Moreover @xmath defined below is the
minimal adjoint orbit (see § D.2.2 ) for the simple group @xmath . This
simple Lie group and its minimal adjoint orbit have quite exceptional
behaviour (see Table A.1 ) and thus we find it worth to explain this
example in more detail.

Let @xmath be a symplectic vector space. We let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the coordinate ring of @xmath . Also consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath . Then we have the following @xmath covering map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the restriction of the map induced by @xmath . This is the
underlying map of the second Veronese embedding of @xmath . In the
language of § C.3 , we have @xmath and @xmath .

The symplectic form @xmath is @xmath invariant:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence it descents to a symplectic form @xmath on @xmath , making @xmath
a symplectic manifold, such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The natural gradings on @xmath and on @xmath induce the actions of
@xmath on @xmath and on @xmath (note that the action on @xmath is not
faithful, its kernel is @xmath ) and @xmath is equivariant with respect
to these actions.

###### Corollary D.16.

With the setup as above, the form @xmath is homogeneous of weight @xmath
with respect to the @xmath -action described above, so it is of weight
@xmath with respect to the faithful action of @xmath . Conversely, if
@xmath is a homogeneous symplectic form on @xmath of weight @xmath ,
then @xmath is a constant symplectic form on @xmath .

Proof. This follows from Lemma B.1 (ii) and the characterisation of
constant forms on an affine space in § B.6 .

@xmath

###### Corollary D.17.

The Poisson bracket on @xmath induced by @xmath is the restriction of
the Poisson bracket on @xmath induced by @xmath .

Proof. This follows immediately from Proposition D.9 .

@xmath

## Chapter E Contact geometry

A projective space seems to be the most standard example of a projective
variety. Yet, as a contact manifold, the projective space of odd
dimension is the most exceptional among exceptional examples. As a
consequence, the study of its Legendrian subvarieties is quite
complicated and very interesting. We start our considerations by
introducing this case. Further we generalise to the other contact
manifolds.

### e.1 Projective space as a contact manifold

Let @xmath be a symplectic vector space and let @xmath be its naive
projectivisation. Then for every @xmath the tangent space @xmath is
naturally isomorphic to the quotient @xmath . Let @xmath be a corank 1
vector subbundle defined fibrewise:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also let @xmath be the quotient line bundle, so that we have the
following short exact sequence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that @xmath (respectively @xmath ) is the contact distribution
(respectively the contact form ) associated with the symplectic form
@xmath .

By § D.1.3 the vector space @xmath carries a natural symplectic
structure @xmath . By Proposition C.1 (i) @xmath gives a well defined
twisted 2-form on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition E.1.

With an appropriate choice of local trivialisation of @xmath , for every
@xmath one has @xmath . In particular @xmath is nowhere degenerate and
it determines an isomorphism:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover @xmath .

Proof. See also [ LeB95 , Ex. 2.1] .

Let @xmath be some symplectic coordinates on @xmath . Then the @xmath
-perpendicular space to @xmath is given by the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We look for a twisted @xmath -form @xmath on @xmath whose kernel at each
point is exactly as above. This is for instance satisfied by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The ambiguity is only in the choice of the scalar coefficient — we
choose @xmath in order to acquire the right formula for @xmath . Choose
an affine piece @xmath , say where @xmath . On @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, fixing @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath is the image under the projection @xmath of:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To see that @xmath take a section of @xmath , for instance @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a section of @xmath and hence @xmath .

@xmath

### e.2 Legendrian subvarieties of projective space

Assume @xmath is a symplectic vector space of dimension @xmath .

The author in his previous articles [ Buc03 ] , [ Buc06 ] , [ Buc07 ] ,
[ Buc09 ] and [ Buc08b ] found convenient to use the following
definition:

###### Definition.

We say that a subvariety @xmath is Legendrian if the affine cone @xmath
is a Lagrangian subvariety (see § D.2.1 ).

Yet the original definition is formulated in a slightly different, but
equivalent manner:

###### Proposition E.2.

Let @xmath be a subvariety. The following conditions are equivalent:

-   @xmath is Legendrian;

-   @xmath is @xmath -integrable and it is of pure dimension @xmath .;

Proof. If @xmath is @xmath -integrable, then @xmath is Legendrian by
Propositions E.1 and C.1 (iv) . The other implication is follows from
definition of @xmath .

@xmath

#### e.2.1 Decomposable and degenerate Legendrian subvarieties

###### Definition.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two symplectic vector spaces and let @xmath and
@xmath be two Legendrian subvarieties. Now assume @xmath and @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath is the join of @xmath and @xmath meaning the union of all
lines from @xmath to @xmath . Now, clearly, the affine cone @xmath is
the product @xmath (where @xmath is the affine cone of @xmath ), so by §
D.2.2 @xmath is Legendrian. In such a situation we say that @xmath is a
decomposable Legendrian subvariety . We say that a Legendrian subvariety
in @xmath is indecomposable , if it is not of that form for any
non-trivial symplectic decomposition @xmath .

The indecomposable Legendrian subvarieties have more consistent
description of their projective automorphisms group (see Chapter F ). On
the other hand, decomposable Legendrian varieties (which usually
themselves are badly singular) will be used to provide some very
interesting families of examples of smooth Legendrian varieties (see
Chapter I ).

We say a subvariety of projective space is degenerate if it is contained
in some hyperplane. Otherwise, we say it is non-degenerate . The
following easy proposition in some versions is well known. The presented
version comes from [ Buc06 , Thm 3.4] but see also [ LM07 , Prop. 17
(1)] or [ Buc03 , Tw. 3.16] .

###### Proposition E.3.

Let @xmath be a Legendrian subvariety. Then the following conditions are
equivalent:

-   @xmath is degenerate.

-    There exists a symplectic linear subspace @xmath of codimension 2,
    such that @xmath is a Legendrian subvariety in @xmath and @xmath is
    a cone over @xmath .

-   @xmath is a cone over some variety @xmath .

In particular degenerate Legendrian subvarieties are decomposable.

@xmath

### e.3 Contact manifolds

###### Definition.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold or smooth algebraic variety and fix a
short exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a corank @xmath subbundle of the tangent bundle. We say
that @xmath is a contact manifold if the twisted 2-form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see Proposition C.1 (i) ) is nowhere degenerate, so that @xmath is a
symplectic form on @xmath for every @xmath . In such a case @xmath is
called the contact distribution on @xmath and @xmath is the contact form
on @xmath .

###### Example E.4.

By Proposition E.1 , the projective space with the contact distribution
associated with a symplectic form is a contact manifold.

The following properties are standard, well known (see for instance [
Bea98 ] ):

###### Proposition E.5.

We have the following properties of contact manifold @xmath :

1.   The dimension of @xmath is odd.

2.   Let @xmath be an open subset, let @xmath be any section and let
    @xmath be a map of sheaves:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then @xmath is a map of @xmath -modules and the assignment @xmath is
    an isomorphism of @xmath -modules:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   The canonical divisor @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . In
    particular @xmath is a Fano variety if and only if @xmath is ample.

Proof. We only prove (ii) , the other parts follow easily. Map @xmath is
a map of @xmath -modules by Proposition C.1 (iii) . By Propsition C.1
(ii) we have equality:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is non-degenerate, it follows that @xmath is indeed an
isomorphism.

@xmath

#### e.3.1 Symplectisation

The following construction is standard — see for instance [ Arn74 ] , [
KPSW00 ] , [ Bea98 ] .

Let @xmath be the principal @xmath -bundle as in § C.3 . In § C.4 and §
C.5 we studied in details the properties of @xmath and an extension of
the twisted form @xmath to @xmath . We have an equivalence between
contact structures on @xmath and symplectic homogeneous weight 1
structures on @xmath :

###### Theorem E.6.

Let @xmath be a complex manifold or smooth algebraic variety with a line
bundle @xmath and the principal @xmath -bundle @xmath as in § C.3 .

-    If @xmath is a contact form, then @xmath (see § C.5 ) is a
    homogeneous symplectic form on @xmath of weight 1.

-    Conversely, assume @xmath is a symplectic form on @xmath , which is
    homogeneous of weight 1. Then there exists a unique contact form
    @xmath on @xmath , such that @xmath .

Proof. See Proposition C.16 .

@xmath

If @xmath is a contact manifold, then the symplectic manifold @xmath
from the theorem is called the symplectisation of @xmath .

Using the theorem and § D.2.2 we have following examples of contact
manifolds:

###### Example E.7.

Let @xmath be a simple group and let @xmath be the closed orbit in
@xmath . Then @xmath is a contact manifold (compare with Conjecture A.2
).

###### Example E.8.

If @xmath , then let @xmath and hence @xmath , where @xmath is the zero
section and @xmath is a contact manifold.

###### Example E.9.

If @xmath is a contact Fano manifold, then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the point corresponding to the maximal ideal @xmath (see
[ Gro61 , §2.3] ).

###### Example E.10.

If @xmath , then by Proposition E.5 (iii) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath is a @xmath to @xmath unramified cover of @xmath , see
§ D.3.3 . In particular, from Theorem E.6 and Corollary D.16 we conclude
that every contact structure on @xmath is associated to some constant
symplectic form @xmath on @xmath (see § E.1 ).

Recall Theorem A.1 that every contact projective manifold @xmath is
either isomorphic to @xmath or it is Fano with @xmath . In the second
case by Proposition E.5 (iii) and the Kobayashi-Ochiai characterisation
of projective space [ KO73 ] either @xmath or @xmath .

#### e.3.2 Contact automorphisms

Automorphisms of contact manifolds preserving the contact structure were
also studied by LeBrun [ LeB95 ] and Beauville [ Bea98 ] . We use their
methods to state slightly more general results about infinitesimal
automorphisms. In the end we globalise the automorphisms for projective
contact manifolds.

Let @xmath be a contact manifold and let @xmath be the symplectisation
as in § E.3.1 . Also let @xmath be as in § C.3 .

###### Example E.11.

If @xmath is a contact Fano manifold, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath (see Example E.9 ), all the structure of @xmath as well as
its global and local behaviour is determined by this ring of global
sections. Hence in this case whatever is stated below for the sheaf
@xmath can be deduced from the analogous statement about @xmath only.

###### Corollary E.12.

1.   Let @xmath be two functions on @xmath homogeneous with respect to
    the action of @xmath . Then @xmath is also homogeneous and @xmath

2.   The Poisson bracket descends to @xmath and determines a bilinear
    map:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Proof. This follows from Corollary D.15 . See also [ LeB95 , Rem. 2.3] .

@xmath

We will refer to the Lie algebra structure on @xmath defined above also
as Poisson structure and denote the bracket by @xmath . For @xmath let
@xmath be the corresponding element in @xmath .

By Corollary E.12 the invertible sheaf @xmath has a Lie algebra
structure and it is crucial for our considerations, that it is
isomorphic to the sheaf @xmath of infinitesimal automorphisms of @xmath
preserving @xmath (see § C.4 for more details):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem E.13.

Let @xmath be a contact manifold, @xmath be the contact distribution,
@xmath be the contact form and let @xmath be an open subset. Using the
notation of § C.2 and § C.4 we have:

1.  @xmath as sheaves of Abelian groups.

2.   The map of sheaves @xmath maps isomorphically the Lie algebra
    structure of @xmath onto the Lie algebra structure of @xmath given
    by the Poisson bracket.

3.   The following two Lie algebra representations of @xmath on @xmath
    are equal:

    -    The induced representation of @xmath on @xmath (see § C.4 ).

    -    The representation induced by the adjoint representation:

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

Proof. The following proof of (1) is taken from [ Bea98 , Prop. 1.1] ,
but see also [ LeB95 , Prop. 2.1] .

To prove (1) , take any @xmath and consider the map of sheaves:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition C.1 (iii) the above map is a map of @xmath -modules,
hence it is an element of @xmath . Let @xmath be the corresponding
element of @xmath (see Proposition E.5 (ii) ). By the definition of the
isomorphism @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath , hence @xmath . Therefore @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives the required splitting.

For (2) see also [ Bea98 , Prop. 1.6] and [ LeB95 , Rem. 2.3] . By (1) ,
the map @xmath is an isomorphism of sheaves of Abelian groups. So it is
enough to prove that @xmath preserves the Lie algebra structures. For
every @xmath denote by @xmath and @xmath the induced infinitesimal
automorphisms of @xmath (see § C.4 ). We have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath preserves the Lie algebra structures.

Part (3) is local and since both representations satisfy the Leibniz
rule (see Equation ( C.12 ) and Lemma D.8 ), it is enough to check the
equality for multiplicative generators of @xmath . Locally, these might
be taken for instance as sections of @xmath and so (3) follows from (2)
.

@xmath

We underline, that @xmath , as a subsheaf of @xmath is not a @xmath
-submodule (see § C.4 ). So in particular the obtained splitting of the
short exact sequence of sheaves of Abelian groups

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is not a splitting of vector bundles.

Turning to global situation assume @xmath is projective and let @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath denote, respectively, the group of
automorphisms of @xmath , the group of automorphisms of @xmath
preserving the contact structure and their Lie algebras.

LeBrun [ LeB95 ] and Kebekus [ Keb01 ] observed that in the case of
projective contact Fano manifolds with Picard group generated by @xmath
, the global sections of @xmath are isomorphic to @xmath :

###### Corollary E.14.

Let @xmath be a projective contact manifold with contact distribution
@xmath .

1.   Then @xmath maps isomorphically @xmath onto @xmath .

2.   If moreover @xmath is Fano with @xmath , then @xmath and hence the
    Lie algebra @xmath is naturally isomorphic to @xmath .

Proof. By Corollary C.8 we have @xmath , so (i) follows from Theorem
E.13 (2) .

On the other hand (ii) follows from [ Keb01 , Cor. 4.5] .

@xmath

### e.4 Legendrian subvarieties in contact manifold

###### Definition.

Let @xmath be a complex contact manifold with a contact distribution
@xmath . A subvariety @xmath is Legendrian if @xmath is @xmath
-integrable (i.e., @xmath ) and @xmath (i.e., @xmath has maximal
possible dimension).

If @xmath , then the above definition agrees with the definition in §
E.2 by Proposition E.2 . In general, we have analogous properties with
@xmath replaced by @xmath :

###### Proposition E.15.

Let @xmath be a contact manifold with a contact distribution @xmath and
with its symplectisation @xmath . Assume @xmath is a subvariety. Then:

1.  @xmath is @xmath -integrable if and only if @xmath is isotropic.

2.  @xmath is Legendrian if and only if @xmath is Lagrangian.

Proof. Part (a) follows from Lemma C.17 and Part (b) follows from (a) .

@xmath

In the case of subvarieties of a symplectic manifold, we have three
important types of subvarieties (isotropic, Legendrian and coisotropic).
Also for subvarieties of contact manifold in addition to @xmath
-integrable and Legendrian subvarieties, it is useful to consider the
subvarieties corresponding to the coisotropic case:

###### Definition.

In the setup of Proposition E.15 , we say that @xmath is @xmath
-cointegrable if @xmath is coisotropic.

###### Example E.16.

Assume @xmath is irreducible and Lagrangian and let @xmath be the
closure of @xmath . Then @xmath is @xmath -cointegrable. If moreover
@xmath is not @xmath -invariant, then @xmath .

###### Corollary E.17.

If @xmath for some smooth algebraic variety @xmath and @xmath is an
algebraic Legendrian subvariety, then @xmath is the conormal variety
@xmath to some algebraic subvariety @xmath .

Proof. It follows from Proposition E.15 , Example E.8 and Lemma D.7 .

@xmath

Let @xmath be the sheaf of rings on @xmath defined in § C.3 . For a
subvariety @xmath , let @xmath be the sheaf of ideals generated by those
local sections of @xmath that vanish on @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ideal sheaf of @xmath . In this context, the meaning
of Lemma D.11 is the following:

###### Lemma E.19.

With the notation as above, let @xmath be a coherent sheaf of ideals.
Then @xmath is preserved by the Poisson bracket on @xmath if and only if
@xmath is preserved by the Poisson bracket on @xmath .

@xmath

Hence we get the description of @xmath -cointegrable subvarieties in
terms of the Poisson bracket on @xmath :

###### Proposition E.20.

With the assumptions as above, a subvariety @xmath is @xmath
-cointegrable if and only if @xmath is preserved by the Poisson bracket
on @xmath .

Proof. The proposition combines Equation ( E.18 ), Theorem D.10 together
with Lemma E.19 .

@xmath

Given a subvariety @xmath , we define @xmath to be the sheaf of Lie
algebras of those infinitesimal automorphisms of @xmath , which preserve
@xmath and contact distribution @xmath (see also § C.4 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Further, let @xmath be the degree @xmath part of the sheaf of
homogeneous ideals @xmath . Since @xmath is a line bundle with the
action of @xmath (see § C.4 ), choosing a local trivialisation and using
the gluing property of sheaves we can replace @xmath in the definition
of @xmath with @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (E.21)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the induced action of @xmath on @xmath described in
§ C.4 .

The following theorem establishes a connection between the infinitesimal
automorphisms of a Legendrian variety and its ideal:

###### Theorem E.22.

Let @xmath be a contact manifold with a contact distribution @xmath and
let @xmath be the quotient map. Also let @xmath be an open subset.
Assume @xmath is an irreducible subvariety.

1.   If @xmath is @xmath -integrable, then @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is @xmath -cointegrable, then @xmath .

3.   If @xmath is Legendrian, then @xmath .

Proof. In the case of A , choose arbitrary @xmath . We must prove that
@xmath or, equivalently, that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(recall that for a section @xmath by @xmath we denote the corresponding
element in @xmath ).

By Equation ( E.21 ) the action of @xmath preserves @xmath and hence
also it preserves @xmath . By Theorem E.13 (3) this means that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover @xmath is isotropic by Proposition E.15 .

By Lemma D.12 function @xmath is constant on @xmath . But @xmath is also
a @xmath -homogeneous function of weight 1, so it must vanish on @xmath
. Therefore @xmath as claimed.

To prove B let @xmath be an infinitesimal automorphism such that @xmath
. By Proposition E.20

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so by Theorem E.13 (3) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(where @xmath denotes the induced representation of @xmath on @xmath ,
see § C.4 ). Hence by Equation ( E.21 ) the infinitesimal automorphism
@xmath is contained in @xmath and @xmath as claimed.

Part C is an immediate consequence of A and B .

@xmath

The following corollary says that in the case when @xmath is projective
also the global automorphisms of a Legendrian subvariety can be
understood in terms of the ideal of the variety. In particular, in (i)
below, we generalise Theorem A.9 .

###### Corollary E.23.

Let @xmath be a projective contact manifold, let @xmath be the contact
distribution and let @xmath be a Legendrian subvariety. Let @xmath
(resp. @xmath ) be the Lie algebra of group of automorphisms of @xmath
preserving @xmath (resp. preserving @xmath and @xmath ). Then:

1.  @xmath ;

2.   If in addition @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof. It follows from Corollary E.14 and Theorem E.22 C .

@xmath

In Chapter F we discuss the extension of Corollary E.23 (ii) to @xmath .

The following corollary generalises [ Buc06 , Thm 5.8] :

###### Corollary E.24.

If @xmath is a projective contact manifold and @xmath is an irreducible
Legendrian subvariety such that @xmath is generated by @xmath , then
@xmath acts transitively on the smooth locus of @xmath . In particular,
if @xmath is in addition smooth, then @xmath is a homogeneous space.

Proof. If @xmath is a closed subvariety invariant under the action of
@xmath , then by Theorem E.13 (3) and by Corollary E.23 (i) :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence by the Leibniz rule and since @xmath is generated by @xmath , we
have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So by Lemma D.13 , variety @xmath is contained in the singular locus of
@xmath .

Now let @xmath be an orbit of a smooth point under the action of @xmath
. Then the closure @xmath is not contained in the singular locus so by
above it must be equal to all of @xmath . Moreover @xmath is a closed
subset invariant under the action and not equal to @xmath , so it is
contained in the singular locus. So @xmath is the whole smooth locus of
@xmath .

@xmath

We conclude this chapter by underlining that, unfortunately, the above
results are proved only for automorphisms of @xmath , that preserve
Legendrian subvariety @xmath , not simply for automorphisms of @xmath .

## Chapter F Projective automorphisms of a Legendrian variety

The content of this chapter is published in [ Buc07 ] .

We are interested in the following conjecture:

###### Conjecture F.1.

Let @xmath be an irreducible indecomposable Legendrian subvariety and
let @xmath be a connected subgroup of linear automorphisms preserving
@xmath . Then @xmath is contained in the image of the natural map @xmath
.

It is quite natural to believe, that if a linear map preserves a form on
a big number of linear subspaces, then it actually preserves the form
(at least up to scalar). With this approach, Janeczko and Jelonek proved
the conjecture in the case where the image of @xmath under the Gauss map
is non-degenerate in the Grassmannian of Lagrangian subspaces in @xmath
— see [ JJ04 , Cor. 6.4] . Unfortunately, this is not enough - for
example @xmath has a degenerate image under the Gauss map and this is
one of the simplest examples of smooth Legendrian subvarieties.

In § F.2 we prove Theorem A.11 , i.e. that the conjecture holds for
smooth @xmath . This theorem, combined with Corollary E.23 gives us a
good understanding of the group of projective automorphisms of a smooth
Legendrian subvariety in @xmath .

### f.1 Discussion of assumptions

One obvious remark is that homotheties act trivially on @xmath , but in
general are not symplectic on @xmath . Therefore, it is more convenient
to think of conformal symplectomorphisms (see § D.1.4 ).

It is clear, that if we hope for a positive answer to the question
whether a projective automorphism of a Legendrian subvariety necessarily
preserves the contact structure, then we must assume that our Legendrian
variety is non-degenerate.

Another natural assumption is that @xmath is irreducible — one can also
easily produce a counterexample if we skip this assumption. Yet still
this is not enough.

Let @xmath be a decomposable Legendrian variety. Then we can act via
@xmath on @xmath and via @xmath on @xmath - such an action will preserve
@xmath and in general it is not conformal symplectic. This explains why
the assumptions of our conjecture F.1 are necessary.

### f.2 Preservation of contact structure

Let @xmath be an irreducible, indecomposable Legendrian subvariety, let
@xmath be the affine cone over @xmath and @xmath be the smooth locus of
@xmath . Assume that @xmath is the maximal connected subgroup in @xmath
preserving @xmath . Let @xmath be the Lie algebra tangent to @xmath . To
prove the conjecture it would be enough to show that @xmath is contained
in the Lie algebra @xmath tangent to conformal symplectomorphisms,
i.e. the Lie algebra spanned by @xmath and the identity matrix @xmath .

Recall from § D.1.4 the notion of weks-symplectic matrices.

###### Theorem F.2.

With the above notation the following properties hold:

-    The underlying vector space of @xmath decomposes into symplectic
    and weks-symplectic part:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    If @xmath , then @xmath preserves every tangent space to @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and hence also

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    If @xmath is semisimple, then @xmath for some @xmath .

-    Assume @xmath is nilpotent and let @xmath be an integer such that
    @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is always non-zero and is contained
    in the singular locus of @xmath . In particular, @xmath is singular.

In what follows we prove the four parts of Theorem F.2 .

##### I. Decomposition into symplectic and weks-symplectic part

Proof. Take @xmath to be an arbitrary element. Then for every @xmath one
has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence the quadratic polynomial @xmath is identically zero on @xmath and
hence it is in the ideal of @xmath . Therefore by maximality of @xmath
and Theorem A.9 the map @xmath is also in @xmath . However,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath and both symplectic and weks-symplectic components @xmath and
@xmath are in @xmath .

@xmath

From the point of view of the conjecture, the symplectic part is fine.
We would only need to prove that @xmath . So from now on we assume
@xmath .

##### II. Action on tangent space

Proof. Let @xmath for @xmath . Then @xmath and hence it acts on @xmath .
Choose a point @xmath and two tangent vectors in the same tangent space
@xmath . Then clearly also @xmath and @xmath are contained in one
tangent space, namely @xmath . Hence:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

In particular the part of the expression linear in @xmath vanishes,
hence @xmath . Combining this with Equation ( D.2 ) we get that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, this implies that @xmath . Therefore @xmath preserves the
tangent space at every smooth point of @xmath and hence also @xmath
preserves that space.

@xmath

##### III. Semisimple part

Since @xmath is an algebraic subgroup in @xmath , hence @xmath has the
natural Jordan decomposition inherited from @xmath , i.e. if we write
the Jordan decomposition for @xmath , then @xmath (see [ Hum75 ,
Thm 15.3(b)] ). Therefore by Proposition D.4 (i), proving that for
@xmath we have @xmath and @xmath would be enough to establish the
conjecture.

Here we deal with the semisimple part.

Proof. Argue by contradiction. Let @xmath be an arbitrary eigenspace of
@xmath and let @xmath be the sum of the other eigenspaces. If @xmath ,
then both @xmath and @xmath are non-zero and by Proposition D.4 (ii) and
(iii) they are @xmath -perpendicular, complementary symplectic subspaces
of @xmath . Let @xmath be any point. Since @xmath preserves @xmath by
part II it follows that @xmath . But then both @xmath are Lagrangian
subspaces, hence have constant (independent of @xmath ) dimensions.
Hence @xmath is a sum of two vector bundles and from Proposition B.3 we
get that @xmath is a product of two Lagrangian subvarieties,
contradicting our assumption that @xmath is indecomposable.

@xmath

##### IV. Nilpotent part — @xmath is singular

###### Lemma F.3.

Assume @xmath is any closed subvariety preserved by the action of @xmath
for some nilpotent endomorphism @xmath . If @xmath is a point of the
affine cone over @xmath and @xmath is an integer such that @xmath and
@xmath , then @xmath is in @xmath .

Proof. Point @xmath is just the limit of @xmath as @xmath goes to @xmath
.

@xmath

###### Lemma F.4.

Assume @xmath is nilpotent and @xmath , @xmath for an integer @xmath .
Let @xmath be an affine cone over some irreducible projective subvariety
in @xmath , which is preserved by the action of @xmath , but is not
contained in the set of the fixed points. Assume that this action
preserves the tangent space @xmath at every smooth point @xmath of
@xmath . If there exists a non-zero vector in @xmath which is a smooth
point of @xmath contained in @xmath , then @xmath is a linear subspace.

Proof. Step 0 - notation. We let @xmath to be the closure of @xmath , so
in particular @xmath is irreducible. By Lemma F.3 , we know that @xmath
. Let @xmath be a general point of @xmath . Then by our assumptions
@xmath is a smooth point of both @xmath and @xmath .

Next denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

You can think of @xmath as union of those lines in @xmath (or points in
the projective space @xmath ), which under the action of @xmath converge
to the line spanned by @xmath (or @xmath ) ¹ ¹ 1 This statement is not
perfectly precise, though it is true on an open dense subset. There are
some other lines, which converge to @xmath , namely those generated by
@xmath , but @xmath for some @xmath . We are not interested in those
points. as @xmath goes to @xmath . We also note that the closure @xmath
is a linear subspace spanned by an arbitrary element @xmath and @xmath .

Also we let @xmath , so that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, @xmath from now on will always denote an arbitrary point of
@xmath .

Step 1 - tangent space to @xmath at points of @xmath . Since @xmath is a
smooth point of @xmath also @xmath consists of smooth points of @xmath .
This is because the set of singular points is closed and @xmath
invariant. By our assumptions @xmath preserves every tangent space to
@xmath and thus for every @xmath we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So the tangent space to @xmath is constant over the @xmath and in
particular @xmath .

Step 2 - dimensions of @xmath and @xmath . From the definitions of
@xmath and @xmath and by Step 1 we get that for any point @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath .

Since @xmath was a general point of @xmath , we have that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath .

Step 3 - the closure of @xmath is a linear subspace. From the definition
of @xmath and Step 1 we know that @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , so the closure of @xmath is exactly @xmath and clearly
this closure is contained in @xmath . In particular @xmath .

Step 4 - @xmath is contained in @xmath . Let @xmath be @xmath . By
Step 3 we know that @xmath . Now we calculate the local dimension of
@xmath at @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the first and the last entries are identical, we must have all
equalities. In particular the local dimension of @xmath at @xmath is
equal to the dimension of the tangent space to @xmath at @xmath . So
@xmath is a smooth point of @xmath and therefore there is a unique
component of @xmath passing through @xmath , namely the linear space
@xmath . Since @xmath is contained in @xmath (because @xmath ) and
@xmath , we must have @xmath .

Step 5 - vary @xmath . Recall, that by Step 1 the tangent space to
@xmath is the same all over @xmath . So also it is the same on every
smooth point of @xmath , which falls into the closure of @xmath . But by
Step 4, @xmath is a subset of @xmath , which is in the closure of @xmath
by Step 3. So the tangent space to @xmath is the same for an open subset
of points in @xmath . Now apply again Step 1 for different @xmath ’s in
this open subset and we get that @xmath has constant tangent space on a
dense open subset of @xmath . This is possible if and only if @xmath is
a linear subspace, which completes the proof of the lemma.

@xmath

Now part IV of the theorem follows easily:

Proof. By the assumptions of the theorem @xmath is not contained in any
hyperplane, so in particular @xmath is not contained in @xmath . So by
Lemma F.3 the image @xmath contains points other than @xmath . Next by
Lemma F.4 and part II of the theorem, since @xmath cannot be a linear
subspace, there can be no smooth points of @xmath in @xmath .

@xmath

##### Smooth case

We conclude that parts I, III and IV of Theorem F.2 together with
Proposition D.4 (i) and [ Hum75 , Thm. 15.3(b)] imply Theorem A.11 . We
only note that a smooth Legendrian subvariety is either a linear
subspace or it is indecomposable.

### f.3 Some comments

Conjecture F.1 is now reduced to the following special case not covered
by Theorem F.2 :

###### Conjecture F.5.

Let @xmath be an irreducible Legendrian subvariety. Let @xmath be a
nilpotent endomorphism and @xmath be an integer such that @xmath and
@xmath . Assume that the action of @xmath preserves @xmath . Assume
moreover, that @xmath is singular at points of the image of the rational
map @xmath . Then @xmath is decomposable.

We also note the improved relation between projective automorphisms of a
Legendrian subvariety and quadratic equations satisfied by its points:

###### Corollary F.6.

Let @xmath be an irreducible Legendrian subvariety for which Conjecture
F.1 holds (for example @xmath is smooth). If @xmath is the maximal
subgroup preserving @xmath , then @xmath , where @xmath is the space of
homogeneous quadratic polynomials vanishing on @xmath .

Proof. It follows immediately from the statement of the conjecture and
Theorem A.9 .

@xmath

Finally, it is important to note, that Theorem F.2 part III does not
imply that every torus acting on an indecomposable, but singular
Legendrian variety @xmath is contained in the image of @xmath . It only
says that the intersection of such a torus with the weks-symplectic part
is always finite. Therefore if there is a non-trivial torus acting on
@xmath , there is also some non-trivial connected subgroup of @xmath
acting on @xmath and also some quadratic equations in the ideal of
@xmath .

## Chapter G Toric Legendrian subvarieties in projective space

The content of this chapter is published in [ Buc07 ] .

We apply Theorem A.11 to classify smooth toric Legendrian subvarieties.
We choose appropriate coordinates to reduce this problem to some
combinatorics (for surface case — see § G.2 ) and some elementary
geometry of convex bodies (for higher dimensions — see § G.3 ).
Eventually the proof of Theorem A.12 is obtained in Corollaries G.6 and
G.10 .

### g.1 Classification of toric Legendrian varieties

Within this chapter @xmath is a toric subvariety of dimension @xmath in
a projective space of dimension @xmath . We assume it is embedded
torically, so that the action of @xmath on @xmath extends to an action
on the whole @xmath , but we do not assume that the embedding is
projectively normal. The notation is based on [ Stu97 ] though we also
use techniques of [ Oda88 ] . We would like to understand when @xmath
can be Legendrian with respect to some contact structure on @xmath and
in particular, when it can be a smooth toric Legendrian variety.

There are two reasons for considering non projectively normal toric
varieties here. The first one is that the new example we find is not
projectively normal. The second one is the conjecture [ Stu97 ,
Conj. 2.9] , which says that a smooth, toric, projectively normal
variety is defined by quadrics. We do not expect to produce a
counterexample to this conjecture and on the other hand all smooth
Legendrian varieties defined by quadrics are known to be just the
subadjoint varieties (see [ Buc06 , Thm 5.11] ).

In addition we assume that either @xmath is smooth or at least the
following condition is satisfied:

-   The action of the torus @xmath on @xmath preserves the contact
    structure on @xmath . In other words, the image of @xmath is
    contained in the image of @xmath .

In the case where @xmath is smooth, the ( @xmath ) condition is always
satisfied by Theorem A.11 . But for some statements below we do not need
non-singularity, so we only assume ( @xmath ).

###### Theorem G.1.

Let @xmath be a toric (in the above sense) non-degenerate Legendrian
subvariety satisfying ( @xmath ). Then there exists a choice of
symplectic coordinates on @xmath and coprime integers @xmath such that
@xmath is the closure of the image of the following map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, @xmath is the closure of the orbit of a point

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

under the torus action with weights

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover every such @xmath is a non-degenerate toric Legendrian
subvariety.

We are aware that for many choices of the @xmath ’s from the theorem,
the action of the torus on @xmath (and on @xmath ) is not faithful, so
that for such examples a better choice of coordinates could be made.
However, we are willing to pay the price of taking a quotient of @xmath
to get a uniform description. One advantage of the description given in
the theorem is that a part of it is almost independent of the choice of
the @xmath ’s. This part is the @xmath -dimensional “octahedron” @xmath
.

Proof. Assume @xmath is Legendrian with respect to a symplectic form
@xmath , that @xmath is non-degenerate, that the torus @xmath acts on
@xmath preserving @xmath and satisfies ( @xmath ). Replacing if
necessary @xmath by some covering we may assume that @xmath factorises
through a maximal torus @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies, that for an appropriate symplectic basis the variety
@xmath is the closure of the image of the map @xmath given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and for @xmath we let @xmath . This means that
@xmath is the closure of the @xmath -orbit of the point ¹ ¹ 1 Note that
usually one assumes that this point is just [1,…,1]. In our case we
would have to consider non-symplectic coordinates. We prefer to deal
with a point with more complicated coordinates. @xmath where @xmath acts
with weights @xmath .

Since @xmath is non-degenerate, the weights are pairwise different. Also
the weights are not contained in any hyperplane in @xmath , because the
dimension of @xmath is equal to the dimension of @xmath and we assume
@xmath has an open orbit of the @xmath -action. So there exists exactly
one (up to scalar) linear relation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We assume that the @xmath ’s are coprime integers. Permuting coordinates
appropriately we can assume that @xmath . After a symplectic change of
coordinates, we can assume without loss of generality that all the
@xmath ’s are non negative by exchanging @xmath with @xmath (and @xmath
with @xmath ) if necessary. Clearly not all the @xmath ’s are zero, so
in particular @xmath and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, if we set @xmath for @xmath , the points @xmath form a basis
of a lattice @xmath containing all @xmath ’s. The lattice @xmath might
be finer than the one generated by the @xmath ’s. Replacing again @xmath
by a finite cover, we can assume that the action of @xmath is
expressible in the terms of weights in @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It remains to prove three things: that @xmath , that the @xmath ’s might
be chosen as in the statement of the theorem and finally that every such
variety is actually Legendrian. We will do all three together.

The torus acts symplectically on the projective space, thus the tangent
spaces to the affine cone are Lagrangian if and only if just one tangent
space at a point of the open orbit is Lagrangian. So take the point
@xmath . The affine tangent space is spanned by the following vectors:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath                                                                                                
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Now the products are following:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore the linear space spanned by @xmath and the @xmath ’s is
Lagrangian if and only if:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, since @xmath , the @xmath cannot be zero either. After
another conformal symplectic base change, we can assume that @xmath and
then @xmath . On the other hand, the above equation is satisfied for the
variety in the theorem. Hence the theorem is proved.

@xmath

Our next goal is to determine for which values of the @xmath ’s the
variety @xmath is smooth. The curve case is not interesting at all and
also very easy, so we start from @xmath , i.e. Legendrian surfaces.

### g.2 Smooth toric Legendrian surfaces

We are interested in knowing when the toric projective surface with
weights of torus action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

is smooth. Our assumptions on the @xmath ’s are following:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath are coprime integers.

###### Example G.3.

Let @xmath and @xmath (see Figure G.1 ). Then @xmath is the product of
@xmath and a quadric plane curve @xmath .

###### Example G.4.

Let @xmath (see Figure G.1 ). Although the embedding is not projectively
normal (we lack the weight @xmath in the middle), the image is smooth
anyway. Then @xmath is the blow up of @xmath in three non-colinear
points.

We will prove there is no other smooth example.

We must consider two cases (see Figure G.2 ): either @xmath (which means
that @xmath is in the interior of the square @xmath ) or @xmath (so that
@xmath is outside or on the border of the square).

Geometrically, case @xmath means, that the normalisation of @xmath is
@xmath . It is just an easy explicit verification that @xmath is not
smooth with these additional weights in the interior.

In the other case, for a vertex @xmath of the polytope

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we define the sublattice @xmath to have the origin at @xmath and to be
generated by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is smooth, for every vertex @xmath the vectors of the edges
meeting at @xmath must form a basis of @xmath (compare with [ Stu97 ,
Prop. 2.4 & Lemma 2.2] ). In particular, if @xmath (it is immediate from
Inequalities ( G.2 ) that @xmath is indeed a vertex), then @xmath can be
expressed as an integer combination of @xmath and @xmath (see the right
hand side of Figure G.2 ). So write:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some integers @xmath and @xmath . It is obvious that @xmath and
@xmath must be strictly positive, since @xmath is in the cone generated
by @xmath and @xmath with the vertex at @xmath . But then (since @xmath
) from Equation ( G.5 ) on the second coordinate we get that either
@xmath or @xmath .

If @xmath , then we easily get that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath and by Inequalities ( G.2 ) we get @xmath and therefore
(since the @xmath ’s are coprime) @xmath , which is Example G.3 .

On the other hand, if @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence by Inequalities ( G.2 ) and since the @xmath ’s are coprime,
we get @xmath , which is Example G.4 .

###### Corollary G.6.

If @xmath is smooth toric Legendrian surface, then it is either @xmath
or @xmath blown up in three non-colinear points or plane @xmath .

@xmath

### g.3 Higher dimensional toric Legendrian varieties

In this section we assume that @xmath . By means of the geometry of
convex bodies we will prove there is only one smooth toric
non-degenerate Legendrian variety in dimension @xmath and no more in
higher dimensions. We use Theorem G.1 so that we have a toric variety
with weights:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the @xmath ’s are coprime positive integers with @xmath .

###### Example G.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then the related toric variety is @xmath (see
Figure G.3 ).

Further, let @xmath be the polytope defined by the weights:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma G.8.

Let @xmath be two complementary subsets of indexes.

-    Assume @xmath and @xmath . If

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then the interval @xmath is an edge of @xmath .

-    Assume @xmath and @xmath . If

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then both intervals @xmath and @xmath are edges of @xmath .

-    If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is an edge of @xmath .

Proof. Fix @xmath small enough, set @xmath and define the following
hyperplanes in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assuming the inequality of (a), @xmath is equal to @xmath and the rest
of @xmath lies on one side of @xmath . So @xmath is a supporting
hyperplane for the face @xmath , which is a simplex of dimension @xmath
and therefore all its edges are also edges of @xmath as claimed in (a).

Next assume that the inequality of (b) holds. Then @xmath (respectively
@xmath ) is a supporting hyperplane for the edge @xmath (respectively
@xmath ).

Similarly, in the case of (c), @xmath is a supporting hyperplane for
@xmath .

@xmath

###### Theorem G.9.

Let @xmath be a toric non-degenerate Legendrian variety of dimension
@xmath satisfying ( @xmath ) (see page G.1 ). If @xmath and
normalisation of @xmath has at most quotient singularities, then @xmath
and @xmath .

Proof. Since the normalisation of @xmath has at most quotient
singularities, it follows that the polytope @xmath is simple, i.e. every
vertex has exactly @xmath edges (see [ Ful93 ] or [ Oda88 , §2.4,
p. 102] ). We will prove this is impossible, unless @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath is just equal to @xmath and clearly in such a
case every vertex of @xmath has @xmath edges. Hence more than @xmath for
@xmath .

Thus from now on we can assume that @xmath . yB Lemma G.8 (b), @xmath is
an edge for every @xmath .

Choose any @xmath and set @xmath .

If either

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then using Lemma G.8 we can count the edges at either @xmath or @xmath
and see that there is always more than @xmath of them. We note that
@xmath never happens due to our assumptions on the @xmath ’s.

Therefore the remaining case to consider is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the equality holds for every @xmath . This implies:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the @xmath ’s are positive integers and coprime, we must have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is exactly Example G.7 for @xmath . Otherwise, if @xmath we can
take @xmath for any two different @xmath and set @xmath to be the
complement of @xmath . Then @xmath and by Lemma G.8 (a) and (c) there
are too many edges at the @xmath ’s.

@xmath

###### Corollary G.10.

If @xmath is a smooth toric Legendrian subvariety and @xmath , then it
is either a linear subspace or @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath

## Chapter H Examples of quasihomogeneous Legendrian varieties

The content of this chapter is published in [ Buc09 ] .

We construct a family of examples of Legendrian subvarieties in
projective spaces. Although most of them are singular, a new example of
a smooth Legendrian variety in dimension 8 is in this family. The 8-fold
has interesting properties: it is a compactification of the special
linear group, a Fano manifold of index 5 and Picard number 1 (see
Theorem H.4 (b)). Also we show how this construction generalises to give
new smooth examples in dimensions 5 and 14 (see § H.2.1 ).

In § H.1 we introduce the notation for this chapter. In § H.2 we
formulate the results and make some comments on possible
generalisations. In § H.3 we study the structure of a group action
related to the problem. In § H.4 we finally prove the results.

### h.1 Notation and definitions

For this chapter we fix an integer @xmath .

##### Vector space @xmath

Let @xmath be a vector space over complex numbers @xmath of dimension
@xmath , which we interpret as a space of pairs of @xmath matrices. The
coordinates are: @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . By @xmath we denote the
matrix @xmath and similarly for @xmath and @xmath .

Given two @xmath matrices @xmath and @xmath , by @xmath we denote the
point of the vector space @xmath , while by @xmath we denote the point
of the projective space @xmath .

Sometimes, we will represent some linear maps @xmath and some 2-linear
forms @xmath as @xmath matrices. In such a case we will assume the
coordinates on @xmath are given in the lexicographical order:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Symplectic form @xmath

On @xmath we consider the standard symplectic form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (H.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Further we set @xmath to be the matrix of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Varieties @xmath, @xmath and @xmath

We consider the following subvariety of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (H.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The square at @xmath seems to be irrelevant here, but it slightly
simplifies the notation in the proofs of Theorem H.4 (b) and Proposition
H.10 (ii). Although it is not essential for the content of this chapter,
we note that @xmath is @xmath -cointegrable.

Further we define two types of subvarieties of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . The varieties @xmath have been also studied by [ Str82 ]
and [ MT99 ] . @xmath (especially @xmath ) is the main object of this
chapter.

##### Automorphisms @xmath

For any @xmath we let @xmath be the following linear automorphism of
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also the induced automorphism of @xmath will be written in the same way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Groups @xmath and @xmath, Lie algebra @xmath and their
representation

We set @xmath and let it act on @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This action preserves the symplectic form @xmath .

We will mostly consider the restricted action of @xmath .

We also set @xmath to be the Lie algebra of @xmath and we have the
tangent action of @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Though we denote the action of the groups @xmath , @xmath and the Lie
algebra @xmath by the same @xmath we hope it will not lead to any
confusion. Also the induced action of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath will
be denoted by @xmath .

##### Orbits @xmath and @xmath

We define the following sets:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

so that @xmath and @xmath .

Clearly, if @xmath , then @xmath is empty, so whenever we are
considering @xmath we will assume @xmath .

##### Elementary matrices @xmath and points @xmath and @xmath

Let @xmath be the elementary @xmath matrix with unit in the @xmath row
and the @xmath column and zeroes elsewhere.

We distinguish two points @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These points will be usually chosen as nice representatives of the
closed orbits @xmath and @xmath .

##### Submatrices - extracting rows and columns

Assume @xmath is an @xmath matrix and @xmath are two sets of indices of
cardinality @xmath and @xmath respectively:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then we denote by @xmath the @xmath submatrix of @xmath obtained by
removing rows of indices @xmath and columns of indices @xmath . Also for
a set of indices @xmath we denote by @xmath the set of @xmath indices
complementary to @xmath .

We will also use a simplified version of the above notation when we
remove only a single column and single row: @xmath denotes the @xmath
submatrix of @xmath obtained by removing @xmath -th row and @xmath -th
column, i.e. @xmath

Also in the simplest situation where we remove only the last row and the
last column, we write @xmath , so that @xmath .

### h.2 Main results

In this chapter we give a classification ¹ ¹ 1 This problem was
suggested by Sung Ho Wang. of Legendrian subvarieties in @xmath that are
contained in @xmath .

###### Theorem H.3.

Let projective space @xmath , varieties @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
automorphisms @xmath be defined as in § H.1 . Assume @xmath is an
irreducible subvariety. Then @xmath is Legendrian and contained in
@xmath if and only if @xmath is one of the following varieties:

-   @xmath for some @xmath or

-   @xmath for some @xmath .

The idea of the proof of Theorem H.3 is based on the observation that
every Legendrian subvariety that is contained in @xmath must be
invariant under the action of the group @xmath . This is explained in §
H.3 . A proof of the theorem is presented in § H.4.1 .

Also we analyse which of the above varieties appearing in 1. and 2. are
smooth:

###### Theorem H.4.

With the definition of @xmath as in § H.1 , the family @xmath contains
the following varieties:

-   @xmath is a linear subspace.

-   @xmath is smooth, its Picard group is generated by a hyperplane
    section. Moreover @xmath is a compactification of @xmath and it is
    isomorphic to a hyperplane section of Grassmannian @xmath . The
    connected component of @xmath is equal to @xmath and @xmath is not a
    homogeneous space.

-   @xmath is the 15 dimensional spinor variety @xmath .

-    For @xmath , the variety @xmath is singular.

A proof of the theorem is explained in § H.4.3 .

Variety @xmath is an original example of [ Buc09 ] . Also it is the
first described example of a smooth non-homogeneous Legendrian variety
of dimension bigger than @xmath (see § A.1.3 ). This example is very
close to a homogeneous one, namely it is isomorphic to a hyperplane
section of @xmath , a well known subadjoint variety. So a natural
question arises, whether general hyperplane sections of other Legendrian
varieties admit a Legendrian embedding. The answer is yes and we explain
it (as well as many conclusions from this surprisingly simple
observation) in Chapter I .

###### Theorem H.5.

With the definition of @xmath as in § H.1 , variety @xmath is smooth if
and only if @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . In the first two cases, @xmath
and @xmath are linear spaces, while @xmath .

A proof of the theorem is presented in § H.4.2 .

#### h.2.1 Generalisation: Representation theory and further examples

The interpretation of Theorem H.4 (b) and (c) can be following: We take
the exceptional Legendrian variety @xmath , slice it with a linear
section and we get a description, which generalised to matrices of
bigger size, gives the bigger exceptional Legendrian variety @xmath . A
similar connection can be established between other exceptional
Legendrian varieties (see § A.1.3 ).

For instance, assume that @xmath is a vector space of dimension @xmath ,
which we interpret as the space of pairs of @xmath symmetric matrices
@xmath . Now in @xmath consider the subvariety @xmath , which is the
closure of the following set:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem H.6.

All the varieties @xmath are Legendrian and we have:

-   @xmath is a linear subspace.

-   @xmath is smooth and it is isomorphic to a hyperplane section of
    Lagrangian Grassmannian @xmath .

-   @xmath is smooth and it is Grassmannian variety @xmath .

-    For @xmath , the variety @xmath is singular.

The proof is exactly as the proof of Theorem H.4 .

Similarly, we can take @xmath to be a vector space of dimension @xmath ,
which we interpret as the space of pairs of @xmath skew-symmetric
matrices @xmath . Now in @xmath consider subvariety @xmath , which is
the closure of the following set:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem H.7.

All the varieties @xmath are Legendrian and we have:

-   @xmath is a linear subspace.

-   @xmath is smooth and it is isomorphic to a hyperplane section of the
    spinor variety @xmath .

-   @xmath is smooth and it is the 27 dimensional @xmath variety.

-    For @xmath , the variety @xmath is singular.

Here the only difference is that we replace the determinants by the
Pfaffians of the appropriate submatrices and also for the previous cases
we will be picking some diagonal matrices as nice representatives. Since
there is no non-zero skew-symmetric diagonal matrix, we must modify our
calculations a little bit, but there is essentially no difference in the
technique.

Prior to [ Buc09 ] neither @xmath nor @xmath have been identified as
smooth Legendrian subvarieties.

Therefore we have established a connection between the subadjoint
varieties of the 4 exceptional groups @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . A similar connection was obtained by [ LM02 ] .

We note that @xmath symmetric matrices, @xmath matrices and @xmath
skew-symmetric matrices naturally correspond to @xmath Hermitian
matrices with coefficients in @xmath , where @xmath is the field of,
respectively, real numbers @xmath , complex numbers @xmath and
quaternions @xmath (see [ LM01 ] and references therein). An algebraic
relation (analogous to Parts (c) of Theorems H.4 , H.6 and H.7 ) between
Lie algebras of types @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and @xmath Hermitian
matrices with coefficients in @xmath is described in [ BK94 ] .

### h.3 @xmath-action and its orbits

Recall the definition of @xmath in § H.1 .

The following polynomials are in the homogeneous ideal of @xmath (the
indices @xmath below run through @xmath , @xmath is a summation index):

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (H.8a)
     @xmath      (H.8b)
     @xmath      (H.8c)
     @xmath      (H.8d)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations simply come from eliminating @xmath from the defining
equation of @xmath — see Equation ( H.2 ).

For the statement and proof of the following proposition, recall our
notation of § H.1 .

###### Proposition H.9.

Let @xmath be a Legendrian subvariety. If @xmath is contained in @xmath
, then @xmath is preserved by the induced action of @xmath on @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be as in the Theorem A.9 and define @xmath
analogously. Clearly @xmath . Also let @xmath be the map described in
Theorem A.9 . By Theorem A.9 it is enough to show that @xmath or that
the images of the quadrics ( H.8a )–( H.8d ) under @xmath generate
@xmath .

We write out the details of the proof only for @xmath . There is no
difference between this case and the general one, except for the
complexity of notation.

Let us take the quadric

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath . Also let @xmath be the @xmath symmetric matrix
corresponding to @xmath . For instance:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Choose an arbitrary @xmath and at the moment we want to think of it as
of a single vertical @xmath -vector: @xmath , so that the following
multiplication makes sense:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similar calculations show that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next in the ideal of @xmath we have the following quadrics: @xmath for
@xmath (see Equation ( H.8b )) and @xmath (see Equation ( H.8a )). By
taking images under @xmath of the linear combinations of those quadrics
we can get an arbitrary traceless matrix @xmath acting on @xmath in the
following way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Exponentiate this action of @xmath to get the action of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proves that the action of subgroup @xmath preserves @xmath as
claimed in the proposition. The action of the other component @xmath is
calculated in the same way, but using quadrics ( H.8c )–( H.8d ).

@xmath

#### h.3.1 Invariant subsets

Here we want to decompose @xmath into a union of some @xmath -invariant
subsets, most of which are orbits.

###### Proposition H.10.

-    The sets @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -invariant and they
    are all contained in @xmath .

-   @xmath is equal to the union of all @xmath (for @xmath ) and all
    @xmath (for integers @xmath , @xmath ).

-    Every @xmath is an orbit of the action of @xmath . If @xmath is
    odd, then @xmath is isomorphic (as algebraic variety) to @xmath .
    Otherwise if @xmath is even, then @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath .
    In both cases

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Proof. The proof of part (i) is an explicit verification from the
definitions in § H.1 .

To prove part (ii), assume @xmath is a point of @xmath , so @xmath .
First assume that the ranks of both matrices are maximal:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath must be non-zero and @xmath . Let @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath . Then we have:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore @xmath .

Next, if either of the ranks is not maximal:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then by Equation ( H.2 ) we must have @xmath . So @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath .

Now we prove (iii). The action of @xmath commutes with @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So to prove @xmath is an orbit it is enough to prove that @xmath is an
orbit, which follows from the definitions of the action and @xmath .

We have the following epimorphic map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then we must have @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath . Hence
@xmath and @xmath . If @xmath is odd and @xmath , then @xmath so @xmath
. So @xmath is either isomorphic to @xmath or to @xmath as stated.

@xmath

From Proposition H.10 (ii) we conclude that @xmath is an equivariant
compactification of @xmath (if @xmath is odd) or @xmath (if @xmath is
even). See [ Tim03 ] and references therein for the theory of
equivariant compactifications. In the setup of [ Tim03 , §8] , this is
the compactification corresponding to the representation @xmath , where
@xmath is the standard representation of @xmath . Therefore some
properties of @xmath could also be read from the general description of
group compactifications.

###### Proposition H.11.

-    The dimension of @xmath is @xmath . In particular, if @xmath , then
    the dimension is equal to @xmath .

-   @xmath is an orbit of the action of @xmath , unless @xmath is even
    and @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then there are exactly two closed orbits of the action
    of @xmath : @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. Part (i) follows from [ Str82 , Prop. 2.10] .

For part (ii) let @xmath be any point. By Gaussian elimination and
elementary linear algebra, we can prove that there exists @xmath such
that @xmath is a pair of diagonal matrices. Moreover, if @xmath , then
we can choose @xmath and @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath and this finishes the proof in the case @xmath .

So assume @xmath . Then we can choose @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . If @xmath , then set @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly @xmath and:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So rescaling we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this finishes the proof of (ii).

For part (iii), denote by @xmath (respectively, @xmath ) the standard
representation of the first (respectively, the second) component of
@xmath with the trivial action of the other component. Then @xmath as a
representation of @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . For @xmath the
representation @xmath is not isomorphic to @xmath and therefore @xmath
is a union of two irreducible non-isomorphic representations. It is a
standard fact from the representation theory, that the closed orbits of
the action of a semisimple group on a projectivised representation are
in one to one correspondence with the irreducible subrepresentations. So
there are exactly two closed orbits of the action of @xmath on @xmath .
These orbits are simply @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath

#### h.3.2 Action of @xmath

The action of @xmath extends the action of @xmath , but it does not
preserve @xmath . So we will only consider the action of @xmath when
speaking of @xmath .

We have properties analogous to Proposition H.11 (ii) and (iii) but with
no exceptional cases:

###### Proposition H.12.

-    Every @xmath is an orbit of the action of @xmath .

-    For every @xmath there are exactly two closed orbits of the action
    of @xmath : @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. This is exactly as the proof of Proposition H.11 (ii) and (iii).

@xmath

### h.4 Legendrian varieties in @xmath

In this section we prove the main results of the chapter.

#### h.4.1 Classification

We start by proving the Theorem H.3 .

Proof. First assume @xmath is Legendrian and contained in @xmath . If
@xmath contains a point @xmath where both @xmath and @xmath are
invertible, then by Proposition H.9 it must contain the orbit of @xmath
, which by Proposition H.10 (ii) and (iii) is equal to @xmath for some
@xmath . But the dimension of @xmath is @xmath which is exactly the
dimension of @xmath (see Proposition H.10 (iii)), so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, if @xmath does not contain any point @xmath where
both @xmath and @xmath are invertible, then in fact @xmath is contained
in the locus @xmath . This locus is just the union of all @xmath and its
irreducible components are the closures of @xmath , which are exactly
@xmath . So in particular every irreducible component has dimension
@xmath (see Proposition H.11 (i)) and hence @xmath must be one of these
components.

Therefore it remains to show that all these varieties are Legendrian.

The fact that @xmath is a Legendrian variety follows from [ Str82 ,
pp524–525] . Strickland proves there that the affine cone over @xmath
(or @xmath in the notation of [ Str82 ] ) is the closure of a conormal
bundle. Conormal bundles are classical examples of Lagrangian varieties
(see Example D.6 ).

Since @xmath preserves the symplectic form @xmath , it is enough to
prove that @xmath is Legendrian.

The group @xmath acts symplectically on @xmath and the action has an
open orbit on @xmath — see Proposition H.10 (iii). Thus the tangent
spaces to the affine cone over @xmath are Lagrangian if and only if just
one tangent space at a point of the open orbit is Lagrangian.

So we take @xmath . Now the affine tangent space to @xmath at @xmath is
the linear subspace of @xmath spanned by @xmath and the image of the
tangent action of the Lie algebra @xmath . We must prove that for every
four traceless matrices @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (H.13a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (H.13b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Equality ( H.13a ) is true without the assumption on the trace of the
matrices:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For Equality ( H.13b ) we calculate:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence we have proved that the closure of @xmath is Legendrian.

@xmath

#### h.4.2 Degenerate matrices

By [ Str82 , Prop. 1.3] the ideal of @xmath is generated by the
coefficients of @xmath , the coefficients of @xmath , the @xmath -minors
of @xmath and the @xmath -minors of @xmath . In short, we will say that
the equations of @xmath are given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (H.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Lemma H.15.

Assume @xmath and @xmath . Then:

-    The tangent cone to @xmath at @xmath is a product of a linear space
    of dimension @xmath and the affine cone over @xmath .

-    The tangent cone to @xmath at @xmath is a product of a linear space
    of dimension @xmath and the affine cone of @xmath .

-   @xmath is smooth at @xmath if and only if @xmath .

-   @xmath is smooth at @xmath if and only if @xmath .

Proof. We only prove (i) and (ii), while (i’) and (ii’) follow in the
same way by exchanging @xmath and @xmath . Consider Equations ( H.14 )
of @xmath restricted to the affine neighbourhood of @xmath obtained by
substituting @xmath . Taking the lowest degree part of these equations
we get some of the equations of the tangent cone at @xmath (recall our
convention on the notation of submatrices — see § H.1 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These equations define the product of the linear subspace @xmath and the
affine cone over @xmath embedded in the set of those pairs of matrices,
whose last row and column are zero: @xmath . So the variety defined by
those equations is irreducible and its dimension is equal to @xmath .
Since this contains the tangent cone we are interested in and by § B.8
(1), they must coincide as claimed in (i).

Next (ii) follows immediately, since for @xmath the equations above
reduce to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence the tangent cone is just the tangent space, so @xmath is a
smooth point of @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath , then @xmath is not a
linear space, so by (i) the tangent cone is not a linear space either
and @xmath is singular at @xmath — see § B.8 (3).

@xmath

Now we can prove Theorem H.5 :

Proof. It is obvious from the definition of @xmath , that @xmath and
@xmath , so these are indeed linear spaces.

Therefore assume @xmath . But @xmath is @xmath invariant (see
Proposition H.12 (i)) and so is its singular locus @xmath . Hence @xmath
is singular if and only if @xmath contains a closed orbit of @xmath .

So @xmath is smooth, if and only if it is smooth at both @xmath and
@xmath (see Proposition H.12 (ii)), which by Lemma H.15 (ii) and (ii’)
holds if and only if @xmath and @xmath .

To finish the proof, it remains to verify what kind of variety is @xmath
. Consider the following map:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Clearly this is the Segre embedding in appropriate coordinates. The
image of this embedding is contained in @xmath (see Equation ( H.14 ))
and since dimension of @xmath is equal to the dimension of @xmath we
conclude the above map gives an isomorphism of @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath

#### h.4.3 Invertible matrices

We wish to determine some of the equations of @xmath . Clearly the
equations of @xmath (see Equation ( H.8 )) are quadratic equations of
@xmath . To find other equations, we recall that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, for a matrix @xmath with determinant 1 we know that the entries
of @xmath consist of the appropriate minors (up to sign) of @xmath .
Therefore we get many inhomogeneous equations satisfied by every pair
@xmath (recall our convention on the notation of submatrices — see § H.1
):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To make them homogeneous, multiply two such equations appropriately:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (H.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are degree @xmath equations, which are satisfied by the points of
@xmath and we state the following theorem:

###### Theorem H.17.

Let @xmath . Then the quadratic polynomials ( H.8a )–( H.8d ) and the
cubic polynomials ( H.16 ) generate a homogeneous ideal @xmath in @xmath
which defines @xmath as a subscheme of @xmath . Moreover @xmath is
smooth.

Proof. It is enough to prove that the scheme @xmath defined by @xmath is
smooth, because the reduced subscheme of @xmath coincides with @xmath .

The scheme @xmath is @xmath invariant, hence as in the proof of Theorem
H.5 and by Proposition H.11 (iii) it is enough to verify smoothness at
@xmath and @xmath . Since we have the additional symmetry here
(exchanging @xmath ’s with @xmath ’s) it is enough to verify the
smoothness at @xmath .

Now we calculate the tangent space to @xmath at @xmath by taking linear
parts of the polynomials evaluated at @xmath . From polynomials ( H.8 )
we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now from Equations ( H.16 ) for @xmath and @xmath we get the following
evaluated equations:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(where @xmath is either @xmath or @xmath , which ever is different than
@xmath and analogously for @xmath ) so the linear part is just @xmath .
Hence by varying @xmath and @xmath we can get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore the tangent space has codimension at least @xmath , which is
exactly the codimension of @xmath — see Proposition H.10 (iii). Hence
@xmath is smooth (in particular reduced) and @xmath .

@xmath

###### Remark H.18.

The ideal @xmath from Theorem H.17 could possibly be unsaturated (in
other words, the affine subscheme in @xmath defined by this ideal could
be not reduced at @xmath ). Computer calculations show that this is not
the case and @xmath is saturated. We will only need that the saturated
ideal of @xmath has no other quadratic polynomials than @xmath and we
will prove it later.

To describe @xmath for @xmath we must find more equations.

There is a more general version of the above property of an inverse of a
matrix with determinant 1, which is less commonly known.

###### Proposition H.19.

-    Assume @xmath is a @xmath matrix of determinant @xmath and @xmath
    are two sets of indices, both of cardinality @xmath (again recall
    our convention on indices and submatrices — see § H.1 ). Denote by
    @xmath . Then the appropriate minors are equal (up to sign):

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    A coordinate free way to express these equalities is following:
    Assume @xmath is a vector space of dimension @xmath , @xmath is a
    linear automorphism of @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the induced
    automorphism of @xmath . If @xmath , then:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    Consider the induced action of @xmath on the polynomials on @xmath
    . Then the vector space spanned by the set of equations of (i) for a
    fixed @xmath is @xmath invariant.

Proof. Part (ii) follows immediately from (i), since if @xmath is a
matrix of @xmath , then the terms of the matrices of the maps @xmath and
@xmath are exactly the appropriate minors of @xmath and @xmath .

Part (iii) follows easily from (ii).

As for (i), we only sketch the proof, leaving the details to the reader.
Firstly, reduce to the case when @xmath and @xmath are just @xmath and
the determinant of @xmath is possibly @xmath (which is where the sign
shows up in the equality). Secondly if both determinants @xmath and
@xmath are zero, then the equality is clearly satisfied. Otherwise
assume for example @xmath . Then performing the appropriate row and
column operations we can change @xmath into a diagonal matrix, @xmath
and @xmath into the zero matrices and all these operations can be done
without changing @xmath nor @xmath . Then the statement follows easily.

@xmath

In particular we get:

###### Corollary H.20.

Assume @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are as in Proposition H.19 (i).

-    If @xmath is even and @xmath , then the equation

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is homogeneous of degree @xmath and it is satisfied by points of
    @xmath .

-    If @xmath and @xmath , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is a homogeneous equation of degree @xmath satisfied by points of
    @xmath .

Proof. Clearly both equations are homogeneous. If @xmath and @xmath ,
then the following equations are satisfied:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (H.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (H.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Equation ( H.21 ) follows from Proposition H.19 (i) and Equation ( H.22
) follows from @xmath ). Equation in (b) is just Equation ( H.21 )
squared multiplied side-wise by Equation ( H.22 ).

So both equations in (a) and (b) are satisfied by every pair @xmath and
by homogeneity also by @xmath . Hence (a) and (b) hold on an open dense
subset of @xmath , so also on whole @xmath .

@xmath

We know enough equations of @xmath to prove the Theorem H.4 :

##### Case @xmath — linear subspace

Proof. To prove (a) just take the linear equations from Corollary H.20
(a) for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

@xmath

##### Case @xmath — hyperplane section of @xmath

Proof. For (b), @xmath is smooth by Theorem H.17 and it is a
compactification of @xmath by Proposition H.10 (i) and (iii).

###### Picard group of @xmath.

The complement of the open orbit

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

must be a union of some orbits of @xmath , each of them must have
dimension smaller than @xmath . So by Propositions H.10 (ii), (iii),
H.11 (i) and (ii) the only candidates are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . We claim that only @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
contained in @xmath . To exclude @xmath consider the point:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This point is in @xmath and does not satisfy Equation ( H.16 ) for
@xmath and @xmath and therefore it is not contained in @xmath . So
@xmath is disjoint from @xmath .

Analogously, @xmath is disjoint from @xmath .

It only remains to prove that @xmath , since the other orbits are in the
closure of @xmath . Take the curve in @xmath parametrised by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath the curve meets @xmath , and therefore @xmath is contained in
@xmath and that finishes the proof of the claim.

Since @xmath (see Proposition H.11 (i)), @xmath is a prime divisor. We
have @xmath and by [ Har77 , Prop. II.6.5(c)] the Picard group of @xmath
is isomorphic to @xmath with the ample generator @xmath .

Next we check that @xmath is linearly equivalent (as a divisor on @xmath
) to a hyperplane section @xmath of @xmath . Since we already know that
@xmath , we must have @xmath for some positive integer @xmath . But
there are lines contained in @xmath (for example those contained in
@xmath ) ² ² 2 Actually, the reader could also easily find explicitly
some lines (or even planes) which intersect the open orbit and conclude
that @xmath is covered by lines. . So let @xmath be any line and we
intersect:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But the result must be an integer, so @xmath as claimed.

###### Complete embedding.

Since @xmath itself is definitely not a hyperplane section of @xmath ,
the conclusion is that the Legendrian embedding of @xmath is not given
by a complete linear system. The natural guess for a better embedding is
the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(we note that @xmath for @xmath with @xmath ) and one can verify that
the projection from the point @xmath restricted to @xmath gives an
isomorphism with @xmath .

The Grassmannian @xmath in its Plücker embedding can be described as the
closure of:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we immediately identify @xmath as the section @xmath of the
Grassmannian.

Though it is not essential, we note that @xmath (see Kodaira vanishing
theorem [ Laz04 , Thm 4.2.1] ; alternatively, it follows from the fact
that @xmath for Grassmannians) and hence the above embedding of @xmath
is given by the complete linear system.

###### Quadratic equations of @xmath.

In order to calculate the automorphism group of @xmath we need to know
that the quadratic part of its saturated ideal has no other polynomial
than linear combinations of polynomials ( H.8a )–( H.8d ) (see also
Remark H.18 ).

The ideal of grassmannian @xmath is generated by 35 quadratic equations,
which in the above coordinates take form:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Although at the first glance there are 36 equations above, the trace
equality @xmath makes one of them redundant.

The homogeneous ideal @xmath is the same but with @xmath and the ideal
of @xmath arises as the elimination ideal of @xmath with the @xmath
eliminated. In particular the quadratic polynomials in @xmath are
exactly those quadrics in @xmath that do not contain any term with
@xmath . No term in @xmath other than @xmath appears more than once in
the equations listed above. Therefore the quadratic part of the ideal
@xmath arises by eliminating @xmath from:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore polynomials ( H.8 ) span all the quadratic polynomials in
@xmath .

###### Automorphism group.

It remains to calculate @xmath — the connected component of the
automorphism group.

The tangent Lie algebra of the group of automorphisms of a complex
projective manifold is equal to the global sections of the tangent
bundle, see Theorem C.4 . A vector field on @xmath is also a section of
@xmath and we have the following short exact sequence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The homogeneous vector bundle @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath , where
@xmath is the universal subbundle in @xmath and @xmath is the universal
quotient bundle. This bundle corresponds to an irreducible module of the
parabolic subgroup in @xmath . Calculating explicitly its highest weight
and applying Bott formula [ Ott95 ] we get that @xmath . Hence every
section of @xmath extends to a section of @xmath . In other words, if
@xmath is the subgroup preserving @xmath , then the restriction map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is epimorphic.

The action of @xmath on @xmath preserves the natural symplectic form
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the action of @xmath on @xmath preserves the hyperplane @xmath
containing @xmath , it must also preserve @xmath , i.e. @xmath preserves
@xmath . Therefore @xmath acts on the quotient @xmath and hence the
restriction map factorises:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem A.11 , group @xmath is contained in the image of @xmath , so
by Theorem A.9 , Proposition H.9 and the above considerations about
quadratic polynomials:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular @xmath cannot be homogeneous as it contains more than one
orbit of the connected component of automorphism group.

@xmath

We note that the fact that @xmath is not homogeneous can be also proved
without calculating the automorphism group. Since @xmath , it follows
from Theorem A.6 , that @xmath could only be one of the subadjoint
varieties. But none of them has Picard group @xmath and dimension 8.

##### Case @xmath — spinor variety @xmath

Proof. Similarly to Grassmannian @xmath the spinor variety can be
described in terms of matrices. Let @xmath be the vector space of all
@xmath skew-symmetric matrices. Consider a map:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (H.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In coordinates, @xmath is just the matrix of all @xmath Pfaffians of
@xmath and @xmath is the Pfaffian of @xmath . The spinor variety @xmath
is the closure of the image of this map.

For a skew-symmetric matrix @xmath by @xmath denote the Pfaffian of
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath rows and columns removed and by @xmath
denote the Pfaffian of @xmath . Now consider the following map:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (H.24)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

The image of this map is in an open neighbourhood of @xmath and
satisfies the equations of @xmath : 30 quadratic equations @xmath as in
( H.8 ) and 36 quadratic equations from Corollary H.20 (a). So the image
is contained in @xmath . Moreover, Map ( H.24 ) is just a linear
coordinate change different from Map ( H.4.3 ). Therefore, since @xmath
and both varieties are irreducible it follows that (up to linear change
of coordinates):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as claimed in the theorem.

@xmath

##### Case @xmath — singular varieties

Proof. Finally we prove (d). We want to prove, that for @xmath variety
@xmath is singular at @xmath . To do that, we calculate the reduced
tangent cone

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From Equations ( H.8 ) we easily get the following linear and quadratic
equations of @xmath (again we suggest to have a look at § H.1 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath and some @xmath .

Next assume @xmath and @xmath are two sets of indices, both of
cardinality @xmath and such that neither @xmath nor @xmath contains
@xmath . Consider the equation of @xmath as in Corollary H.20 (b):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To get an equation of @xmath , we evaluate at @xmath and take the lowest
degree part, which is simply @xmath . Since @xmath is reduced, by
varying @xmath and @xmath we get that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore also:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath is contained in the product of the linear space @xmath and
the affine cone @xmath over the union of @xmath for @xmath . We claim
that @xmath . By Proposition H.11 (i), every component of @xmath has
dimension @xmath , so by § B.8 (1) the tangent cone must be a union of
some of the components. Therefore to prove the claim it is enough to
find for every @xmath a single element of @xmath that is contained in
the tangent cone.

So take @xmath and @xmath to be two strictly positive integers such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and consider the curve in @xmath with the following parametrisation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to verify that this family is contained in @xmath for @xmath
and as @xmath converges to @xmath , it gives rise to a tangent vector
(i.e. an element of the reduced tangent cone — see the point-wise
definition in § B.8 ) that belongs to @xmath .

So indeed @xmath , which for @xmath contains more than 1 component,
hence cannot be a linear space. Therefore by § B.8 (3) variety @xmath is
singular at @xmath .

@xmath

## Chapter I Hyperplane sections of Legendrian subvarieties

The content of § I.1 and § I.3 of this chapter is published in [ Buc08b
] .

The Legendrian variety @xmath constructed in Chapter H is isomorphic to
a hyperplane section of another Legendrian variety @xmath . In this
chapter we prove that general hyperplane sections of other Legendrian
varieties also admit a Legendrian embedding. This gives numerous new
examples of smooth Legendrian subvarieties.

### i.1 Hyperplane section

#### i.1.1 Construction

The idea of the construction is built on the concept of symplectic
reduction (see § D.1.3 ). Let @xmath be a hyperplane in @xmath . By

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we denote the @xmath -perpendicular to @xmath subspace of @xmath , which
in this case is a line contained in @xmath . We think of @xmath both as
a point in the projective space @xmath and a line in @xmath . We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to be the projection map and for a given Legendrian subvariety @xmath we
let @xmath .

We have the natural symplectic structure @xmath on @xmath determined by
@xmath (see § D.1.3 ). Also @xmath is always Legendrian by Proposition
D.1 and Lemma B.2 .

Note that so far we have not used any smoothness condition on @xmath .

#### i.1.2 Proof of smoothness

Hence to prove Theorem A.14 it is enough to prove that for a general
@xmath , the map @xmath gives an isomorphism of the smooth locus of
@xmath onto its image, an open subset in @xmath .

Recall the definition of secant variety from § B.9 .

###### Lemma I.1.

Let @xmath , choose such a point @xmath that @xmath and let @xmath be
the projection map.

-    If @xmath is smooth, then @xmath gives an isomorphism of @xmath and
    @xmath .

-    In general, @xmath is 1 to 1 and @xmath is an isomorphism of the
    smooth part of @xmath onto its image. In particular, the dimension
    of singular locus of @xmath is greater or equal to the dimension of
    singular locus of @xmath .

Proof. See [ Har77 , Prop. IV.3.4] — the proof is identical in general
as for the curve case. We only note that if @xmath is smooth, then the
secant variety @xmath contains all the embedded tangent spaces of @xmath
. They arise when limits @xmath approaches @xmath .

@xmath

Now we can prove Theorem A.14 :

Proof. By the lemma and the construction in § I.1.1 it is enough to
prove that there exists @xmath s.t. @xmath .

Given two different points @xmath and @xmath in a projective space we
denote by @xmath the projective line through @xmath and @xmath . Let

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --
                                                                                                                                         @xmath   @xmath      
                                                                                                                                         @xmath   @xmath      
  so that @xmath is the incidence variety for the secant variety of @xmath . Obviously, @xmath and @xmath is irreducible. Also we let:                        
                                                                                                                                         @xmath   @xmath      
                                                                                                                                         @xmath   @xmath      
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --

so that the image of the projection of @xmath onto the last coordinate
is the locus of ‘bad’ points. More precisely, for a point @xmath there
exist @xmath such that @xmath if and only if @xmath .

We claim that the image of @xmath under the projection is not the whole
@xmath . To see this note that the condition defining @xmath , i.e.,
@xmath is equivalent to @xmath and @xmath is an isotropic subspace of
@xmath . Now either @xmath is a linear subspace and then both the claim
and the theorem are obvious or there exist two points @xmath such that
@xmath where by @xmath we mean some non-zero point in the line @xmath .
Therefore @xmath is strictly contained in @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so the image of @xmath under the projection cannot be equal to @xmath ¹
¹ 1 The inequality on the dimensions, although simple, is essential for
the proof. An analogous construction for Lagrangian subvarieties in
symplectic manifolds is known as symplectic reduction (see § D.1.3 for
linear algebra baby version of this), but does not produce smooth
Lagrangian subvarieties. .

@xmath

###### Corollary I.2.

Let @xmath be an irreducible Legendrian subvariety whose singular locus
has dimension at most @xmath . Let @xmath be the contact distribution on
@xmath . If @xmath is a general @xmath -cointegrable linear subspace of
codimension @xmath , then @xmath does not intersect the singular locus
of @xmath and @xmath is smooth and admits a Legendrian embedding via an
appropriate subsystem of linear system @xmath into @xmath .

@xmath

We sketch some proofs of Examples A.15 :

Proof. @xmath surfaces of (a) arise as codimension 4 linear sections of
Lagrangian Grassmannian @xmath . Since the canonical divisor @xmath (in
other words @xmath is Fano of index 4), by the adjunction formula, the
canonical divisor of the section is indeed trivial. On the other hand,
by [ LM07 , Prop. 9] it must have genus 9. Although we take quite
special (F-cointegrable) sections, they fall into the 19 dimensional
family of Mukai’s @xmath -surfaces of genus 9 [ Muk88 ] and they form a
13 dimensional subfamily.

The other families of surfaces as in (b) arise as sections of the other
exceptional subadjoint varieties: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . They are
all Fano of index 6, 10 and 18 respectively and their dimensions are 9,
15 and 27 hence taking successive linear sections we get to Calabi-Yau
manifolds as stated in (c). Further the canonical divisor is very ample,
so we have examples of general type as stated in (b) and (d).

The Fano varieties arise as intermediate steps, before coming down to
the level of Calabi-Yau manifolds. Also @xmath is a subadjoint variety
and its hyperplane section is the blow up of a quadric @xmath in a
codimension 2 linear section. The Del Pezzo surfaces are the hyperplane
sections of the blow up of @xmath in a conic curve.

@xmath

### i.2 Linear sections of decomposable Legendrian varieties

Assume @xmath and @xmath are two positive integers, @xmath . Let @xmath
and @xmath be two symplectic vector spaces, and let @xmath and @xmath be
two smooth, irreducible, non-degenerate, Legendrian subvarieties. In
this setup @xmath . Consider the decomposable variety @xmath . Clearly
@xmath , hence @xmath , while

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore a general codimension @xmath @xmath -cointegrable linear
section of @xmath will be smooth of @xmath and admit a Legendrian
embedding. The purpose of this section is to explain that these newly
constructed varieties have essentially different properties than those
of @xmath and @xmath . Hence our method also allows to produce new
examples without dropping the dimension.

Let @xmath be the following line bundle on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also let @xmath be the smooth locus of @xmath .

###### Lemma I.3.

@xmath is isomorphic to @xmath , the total space of the @xmath -bundle
associated to @xmath (see § C.3 ).

Proof. Let @xmath act on @xmath with weight @xmath on @xmath and weight
@xmath on @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the quotient map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a principal @xmath -bundle obtained by removing the zero section from
the total space of the line bundle @xmath for some integers @xmath and
@xmath . We have,

  -------------------- -------- -------- -- --
                       @xmath   @xmath      
                                            
  On the other hand,                        
                       @xmath   @xmath      
                                @xmath      
  -------------------- -------- -------- -- --

Moreover via the isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the class of line bundle @xmath is mapped to @xmath . Hence @xmath or
@xmath . In both cases the total spaces of the line bundles are the same
after removing the zero sections (the difference is only in the sign of
the weights of the @xmath -action, which we ignore at this point).

To finish the proof just note that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the image of @xmath under the quotient map is equal to @xmath .

@xmath

Hence by Lemma C.6 we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the kernel of the epimorphic map is generated by @xmath . If @xmath
and @xmath , by @xmath we will denote a line bundle on @xmath which
represents the image of @xmath under the epimorphic map.

###### Theorem I.4.

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath be as above. Let @xmath be the
contact distribution on @xmath and let @xmath be a general @xmath
-cointegrable linear subspace of codimension @xmath . Then @xmath is
smooth, admits a Legendrian embedding and has the following properties:

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.   We have the restriction map on the Picard groups:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    If @xmath , then @xmath is an isomorphism. If @xmath , then @xmath
    is injective.

In particular, we have:

1.  @xmath is not projectively isomorphic to neither @xmath or @xmath .

2.   If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath ;

3.   If @xmath and @xmath , where the @xmath ’s are line bundles
    corresponding to some effective divisors, then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for some @xmath corresponding to an effective divisor;

4.   If @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and either @xmath or @xmath is simply
    connected (for example Fano), then @xmath .

Proof. Since @xmath and @xmath are smooth, the singular locus of @xmath
has dimension @xmath . By Corollary I.2 , a general coisotropic linear
section of codimension @xmath (such as @xmath ) does not intersect the
singular locus of @xmath . Therefore @xmath is smooth and has natural
Legendrian embedding into @xmath .

Part (a) is immediate, since @xmath and neither linear section nor
projection changes the degree.

Part (b) follows from Lemma I.3 , § C.3 and the adjunction formula (see
[ Har77 , Prop. II.8.20] ).

Part (c) follows from the following generalisation of
Grothendieck-Lefschetz theorem due to Ravindra and Srinivas [ RS06 ] :

###### Theorem I.5.

Let @xmath be a subvariety of @xmath with singular locus of codimension
at least 2. Let @xmath be its general hyperplane section and let @xmath
and @xmath be the smooth locus of @xmath and @xmath respectively. Then
the restriction map @xmath is an isomorphism if dimension of @xmath is
at least @xmath or is injective if @xmath .

Since our variety @xmath arise as repeated hyperplane section and
projection of @xmath and the projection part is always an isomorphism of
smooth parts, we repeatedly apply the theorem of Ravindra and Sriniva to
conclude our claim.

Part (d) follows from (a) : @xmath and @xmath are not linear space,
hence @xmath . Therefore @xmath for @xmath and the varieties cannot be
projectively isomorphic.

Parts (e) and (f) are immediate consequences of (b) and (c) , since
@xmath is isomorphic to @xmath .

Finally, Part (g) follows from (c) and from [ Har77 , Ex. III.12.6] .

@xmath

To conclude we give a further series of examples:

###### Example I.6.

Apply the theorem to both @xmath and @xmath equal to the @xmath
-variety. As a result we get @xmath which we denote by @xmath , a smooth
Legendrian Fano variety of dimension 27, Picard group generated by a
hyperplane section and of index 8. Now apply the theorem to @xmath being
the @xmath -variety again and @xmath . The result, @xmath again has the
Picard group generated by a hyperplane section and @xmath , hence is
very ample. Analogously we construct @xmath and combining this result
with Corollary I.2 , we get infinitely many families of smooth
Legendrian varieties of general type with Picard group generated by a
very ample class in every dimension @xmath , where @xmath .

###### Example I.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath be arbitrary. If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath
has Picard group isomorphic to @xmath . Hence we can get a smooth
Legendrian variety with arbitrarily big Picard rank.

###### Example I.8.

Let @xmath . Let the resulting @xmath be called @xmath . Then @xmath ,
where @xmath is effective. Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for an effective @xmath . Construct analogously @xmath by taking the
section of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath we get that the canonical divisor can be written as an
ample plus an effective, so it is big. Hence in every dimension, it is
possible to construct many smooth Legendrian varieties with the maximal
Kodaira dimension.

### i.3 Extending Legendrian varieties

Our motivation is the example of Landsberg and Manivel [ LM07 , §4] , a
Legendrian embedding of a Kummer K3 surface blown up in 12 points. It
can be seen, that this embedding is given by a codimension 1 linear
system. We want to find a Legendrian 3-fold in @xmath whose hyperplane
section is this example. Unfortunately, we are not able to find a smooth
3-fold with these properties, but we get one with only isolated
singularities.

We recall the setup for the construction of the example. Let @xmath be
the conormal variety , i.e., the closure of the union of projectivised
conormal spaces over smooth points of @xmath . Landsberg and Manivel
study in details an explicit birational map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which depends on a hyperplane @xmath in @xmath and on a point @xmath .
After Bryant [ Bry82 ] they observe that @xmath (if only makes sense) is
always a Legendrian subvariety, but usually singular. Next they study
conditions under which @xmath is smooth. In particular, they prove that
the conditions are satisfied when @xmath is a Kummer quartic surface in
@xmath in general position with respect to @xmath and @xmath and this
gives rise to their example.

We want to modify the above construction just a little bit to obtain our
3-fold. Instead of considering @xmath as a subvariety in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we consider a subvariety @xmath in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the underlying affine cone of @xmath in @xmath is the same as
the underlying affine pencil of @xmath . In other words, we take @xmath
to be the closure of preimage of @xmath under the natural projection
map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Both @xmath and @xmath are naturally embedded into @xmath . Let @xmath
be a hyperplane in @xmath which does not contain @xmath nor @xmath . Set
@xmath and @xmath to be the point in @xmath dual to @xmath . Assume
@xmath is chosen in such a way that @xmath .

###### Theorem I.9.

Let @xmath be a subvariety constructed as above from any irreducible
subvariety @xmath . On @xmath consider the standard symplectic structure
(see § D.1.5 ) and on @xmath consider the associated contact structure.
Also assume @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are chosen as above. Then:

-   @xmath is a Legendrian subvariety contained in the quadric @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be the Legendrian variety in @xmath constructed from
    @xmath and @xmath as in § I.1.1 . Also consider the closure of
    @xmath as in the construction of [ LM07 , §4] . Then the two
    constructions agree, i.e., the closure @xmath is a component of
    @xmath .

-    The singular locus of @xmath equal to the union of following:

    on @xmath the singular points of @xmath ,

    on @xmath the singular points of @xmath and

    outside @xmath the preimage under @xmath of the singular locus of
    the conormal variety @xmath .

Proof. For part (i) consider @xmath , the affine cone over @xmath . The
cotangent bundle to @xmath is equal to @xmath . Furthermore, by our
definition @xmath , the affine cone over @xmath is the conormal variety
of @xmath , so a Lagrangian subvariety (see Example D.6 ).

For part (ii), we choose coordinates @xmath on @xmath and dual
coordinates @xmath on @xmath such that in the induced coordinates on
@xmath the hyperplane @xmath has the equation @xmath . Now restrict to
the affine piece @xmath on both @xmath and @xmath . We see explicitly,
that the projection map @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

agrees with the map @xmath from [ LM07 , §4] .

To find the singularities of @xmath on @xmath as in part (iii) note that
@xmath is invariant under the following action of @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, points of @xmath are fixed points of the action. So let
@xmath and then @xmath decomposes into the eigenspaces of the action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (I.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the fibre of the projection @xmath , @xmath . Clearly
the image of @xmath under the projection @xmath is @xmath , so the
dimension of a general fibre of @xmath is equal to @xmath . Therefore,
since the dimension of the fibre can only grow at special points, we
have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (I.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also @xmath maps @xmath to 0 and @xmath onto @xmath . Therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (I.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now assume @xmath is a smooth point of @xmath . Then adding Equations (
I.11 ) and ( I.12 ) we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By (i) the @xmath is equal to the @xmath , so in Equations ( I.11 ) and
( I.12 ) all the inequalities are in fact equalities. In particular
@xmath , so @xmath is a smooth point of @xmath .

Conversely, assume @xmath is a smooth point of @xmath , then the tangent
space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore clearly @xmath is a smooth point of @xmath .

Exactly the same argument shows that @xmath is singular at @xmath if and
only if @xmath is singular at @xmath .

For the last part of (iii) it is enough to note that @xmath is a locally
trivial @xmath -bundle when restricted to @xmath .

@xmath

###### Corollary I.13.

Given a Legendrian subvariety @xmath we can take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to construct a Legendrian subvariety in @xmath . Such a variety must be
the conormal variety to some variety @xmath (see Corollary E.17 ). Let
@xmath be the Legendrian variety constructed from @xmath as above. By
Theorem I.9 (ii), a component of a hyperplane section of @xmath can be
projected onto @xmath .

Unfortunately, in the setup of the theorem @xmath is almost always
singular (see § I.4 ).

###### Example I.14.

If @xmath is a Kummer quartic surface in @xmath , then @xmath is a
3-fold with 32 isolated singular points (it follows from Theorem I.9
(iii) because the Kummer quartic surface has 16 singular points, it is
isomorphic to its dual and it has smooth conormal variety in @xmath ).
Therefore by Theorem A.14 a general hyperplane section of @xmath is
smooth and admits a Legendrian embedding. By Theorem I.9 the example of
Landsberg and Manivel is a special case of this hyperplane section. Even
though the condition @xmath is a closed condition, it satisfies the
generality conditions of Theorem A.14 and therefore this hyperplane
section consists of a unique smooth component that is projected
isomorphically onto @xmath .

###### Example I.15.

Similarly, if @xmath is a curve in @xmath satisfying the generality
conditions of Bryant [ Bry82 , Thm G] , then @xmath is a surface with
only isolated singularities and its hyperplane section projects
isomorphically onto a Bryant’s Legendrian curve.

### i.4 Smooth varieties with smooth dual

Furthermore we observe that a classical problem of classifying smooth
varieties with smooth dual variety can be expressed in terms of
Legendrian varieties:

###### Corollary I.16.

Using the notation of the previous section, let @xmath be the quadric
@xmath — see Theorem I.9 (i). On @xmath consider the standard symplectic
structure (see § D.1.5 ) and on @xmath consider the associated contact
structure (see § E.1 ).

1.   Let @xmath be a smooth subvariety with @xmath smooth. Let @xmath be
    as in the above construction. Then @xmath is a smooth Legendrian
    variety contained in @xmath .

2.   Conversely, assume @xmath is irreducible, Legendrian and contained
    in @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath and the variety arising from
    @xmath in the above construction is exactly @xmath . Moreover, if
    @xmath is smooth, then @xmath and @xmath are smooth.

We underline that although all the smooth quadrics of a given dimension
are projectively isomorphic, the classification of quadrics relatively
to the contact structure is more complicated. The quadric @xmath can
therefore be written as @xmath in some symplectic coordinates @xmath on
@xmath . We note (without proof), that such quadric @xmath determines
uniquely the pair of Lagrangian subspaces @xmath and @xmath .

Proof. Part (i) follows immediately from Theorem I.9 (i) and (iii).

To prove Part (ii) , consider @xmath . By Lemma B.2 and Proposition D.1
@xmath is Legendrian. By Corollary E.17 , @xmath is a conormal variety
to some subvariety @xmath . The next thing to prove is that @xmath
coincides with the variety constructed above from @xmath , i.e. that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equivalently, it is enough to prove that @xmath is @xmath -invariant.
This is provided by Theorem A.9 since the quadric @xmath produces
exactly the required action. Finally, it follows that @xmath . Moreover,
@xmath is also the conormal variety to @xmath and hence @xmath . If
@xmath is in addition smooth, then @xmath and @xmath are smooth by
Theorem I.9 (iii).

@xmath

Therefore the classification of smooth varieties with smooth dual is
equivalent to the classification of pairs @xmath , where @xmath is a
quadric which can be written as @xmath in some symplectic coordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath and @xmath is a smooth Legendrian variety, which is contained
in @xmath . So far the only known examples of smooth varieties with
smooth dual are the smooth self-dual varieties (see [ Ein86 ] ). From
these we get some of the homogeneous Legendrian varieties (see Table I.1
). Therefore we cannot hope to produce new examples of smooth Legendrian
varieties in this way. What we hope for is to classify the pairs @xmath
as above and hence finish the classification of smooth varieties with
smooth dual.

]