# Acknowledgments

It is a very difficult task, if not impossible, to list all people who
contributed directly or indirectly to the achievement of my Ph.D.
studies. Therefore, I shall undertake the more modest task of
underlining the major contributions.

I would like first to express my gratitude to the Max-Planck-Institut
für Physik (MPI) for providing funding and optimal research
possibilities through the newly born International Max Planck Research
School for Elementary Particle Physics. Thanks also to the Technische
Universität München (TUM), in particular to Prof. Michael Ratz, for
providing the academic framework to my Ph.D. studies.

Next, I would like to thank my supervisor within the institute, Georg
Raffelt, for his kindness, support, availability, and the many useful
advice he gave me both at the scientific and non-scientific levels.

For the research presented in this thesis, I am mostly indebted to
Pasquale Di Bari. I benefited a lot from his expertise in the fields of
leptogenesis and cosmology in general. Moreover, I enjoyed the long
discussions about our work and beyond.

Then, my thanks go to all members of the “astroparticle” theory group
who overlapped with me since October 2005 at the MPI for a nice, relaxed
and inspiring atmosphere. Special thanks to Yvonne Wong for suggestions
about English issues and to Pasquale Serpico for useful information
about the process of terminating a Ph.D. at the MPI and TUM. Thanks also
to my office mate Stefano Pozzorini for the enjoyable “Swiss” atmosphere
inside the office. Finally, thanks to the other IMPRS students,
especially Florian Hahn-Wörnle, Edoardo Mirabella, and Joseph Pradler.

Last but not least, I am grateful to my parents for the irreplaceable
role they played from the very beginning until the present achievement
of my studies.

###### Contents

-    Summary
-    Acknowledgments
-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 The matter-antimatter puzzle
    -    1.2 The puzzle of neutrino masses
        -    1.2.1 Theory of neutrino oscillations
        -    1.2.2 Experimental evidence for neutrino oscillations
        -    1.2.3 Absolute neutrino mass scale
    -    1.3 The see-saw mechanism and leptogenesis
-    2 Vanilla leptogenesis
    -    2.1 General scenarios of unflavored leptogenesis
    -    2.2 The @xmath -dominated scenario
    -    2.3 Leptogenesis and supersymmetry
-    3 Adding flavor to vanilla leptogenesis
    -    3.1 When does flavor matter and why?
    -    3.2 Flavored Boltzmann equations and spectator processes
    -    3.3 In practice, what changes?
    -    3.4 Dependence on the initial conditions and lower bounds
        -    3.4.1 Alignment
        -    3.4.2 Democratic and semi-democratic cases
        -    3.4.3 One-flavor dominance
    -    3.5 Study of a specific example
-    4 From classical to quantum kinetic equations
    -    4.1 Validity of the different pictures
        -    4.1.1 When are flavor effects important?
        -    4.1.2 Maximum flavor effects
    -    4.2 Neutrino mass bound
    -    4.3 Limitations of a simple rate comparison
    -    4.4 Density matrix equation
-    5 Going beyond vanilla leptogenesis
    -    5.1 Degenerate limit for the heavy neutrinos
    -    5.2 @xmath -dominated scenario
    -    5.3 Effects of @xmath
-    6 Leptogenesis from low-energy CP -violating phases
    -    6.1 CP violation in neutrino physics
        -    6.1.1 Neutrino oscillations and the Dirac phase
        -    6.1.2 Neutrinoless double-beta decay and the Majorana
            phases
    -    6.2 Dirac phase leptogenesis
        -    6.2.1 The hierarchical limit
        -    6.2.2 The degenerate limit
    -    6.3 Leptogenesis from the Majorana phases
    -    6.4 Discussion
-    7 Conclusion
-    A Neutrino mixing parameters
-    B The see-saw mechanism with three RH neutrinos

] ]

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 The matter-antimatter puzzle

One can surely say that our understanding of the Universe has made a
huge leap forward in the last few years. This is partly because the
amount of data has dramatically increased, so that an epoch of
“precision cosmology” has started. But this is also due to an
accumulation of evidence for concepts that were still considered exotic
not so long ago, such as dark matter and dark energy. Even though their
nature is still unknown, at least there seems to be a consensus about
their existence.

Nowadays, one speaks about a “Standard Cosmological Model”, in analogy
with its very successful counterpart of particle physics. The Standard
Cosmological Model tells us that the Universe is in a phase of
accelerated expansion and that the total energy in the Universe is
shared among at least four components (see Fig. 1.2 ) which sum to
@xmath , meaning that the Universe is flat to a good precision. The
dominant component (about 73%) is called dark energy, dark matter makes
about 23%, ordinary matter (both luminous and dark) only 4% and
neutrinos 0.2–2%, the uncertainty here stemming from the unknown
absolute neutrino mass scale, as we shall see in Section 1.2.3 .

It is well known that the nature of dark matter is still mysterious. The
particle interpretation seems to be widely supported, and the candidates
are numerous: axion, lightest supersymmetric particle (neutralino,
gravitino), sterile neutrino, and many others.

Dark energy is probably a much bigger issue still than dark matter. It
is supposed to drive the accelerated expansion, but its nature is very
unclear. It also raises a fundamental question about how to treat the
vacuum energy in quantum field theory.

Ordinary matter, which constitutes our bodies as well as the Earth and
the stars, does not seem at first to introduce any challenge to our
understanding. However, this naive perception is wrong because two very
puzzling questions remain:

1.  Why is antimatter essentially absent in the observable Universe?

2.  Why is the number density of baryons so small compared to photons or
    neutrinos?

These two questions are puzzling because, according to the Standard
Big-Bang Theory, matter and antimatter evolved in the same way in the
early Universe. On the other hand, today the observable Universe is
composed almost exclusively of matter. Antimatter is only seen in
particle physics accelerators and in cosmic rays. Moreover, the rates
observed in cosmic rays are consistent with the secondary emission of
antiprotons, @xmath (see Fig. 1.2 ).

Ordinary matter is composed of baryons (protons, neutrons) and leptons
(electrons). One can assign an experimentally conserved number to
baryons and leptons. Baryons and leptons carry one unit of these
numbers, whereas antibaryons and antileptons carry one negative unit. In
this way one can say that the predominance of matter over antimatter is
equivalent to the existence of a net baryon number.

Following the Standard Big-Bang Theory and relying on the Standard Model
(SM) of particle physics, the relic density of baryons, i.e. nucleons
here, can be easily estimated. One has the usual Boltzmann equation for
the number density of baryons @xmath (or antibaryons)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is the baryon mass, @xmath the Hubble expansion
rate, @xmath the equilibrium number density of baryons, and @xmath the
cosmic temperature. The collision term on the right-hand side is given
in terms of an thermally-averaged annihilation cross-section @xmath ,
whose definition can be found in [ 2 ] for example. Eq. ( 1.1 ) can be
conveniently rewritten in terms of the variable @xmath , where @xmath is
the number density of photons, allowing one to factor out the effects of
the expansion of the Universe. One obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In our case, the important annihilation channel is into pions (e.g.
@xmath ). Taking the averaged cross-section to be @xmath , with @xmath
MeV and where @xmath is a numerical factor of order unity, the
freeze-out occurs at @xmath MeV. Neglecting the entropy production in
@xmath -annihilations, one finds for today’s abundance (subscript ‘0’) [
2 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the ratio of baryon number density to photon number density
today is usually referred to as the baryon-to-photon ratio ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The result of our simple computation, Eq. ( 1.3 ), is clearly a small
number, which would perhaps explain the question 2) above. But one
notices immediately a first problem, namely because the abundances of
baryons and antibaryons are predicted in this way to be the same.
Baryons and antibaryons do not evolve in distinctive ways so that one
expects today the same amount of each of them. So, the argument we have
just described leaves open the question 1) above. But let us for the
moment ignore this point and try to see if the abundance of baryons
matches observation.

The photon density follows directly from the measurement of the Cosmic
Microwave Background (CMB) temperature and from Bose-Einstein
statistics: @xmath . Determining the baryon content of the Universe is
more difficult. Direct measurements are not accurate, because only a
small fraction of baryons formed stars and other luminous objects (see
Fig. 1.2 ). However, we can rely on two different indirect probes.

The first probe is Big-Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN). The abundances of
light elements such as @xmath , D, @xmath and @xmath predicted by the
standard theory of BBN crucially depend on @xmath . Comparing
predictions with observations, as shown in Fig. 1.3 , the following
baryon-to-photon ratio is inferred [ 3 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The CMB temperature anisotropies, very well measured by the WMAP
satellite, offer the second probe. These anisotropies reflect the
acoustic oscillations of the baryon-photon fluid which happened around
photon decoupling. A precise computation can be done evolving Boltzmann
equations for anisotropies, assuming that they are generated by quantum
fluctuations during inflation. Fig. 1.4 illustrates how the amount of
anisotropies with angular scale @xmath depends on @xmath . The
baryon-to-photon ratio obtained from 3 years of WMAP data is [ 4 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The synthesis of light elements occurred during the first 3 minutes in
the history of the Universe, whereas the photon decoupling occurred when
the Universe was 400 thousand years old. The fact that these two
completely different probes of the baryon content of the Universe give
compatible results is one of the great successes of modern cosmology. ¹
¹ 1 Throughout the thesis, we shall exlusively use the value of @xmath
obtained from CMB temperature anisotropies, Eq. ( 1.6 ), which has much
smaller errors.

It should now be clear that the result from the “classical” computation
of the baryon density given in Eq. ( 1.3 ) is at odds with the observed
value, Eq. ( 1.6 ). In order to avoid the “baryon annihilation
catastrophe” leading to the value in Eq. ( 1.3 ), one has to generate a
primordial asymmetry between baryons and antibaryons. This small
asymmetry, at the level of one part in one billion , would imply that
after the annihilation process has occurred at full strength, one
remains with the small excess of baryons over antibaryons. The problem
of generating this small excess of baryons over antibaryons is often
called the baryogenesis problem .

The solution to the baryogenesis problem requires the generation of a
small baryon asymmetry primordially. Sakharov, in 1967, enunciated the
three necessary conditions for such a process to be possible at some
stage in the history of the Universe [ 7 ] :

1.  Baryon number violation.

2.  @xmath and @xmath violation.

3.  Departure from thermal equilibrium.

In principle, the SM contains all these ingredients. Indeed,

1.  Due to the chiral nature of weak interactions, @xmath and @xmath are
    not conserved [ 8 ] . At zero temperature, this has no observable
    effect due to the smallness of the weak coupling. However, as the
    temperature reaches the critical temperature @xmath of the
    electroweak phase transition, @xmath and @xmath violating processes
    come into thermal equilibrium [ 9 , 10 ] . The rate of these
    processes is related to the free energy of the sphaleron-type field
    configurations which carry topological charge [ 11 ] . In the SM
    they lead to an effective interaction operator of all left-handed
    fermions, @xmath , which violates baryon and lepton number by three
    units. On the other hand, @xmath remains conserved.

2.  The weak interactions of the SM violate @xmath maximally and violate
    @xmath via the Kobayashi-Maskawa mechanism [ 12 ] . The latter
    originates from the quark mixing matrix, often called the
    Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix, which contains one @xmath
    -violating phase. This phase is known to be non-zero since @xmath
    violation has been observed in the @xmath and @xmath mesons systems
    (see e.g. the review on @xmath violation in [ 5 ] ).

3.  A strongly first-order electroweak phase transition in the early
    Universe could provide the out-of-equilibrium condition. A
    first-order phase transition proceeds via nucleation and growth of
    bubbles [ 13 ] .

This scenario is called electroweak baryogenesis in the Standard Model .
However, it fails for two reasons. First, it turns out that, for the
electroweak phase transition to be strongly first order, the mass of the
Higgs particle should be smaller than about 45 GeV [ 14 ] (see also [ 15
] ). However, LEP II gives the well-known bound @xmath GeV [ 5 ] .
Second, the source of @xmath violation in the quark sector is far too
small, due to the smallness of some of the quark masses [ 16 ] .

In conclusion, successful baryogenesis requires physics beyond the SM,
just as the dark matter and dark energy problems! One intriguing
solution to the problem of baryogenesis is deeply connected with the
neutrino sector and in particular with neutrino masses. This is the
topic of the next section.

### 1.2 The puzzle of neutrino masses

#### 1.2.1 Theory of neutrino oscillations

Even with tiny masses, massive neutrinos can behave very differently
from massless ones. In particular, massive neutrinos naturally lead to
neutrino mixing and to neutrino oscillations, which have been recently
observed, as we shall see below. Let us sketch how this happens.

Consider a neutrino beam created in a charged current interaction along
with the antilepton @xmath . By definition the neutrino created is
called @xmath . In general, this is not a physical particle, but rather
a superposition of physical fields @xmath with different masses @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the lepton mixing matrix, also known as the
Pontecorvo-Maki-Nakagawa-Sakata (PMNS) matrix [ 17 , 18 , 19 ] . By
analogy with the CKM matrix in the quark sector, the lepton mixing
matrix can be conveniently parametrized as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the Dirac and Majorana
@xmath -violating phases, respectively. The Majorana phases, which are
not present in the quark sector, are related to the possible Majorana
nature of neutrinos (see Section 1.3 ).

For a simple-minded approach to the propagation of the state @xmath , we
assume that the 3-momentum @xmath of the different components in the
beam are the same. However, since their masses are different, the
energies of all these components cannot be equal. Rather, for the
component @xmath , the energy is given by the relativistic
energy-momentum relation @xmath . After a time @xmath , the evolution of
the initial beam, Eq. ( 1.7 ), assuming that neutrinos are stable
particles, gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since all @xmath ’s are not equal if the masses are not, Eq. ( 1.9 )
represents a different superposition of the physical eigenstates @xmath
compared to Eq. ( 1.7 ). In general, the state in Eq. ( 1.9 ) can
therefore show properties of other flavor states. The amplitude of
finding a @xmath in the original @xmath beam is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

using the fact that @xmath . The probability of finding a @xmath in the
original @xmath beam at any time @xmath is then the modulus squared of
the amplitude, @xmath . In all practical situations, neutrinos are
extremely relativistic, so that one can approximate the energy-momentum
relation as @xmath and replace @xmath by the distance @xmath traveled by
the beam. After a few manipulations one can finally write the vacuum
oscillation probability as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.11)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . From this formula it is apparent that neutrino
oscillations require non-zero neutrino masses and mixings.

#### 1.2.2 Experimental evidence for neutrino oscillations

The last 10 years have been extremely successful for the field of
neutrino physics. In 1998, the Super-Kamiokande experiment in Japan
reported the first compelling evidence for neutrino oscillations as a
way to explain the anomaly in atmospheric neutrinos. Super-Kamiokande
not only confirmed the previously found deficit in @xmath -type events
but also measured a zenith angle dependent @xmath -deficit which was
inconsistent with expectations based on calculations of the atmospheric
neutrino flux. The neutrino oscillation explanation @xmath with a
quasi-maximal mixing angle [ 20 ] appeared therefore as the most
convincing one.

Two dedicated laboratory experiments have been conceived in order to
check this picture. The experiment K2K in Japan, which collected data
until November 2004, used a pulsed beam of muon-neutrinos produced at
KEK and detected at Super-Kamiokande (distance of 250 km). The currently
running MINOS experiment uses a pulsed beam of muon-neutrinos produced
at NuMI (Fermilab), and the far detector is located at a distance of 735
km in the Soudan mine, Minnesota. Both experiments point to a neutrino
oscillation interpretation of their data, with mixing parameters
compatible with those explaining the atmospheric anomaly [ 21 , 22 ] . A
summarizing plot for “atmospheric” neutrinos can be found in Fig. 1.6 .
The best-fit parameters are [ 23 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the ranges indicated are at @xmath .

Neutrinos from the Sun were first studied by Ray Davis in the Homestake
mine in South Dakota in the 1960’s [ 24 ] . This pioneering work made
use of the radiochemical technique, @xmath . He quickly found that the
observed flux was smaller than the one predicted by Bahcall and
collaborators from the Standard Solar Model [ 25 ] . The solar neutrino
puzzle was born. Later, other experiments were conceived to check this
deficit in solar neutrinos: Kamiokande [ 26 ] and later Super-Kamiokande
[ 27 ] , which used the water Cherenkov technique, also found a deficit,
as well as SAGE [ 28 ] and GALLEX/GNO [ 29 , 30 ] , which used the
radiochemical method with Gallium.

It should be noted that the deficits found in the different experiments
were different, highlighting the energy dependence, as well as the fact
that the experiments were based on different techniques. The
radiochemical method allows only for the measurement of charged-current
(CC) events, which is exclusively sensitive to electron neutrinos.
Experiments relying on water Cherenkov detection register only elastic
scattering (ES) events, @xmath . This technique can measure in principle
all neutrino flavors, but the efficiency in the @xmath and @xmath
channels is much lower, due to the lower cross-sections.

Only the SNO experiment in Sudbury, Canada, used a heavy water detection
which allowed for the detection via three channels simultaneously: CC,
ES as well as neutral current (NC) thanks to the reaction @xmath , where
@xmath denotes deuteron. This made possible a reliable measurement of
the total flux of neutrinos from the Sun. Hence, in addition to
confirming the deficit in solar neutrinos in the CC and ES detection
channels [ 31 ] , this experiment allowed for the first direct test of
the Standard Solar Model. In 2002, the data were found to be actually
consistent with the prediction [ 32 ] , finally resolving the
longstanding solar neutrino puzzle. This can be seen as a huge success
in the history of neutrino physics. The Borexino experiment, located in
the Gran Sasso laboratory, has recently added another milestone to the
understanding of neutrinos from the Sun by detecting in real time a flux
of @xmath neutrinos consistent with the Standard Solar Model prediction
[ 33 ] .

The neutrino oscillation explanation @xmath to the deficits in neutrinos
from the Sun in different experiments was popular from the beginning,
because it appeared as the simplest and most elegant solution. But the
first experiment which really left neutrino oscillations as the only
possible explanation for the solar neutrino puzzle is KamLAND,
rejecting, for instance spin flavor oscillations [ 34 , 35 ] , which
were still allowed after SNO. KamLAND is a scintillation detector
located in Japan which observed the @xmath from neighboring nuclear
reactors thanks to the process @xmath . This experiment saw a @xmath
evidence for the disappearance of @xmath [ 36 , 37 ] . A summarizing
plot of the solar neutrino and KamLAND data can be found in Fig. 1.6 .
The best-fit parameters are [ 23 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the ranges indicated are at @xmath .

For completeness, we should add that a short-baseline reactor neutrino
experiment named CHOOZ, in France, was performed to get a handle on the
third mixing angle, @xmath [ 38 ] . They report no signal, which,
together with atmospheric and K2K data, yields the @xmath upper bound [
23 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 1.2.3 Absolute neutrino mass scale

The oscillation formula Eq. ( 1.11 ) shows that neutrino oscillation
experiments are only able to provide information on neutrino
mass-squared differences . They are insensitive to the absolute neutrino
mass scale. Fortunately, there are other ways to probe it.

First, the so-called “direct” measurement makes use of the very precise
determination of the upper end of the spectral distribution of the
electron in the tritium @xmath -decay, @xmath . The Mainz experiment
obtained the bound @xmath [ 39 ] and the Troitsk experiment @xmath [ 40
] , both at 95% C.L., where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath denoting the lepton mixing matrix we introduced in Section
1.2.1 [cf. Eq. ( 1.8 )]. The upcoming KATRIN experiment [ 41 ] , which
is under construction at the moment, is expected to have a discovery
potential down to @xmath .

Second, if neutrinos are Majorana particles (see next section), then it
might be possible to observe neutrinoless double-beta ( @xmath ) decay
for nuclei like @xmath . Double- @xmath decay, @xmath , has been already
observed, even though the rate is of second order in the Fermi coupling
constant @xmath , implying for instance a lifetime of about @xmath years
for @xmath . The @xmath -decay rate is even more suppressed, and depends
on yet another combination of the neutrino masses as in Eq. ( 1.17 ) [
42 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Up to now, no compelling signal ² ² 2 Part of the Heidelberg-Moscow
collaboration claims an evidence for @xmath -decay, leading to the
measurement @xmath (90% C.L.) [ 43 , 44 ] , where the uncertainty is due
to the poorly known nuclear matrix elements. for @xmath -decay has been
observed, and the currently running CUORICINO experiment, which uses
@xmath , obtains now a bound [ 45 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is slightly stronger than the one obtained in the previous
Heidelberg-Moscow [ 46 ] and IGEX experiments [ 47 , 48 ] , where @xmath
was used. Note that the range shown in Eq. ( 1.19 ) stems from the
uncertainty in the nuclear matrix elements. Future planned experiments
such as GERDA [ 49 ] , MAJORANA [ 50 ] or CUORE [ 51 ] aim at a
sensitivity in the 50 meV range.

There is a third probe of the absolute neutrino mass scale, and this is
cosmology. More precisely, the CMB data and the data from the large
scale structure (LSS) have a sensitivity to the sum of the neutrino
masses @xmath . Looking at the literature in the last 3 years that dealt
with this issue, it is clear that the bound on the sum of the neutrino
masses depends on which data sets are included. We simply show here the
result from a somewhat conservative calculation in [ 52 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The three probes we have presented involve different combinations of the
neutrino masses, where even cancellations are possible in the case of
@xmath -decay [cf. Eq. ( 1.18 )]. But the bottom line here is that all
three probes tend to the same conclusion: the neutrino mass scale has to
be in the sub-eV range . In this sense, this makes neutrinos a very
peculiar particle in the SM, with a mass that is six orders of magnitude
smaller than the electron! Fig. 1.7 illustrates nicely this gap between
neutrinos and the other SM particles. Clearly, such a gap must be
explained on theoretical grounds, and this is the topic of the next
section.

### 1.3 An elegant solution: the see-saw mechanism and leptogenesis

As we have just seen, neutrinos are very special particles due to their
extreme lightness. This might suggest that neutrinos have a unique mass
generation mechanism that leads to small masses in a natural way. One of
the first attempts in the late 1970’s and early 1980’s was the use of
the see-saw mechanism [ 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 ] , which we shortly
describe now.

Let us imagine that we would like to write down the most simple and
general extension of the Standard Model that accomodates neutrino
masses. For simplicity we consider here only one generation of
neutrinos. In the SM, in order to generate massive fermions, one
introduces a right-handed (RH) component for each particle. So let us
introduce one RH neutrino @xmath in a usual Dirac-type term @xmath
Contrary to the other SM particles, this is not the only term allowed
for neutrinos. Since neutrinos are neutral particles, the RH component
can only be a singlet of all SM gauge interactions, including
hypercharge. This unique property of neutrinos implies that the Majorana
mass term @xmath is allowed, where the superscript @xmath denotes charge
conjugation. Actually, in general there is no reason why this term
should be absent. The mass term for neutrinos can then be conveniently
written in a matrix form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that upper left component of the mass matrix is zero because it is
not possible to write down a Majorana mass term for left-handed fields
without breaking gauge invariance.

The see-saw mechanism then assumes that the Majorana mass is much larger
than the Dirac mass, i.e. @xmath . Diagonalizing the mass matrix with
this assumption yields the two mass eigenvalues

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first eigenvalue corresponds to the mass of a light Majorana
neutrino, and the second eigenvalue corresponds to the mass of a heavy
Majorana neutrino. It is interesting to notice that plugging a Dirac
mass at the electroweak scale, @xmath , with a heavy neutrino mass of
@xmath maybe related to the underlying Grand Unified Theory (GUT), one
obtains a light neutrino mass @xmath . This can be seen as a strong
support for this model. For the generalization of the previous
discussion to three massive neutrinos and more details, see Appendix B .

The version of the see-saw mechanism we have just described, with the
addition of RH neutrinos to the SM, is nowadays referred to as the
type-I see-saw mechanism. For completeness, let us mention that other
see-saw mechanisms were proposed to explain the smallness of neutrino
masses: the addition of @xmath triplet Higgses to the SM leads to the
type-II mechanism [ 59 , 60 , 58 ] , and the addition of @xmath triplet
fermions leads to the type-III mechanism [ 61 , 62 ] . Throughout the
thesis, we shall exclusively deal with the type-I mechanism.

As we have just shown, the see-saw mechanism elegantly solves the
problem of generating small neutrino masses in a natural way. But this
is not the only virtue of the model: its cosmological consequence is
indeed that it can also solve the puzzle of the matter-antimatter
asymmetry of the Universe through thermal leptogenesis , as first
proposed by Fukugita and Yanagida 20 years ago [ 63 ] . We saw in
Section 1.1 that one needs to satisfy all three Sakharov’s conditions in
order to solve the baryogenesis problem. Let us see how they are
satisfied in the case of thermal leptogenesis.

1.  Lepton number is violated in the decays of the heavy neutrinos into
    lepton doublets and Higgs doublets. Additionally, @xmath and @xmath
    are violated by the non-perturbative sphaleron processes, which
    however conserve @xmath . This is thus the same source of @xmath
    violation as the one described in the case of electroweak
    baryogenesis (see Section 1.1 ). The difference is that the
    sphaleron transitions are here transferring @xmath number produced
    in the decays of the heavy neutrinos into the required @xmath
    number. These transitions should be in equilibrium for temperatures
    [ 64 , 65 , 66 ]

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.23)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.  @xmath violation occurs in the decays of the heavy neutrinos. The
    relevant quantity to evaluate is the @xmath asymmetry parameter,
    defined as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.24)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath and @xmath . As shown in Fig. 1.8 , one can calculate
    such an asymmetry by computing the interference between the
    tree-level diagram and the two relevant one-loop diagrams, namely
    the self-energy diagram and the vertex correction. We will show the
    result of such a calculation in the next chapter. This source of
    @xmath violation is typically sufficient to explain the
    matter-antimatter problem.

3.  The out-of-equilibrium condition will be satisfied thanks to the
    expansion of the Universe. Convenient quantities to describe when
    the decays of the heavy neutrinos freeze out are the decay
    parameters, @xmath , defined as the ratio of the total decay width
    of the heavy neutrino @xmath to the expansion rate at @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.25)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath . This is the key quantity for the thermodynamical
    description of the decays of heavy particles in the early Universe [
    2 ] . In leptogenesis it can be conveniently expressed in terms of
    the effective neutrino mass [ 67 ]

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.26)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the equilibrium neutrino mass , given by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.27)
      -- -------- -- --------

In this thesis, when referring to “leptogenesis” we will exclusively
mean the production of a lepton asymmetry by the decays of heavy singlet
neutrinos. Other “leptogenesis” scenarios, such as the Affleck-Dine
mechanism in supersymmetric theories [ 68 , 69 , 70 ] or leptogenesis
via neutrino oscillations [ 71 , 72 ] will not be discussed here.

After the clear evidence for non-zero neutrino masses appeared in 1998,
the see-saw mechanism, and hence leptogenesis, became very attractive,
solving simultaneously two important puzzles of modern physics within a
simple and minimal extension of the SM. Another nice feature of the
model is that the heavy fermionic singlets (RH neutrinos) necessary for
the (type-I) see-saw mechanism have a natural connection with grand
unification; e.g. @xmath [ 73 ] predicts the existence of such fermionic
singlets. It is therefore not a surprise if a huge activity was
registered in this field since 1998, with an ever growing precision in
the computations.

We present in Chapter 2 the picture of leptogenesis that emerges when
the flavor content of the leptons coming from the decays of the heavy
neutrinos is ignored. This is what we call the “unflavored” treatment.
In Chapter 3 we discuss why flavor effects are important in a
considerable part of the parameter space, and what their main
implications are. This will allow us to build up a “flavored” picture of
leptogenesis. In Chapter 4 the validity of the classical computation of
the final baryon asymmetry in the case of flavored leptogenesis is
analyzed. We shall argue that the use of a more complicated density
matrix equation might be relevant in some region of the parameter space.
Then, in Chapter 5 , an overview of different ways to go beyond the
conventional picture of leptogenesis, where only the lightest RH
neutrino is taken into account and the mass spectrum of the heavy
neutrinos is very hierarchical, is given. In Chapter 6 we consider a
by-product of flavor effects, namely the fact that the low-energy phases
in the PMNS matrix have a more important role than previously thought.
In particular, the role played by the Dirac phase, source of @xmath
violation in neutrino oscillation experiments, will be thoroughly
studied. Finally, we conclude with a summary of the main results and a
discussion about what one can expect from the experimental side in the
next few years regarding a possible test of leptogenesis.

## Chapter 2 Vanilla leptogenesis

In this chapter, following a purely unflavored ¹ ¹ 1 In the literature
the expressions “flavor-independent” or “one-flavor” are often used to
describe the same concept. treatment, we first introduce the most
general Boltzmann equations which need to be solved in order to estimate
the baryon asymmetry of the Universe produced through leptogenesis. This
will allow us to introduce very useful quantities and definitions which
will be used in the remainder of the thesis. Then, we describe how the
general picture simplifies considerably under natural assumptions, such
as a hierarchical mass spectrum for the heavy neutrinos. This will
enable us to arrive at a “vanilla” leptogenesis, i.e. a typical scenario
of leptogenesis, where the lightest RH neutrino, @xmath , provides the
main contribution. We will then derive two important constraints on the
parameters of the model: a lower bound on the mass of the lightest RH
neutrino, @xmath , and an upper bound on the absolute neutrino mass
scale, @xmath . Finally, we shortly comment on leptogenesis within a
supersymmetric framework and discuss the so-called gravitino problem .

### 2.1 General scenarios of unflavored leptogenesis

We would like here to describe how to calculate the baryon asymmetry
produced through leptogenesis in full generality, i.e. for an arbitrary
RH neutrino mass spectrum and no restrictions on the parameters of the
model.

The Lagrangian in Eq. ( B.1 ) contains all the terms relevant for
leptogenesis. Since we are concerned here with a purely unflavored
analysis, it will prove useful to define the states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be thought of as the states produced in decays and inverse
decays (and @xmath scattering processes, see below) in the process of
leptogenesis. So, to each heavy neutrino @xmath corresponds one lepton
state @xmath and one anti-lepton state @xmath . Note that @xmath is not
the @xmath conjugate of @xmath , although @xmath is the @xmath conjugate
of @xmath . We shall discuss this point in more detail in the next
chapter and see which important consequences follow.

Let us list now the processes that are relevant for the computation of
the baryon asymmetry through leptogenesis [ 74 , 67 , 75 , 76 ] :

-   Decays and inverse-decays: @xmath and the conjugate processes @xmath
    .

-   @xmath Higgs-mediated scattering processes, such as the @xmath
    -channel @xmath and the @xmath -channels @xmath , and @xmath , where
    @xmath and @xmath are the third generation quark doublet and the top
    @xmath singlet, respectively, as well as those involving gauge
    bosons, such as @xmath (with @xmath or @xmath ).

-   The @xmath -channel @xmath scattering processes @xmath with on-shell
    @xmath are already accounted for by decays and inverse decays.
    However, the off-shell @xmath -channel contribution, as well as the
    @xmath -channel and @xmath -channel scatterings ( @xmath ), must be
    included.

For simplicity, we shall neglect in the following the so-called
spectator processes [ 77 , 78 ] , which are processes that are not
directly related to the generation of the asymmetry but that are fast
and could affect it indirectly. For example, the sphaleron transitions
belong to spectator processes, since they are supposed to be in
equilibrium during the leptogenesis process and since they are
responsible for transmitting the @xmath asymmetry produced in the decays
into a @xmath asymmetry in a non-trivial way. For the time being, we
neglect spectator processes, and simply assume that the asymmetry is
directly produced in @xmath instead of @xmath . In any case, spectator
processes altogether are not expected to induce corrections larger than
30% [ 78 ] . We shall discuss in detail spectator processes in the next
chapter (Section 3.2 ).

Thermal corrections will also be neglected. They may lead to relevant
corrections, though with big theoretical uncertainties, in the weak
washout regime ( @xmath ), but negligible corrections are expected in
the more relevant strong washout regime ( @xmath ) [ 75 ] .

Following an unflavored treatment, the set of Boltzmann equations can be
worked out in the form [ 74 , 67 , 79 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . With @xmath we denote the abundance of @xmath per RH
neutrino in ultra-relativistic thermal equilibrium. Defining @xmath and
@xmath , the decay factors are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the expansion rate and the decay parameters @xmath were
introduced in Eq. ( 1.25 ). The total decay rates, @xmath , are the
product of the decay widths times the thermally averaged dilation
factors @xmath , given by the ratio @xmath of the modified Bessel
functions.

As we have seen, the @xmath scatterings @xmath and the related washout
contribution @xmath arise from two different classes of Higgs- and
lepton-mediated inelastic scatterings involving the top quark ( @xmath )
and gauge bosons ( @xmath ). Their main effect is to enhance the heavy
neutrino production and thus the efficiency factor in the weak washout
regime, and, since they also contribute to the washout, they lead to a
correction of the efficiency factor in the strong washout regime as
well. Top quark and gauge boson scattering terms are expected to be of
similar size. However, the reactions densities for the gauge boson
processes are presently controversial [ 76 , 75 ] . Therefore, we will
not discuss these processes here. A simple analytic approximation for
the sum @xmath was obtained in [ 80 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Higgs mass @xmath was introduced to cut off the infrared divergence
of the @xmath -channel process. It turns out that @xmath in the strong
washout regime. The generalization of Eq. ( 2.6 ) for @xmath can be
derived from [ 76 ] .

The equilibrium abundances of the heavy neutrinos and their rates are
also expressed through the modified Bessel functions,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The RH neutrinos can be produced by inverse decays and @xmath
scatterings. Nevertheless, in the relevant strong washout regime,
inverse decays alone are sufficient to make the RH neutrino abundance
reach its thermal equilibrium value prior to the decays which produce
the asymmetry. The asymmetry generated together with the RH neutrino
production will then be efficiently washed out, so that the details of
the RH neutrino production will not affect the final asymmetry, thus
greatly reducing theoretical uncertainties. This is one of the nice
features of the strong washout regime on which we shall focus. For this
reason, the @xmath scattering terms @xmath will play a subdominant role.

The washout factor @xmath in Eq. ( 2.4 ) can be written as the sum of
two contributions [ 81 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term is the sum of the contributions from inverse decays and
@xmath scatterings,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the lightest RH neutrino, @xmath , it was shown in [ 80 ] that
@xmath can be conveniently rewritten as @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath in the strong (weak) washout regime. The corresponding
results for @xmath can again be obtained from [ 76 ] .

In the strong washout regime, inverse decays, where the resonant @xmath
contribution has to be properly subtracted [ 82 , 75 ] , dominate @xmath
scatterings [ 75 , 80 ] , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term in Eq. ( 2.9 ) arises from the non-resonant @xmath
processes and gives typically a non-negligible contribution only in the
non-relativistic limit, for @xmath [ 74 , 81 , 80 ] . For hierarchical
light neutrinos, it can be safely neglected for reasonable values @xmath
. We shall come back to this contribution when discussing the upper
bound on the absolute neutrino mass scale at the end of Section 2.2 .

The effects of production and washout are simultaneously accounted for
by the efficiency factors @xmath associated with each @xmath . Let us
indicate with @xmath a possible pre-existing asymmetry at the initial
temperature of leptogenesis @xmath . The final @xmath asymmetry can then
be written as [ 2 , 80 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the final efficiency factors @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we defined @xmath . Notice that each efficiency factor depends in
general on all decay parameters, i.e. @xmath .

The baryon-to-photon ratio at recombination can then be calculated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath accounts for the sphaleron conversion of a
@xmath asymmetry into a @xmath asymmetry. If the electroweak sphalerons
go out of equilibrium before the electroweak phase transition, one has
@xmath [ 83 ] . If, instead, electroweak sphalerons remain in
equilibrium until slightly after the electroweak phase transition (as
would be the case if, as presently believed, the electroweak phase
transition was not strongly first order), this factor would be @xmath [
84 ] . Both coefficients are of order 1/3 and, for definiteness, we
shall use @xmath throughout the thesis.

If the mass differences satisfy the condition for the applicability of
perturbation theory, @xmath with @xmath [ 85 ] , then a perturbative
calculation from the interference of tree-level with one-loop
self-energy and vertex diagrams (see Fig. 1.8 ) gives [ 86 , 87 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the function @xmath , shown in Fig. 2.1 , is defined as [ 88 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

A particularly useful parametrization of the Yukawa coupling matrix in
the context of leptogenesis involves the orthogonal matrix @xmath [ 89 ]
² ² 2 Compared to the @xmath matrix in [ 89 ] , one has the simple
relation @xmath . ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we defined @xmath and @xmath . The matrix @xmath diagonalizes the
light neutrino mass matrix @xmath given in Eq. ( B.5 ), i.e. @xmath ,
and it can be identified with the lepton mixing matrix in a basis where
the charged lepton mass matrix is diagonal (see Appendix A ). Moreover,
neglecting the effect of the running of neutrino parameters from high
energy to low energy [ 90 , 91 ] , one can assume the @xmath matrix to
be identified with the PMNS matrix, partially measured in neutrino
oscillation experiments. In the following, we shall refer to the
parametrization Eq. ( 2.18 ) as the “orthogonal” or the “Casas-Ibarra”
parametrization.

The @xmath matrix can be conveniently parametrized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This parametrization for an orthogonal complex matrix corresponds to the
transposed form of the CKM matrix in the quark sector or of the PMNS
matrix in neutrino mixing [cf. Eq. ( 1.8 )], with the difference that
here one has complex rotations instead of real ones.

Notice that, using the orthogonal parametrization, Eq. ( 2.18 ), the
decay parameters @xmath can be expressed as linear combinations of the
neutrino masses [ 92 , 80 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parametrization Eq. ( 2.19 ) is especially useful to understand the
general structure of different scenarios of leptogenesis.

-   For @xmath , one has @xmath , while @xmath is maximal if [ 93 ]

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.24)
      -- -------- -- --------

    In the hierarchical limit for the heavy neutrinos (HL), i.e. @xmath
    , one obtains the @xmath -dominated scenario ( @xmath DS), where the
    final asymmetry is the result of only @xmath -related processes.

-   For @xmath , one has @xmath , while @xmath is maximal if

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.25)
      -- -------- -- --------

    At the same time, one has @xmath , so that the washout from @xmath
    can be neglected if @xmath is small enough. Therefore, in the HL and
    for hierarchical light neutrinos, one obtains the @xmath -dominated
    scenario ( @xmath DS) [ 93 ] , which will be the topic of Section
    5.2 .

-   If @xmath , then @xmath undergoes a phase suppression compared to
    its maximal value but @xmath . This implies that in the HL one again
    recovers the @xmath DS [ 93 ] . On the other hand, if @xmath , both
    @xmath and @xmath should be taken into account since both @xmath
    asymmetries are expected to be of the same order.

Before ending this section, we would like to make two remarks. First,
using the Casas-Ibarra parametrization, Eq. ( 2.18 ), it can be easily
seen that the PMNS matrix @xmath cancels out in combinations like @xmath
(or @xmath ). This implies that both the @xmath asymmetry, Eq. ( 2.16 ),
and the decay parameters or effective neutrino masses, Eq. ( 1.26 ), do
not depend on @xmath . Hence, the final asymmetry is completely
independent of the PMNS matrix. In particular, if the @xmath asymmetry
is insensitive to the @xmath -violating phases in @xmath , then the
source of @xmath violation necessary for leptogenesis must come from the
“high-energy” sector, i.e. the @xmath matrix, which is not probed in
neutrino experiments. We shall see in the next chapter that the
situation is completely different when flavor effects are taken into
account.

Second, the border between the @xmath DS and the @xmath DS will also be
affected by flavor effects. Furthermore, contrary to the unflavored
case, where @xmath is always suppressed by factors @xmath , the flavored
@xmath asymmetries @xmath are not suppressed, opening the way to a
potential @xmath -dominated scenario. We shall nonetheless see, for
instance in Section 6.2.1 , that, even though the @xmath asymmetry may
not be suppressed, the washout from the other two heavy neutrinos is
difficult to avoid.

### 2.2 The @xmath-dominated scenario

Let us now discuss the @xmath DS, where the asymmetry is dominantly
generated by the lightest RH neutrino, @xmath . This typically (but not
necessarily) occurs when a hierarchical heavy neutrino spectrum is
considered, @xmath [ 94 ] .

The general expression for the final asymmetry, Eq. ( 2.15 ), reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath can be calculated solving a system of just two kinetic
equations [ 2 , 81 , 75 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These equations are obtained from the general set, Eqs. ( 2.3 ) and (
2.4 ), neglecting the asymmetry generation and the washout terms from
the two heavier RH neutrinos.

For @xmath , the term @xmath in the washout term [cf. Eq. ( 2.9 )] is
negligible and the solutions depend just on @xmath , since this is the
only parameter in the equations. The @xmath asymmetry can be worked out
in an integral form [ 2 ] , and one obtains a special case of the more
general Eq. ( 2.13 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now a possible asymmetry produced by the two heavier RH neutrinos
and frozen at @xmath is included in @xmath . The efficiency factor
@xmath can be expressed through a Laplace integral,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the strong washout regime we are interested in, for @xmath , one can
safely use the approximations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.12
)], and one finds that the final value for the efficiency factor, when
@xmath , is given by [ 80 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

if @xmath . The value @xmath is where the quantity @xmath has a minimum
and the integral in Eq. ( 2.30 ) receives a dominant contribution from a
restricted @xmath -interval centered around it. In the strong washout
regime, it can be calculated as a solution of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

For very large @xmath , the right-hand side of this equation tends to
unity and @xmath , the value of @xmath when the washout from inverse
decays switches off, i.e. @xmath . Fig. 2.2 shows (dashed lines) that
Eq. ( 2.31 ), with @xmath given by Eq. ( 2.32 ), reproduces the
numerical result (solid line) within @xmath for @xmath [ 80 ] .

Even though the approximation @xmath works rigorously only in the strong
washout regime, Eq. ( 2.31 ) describes also the correct weak washout
regime for a thermal initial @xmath -abundance ( @xmath ), because
@xmath depends only on the value of the initial abundance and not on the
decay rate. However, in the intermediate regime ( @xmath ) the error is
about @xmath . For @xmath , the approximation @xmath does not work well
and @xmath , evaluated with Eq. ( 2.32 ), incorrectly saturates to a
constant value @xmath in the limit @xmath , corresponding to the maximum
of @xmath (see upper panel of Fig. 2.4 ). As a matter of fact, in the
weak washout regime the maximum of the asymmetry production does not
occur at @xmath but at higher values

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

roughly when the age of the Universe is equal to the RH neutrino
lifetime. Indeed, in the weak washout regime, the @xmath ’s decay far
from equilibrium, when inverse decays can be neglected. In this case one
has approximately @xmath , where [ 80 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath for a thermal initial @xmath -abundance. The maximum of
@xmath gives the value of @xmath where the production of the asymmetry
is maximum in the weak washout regime, and one can easily find that this
value is given approximately by @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.33 )]. An example is
shown in the upper panel of Fig. 2.3 for @xmath . An improvement of the
analytical expression in Eq. ( 2.31 ) is obtained replacing @xmath from
Eq. ( 2.32 ) with an expression that coincides with it at large @xmath
and with @xmath at @xmath , such as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fig. 2.2 shows (circles) that this expression, plugged into Eq. ( 2.31
), reproduces the numerical solution (solid line) with a precision
always better than 10%.

Notice that, in the particularly relevant range @xmath , Eq. ( 2.31 ) is
well approximated by a power law [ 95 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of a vanishing initial @xmath -abundance ( @xmath ), one has
to take into account two different contributions, a negative and a
positive one,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Defining @xmath by the condition @xmath , the negative contribution
arises from a first stage when @xmath , for @xmath , and is given
approximately by [ 80 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -abundance at @xmath is well approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

interpolating between the limit @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , and
the limit @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . The positive contribution
arises from a second stage when @xmath , for @xmath , and is
approximately given by [ 80 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

As can be seen in Fig. 2.2 , the use of Eq. ( 2.34 ) yields an
improvement also for a vanishing initial @xmath -abundance.

Figures 2.3 and 2.4 show, for a thermal initial @xmath -abundance, the
dynamics of the asymmetry generation, comparing one example of weak
washout with one example of strong washout [ 94 ] . In the top panels we
show the function @xmath , defined for @xmath , for different values of
@xmath . The difference between the two cases is striking. In the weak
washout regime, each decay contributes to the final asymmetry for any
value of @xmath at which the asymmetry is produced. In the strong
washout regime, all the asymmetry produced at @xmath is efficiently
washed out by inverse decays, so that only decays occurring at @xmath
give a contribution to the final asymmetry.

After having thoroughly studied the efficiency factor, we would like to
turn now to the other important piece in the calculation of the baryon
asymmetry Eq. ( 2.26 ), namely the @xmath asymmetry @xmath . The general
expression ( 2.16 ) for @xmath can be re-cast through the @xmath matrix
as [ 93 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the hierarchical limit (HL), for @xmath , one has @xmath , yielding
@xmath . Therefore, the dependence on four of the see-saw parameters,
namely @xmath and @xmath , disappears in the HL, and one is left with
only six parameters. Notice moreover that @xmath , where @xmath , and
thus the final asymmetry depends on the same six parameters. In
particular, let us emphasize once more that the final asymmetry is
independent of the PMNS matrix, which contains three mixing angles and
three phases [cf. Eq. ( A.5 )].

Let us define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The HL for @xmath can then be written as [ 96 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is interesting that @xmath , so that in the HL one has the upper
bound @xmath [ 97 ] . A more precise bound, which is known as the
Davidson-Ibarra bound, was later derived [ 96 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the fact that @xmath . Further refinements were added,
leading to the even more accurate @xmath -dependent bound,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where [ 88 , 98 ]

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.46)
  -- -- -- --------

obtained by maximizing over the @xmath -parameters at fixed @xmath .
From this bound one gets that @xmath and hence the @xmath asymmetry are
maximal in the limit @xmath . One notices as well that the @xmath
asymmetry vanishes when @xmath .

The presence of the bound on the @xmath asymmetry Eq. ( 2.45 ) motivates
the introduction of the so-called “effective leptogenesis phase” @xmath
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that the upper bound in Eq. ( 2.45 ) corresponds to @xmath .

It is also useful to express the function @xmath as [ 93 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the configuration of @xmath parameters which
maximizes the @xmath asymmetry at fixed @xmath . It turns out that such
a configuration always occurs for @xmath [ 93 ] , and hence @xmath is
the maximum of @xmath at fixed @xmath . In other words, for @xmath and
@xmath , the phase @xmath is maximal, while for a generic choice of
@xmath , the @xmath asymmetry undergoes a phase suppression

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.50)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath . It can be readily seen that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
.

It is instructive to calculate @xmath for each of the three elementary
complex rotations that can be used to parametrize @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.19
)]:

-   For @xmath , one has @xmath and the phase is maximal if @xmath ;
    notice that there is no difference between normal and inverted
    hierarchy.

-   For @xmath , one has @xmath , larger for inverted hierarchy than for
    normal; however, for fully hierarchical light neutrinos ( @xmath ),
    one has that @xmath for normal hierarchy and @xmath for inverted
    hierarchy, and since @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.35 )], the final asymmetry
    is slightly higher for normal hierarchy compared to inverted at
    fixed @xmath [ 93 ] .

-   For @xmath , one has @xmath ; one can check that @xmath applies
    independently of @xmath and @xmath and therefore not only in the HL.
    Notice that the conclusions in the previous two cases are still
    valid if one multiplies @xmath or @xmath with @xmath respectively,
    since it does not affect @xmath .

Interesting constraints follow if one imposes that the asymmetry
produced from leptogenesis explains the value of the baryon-to-photon
ratio inferred from CMB observations, Eq. ( 1.6 ), [ 81 , 4 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.52)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we introduced the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last inequality gives the @xmath value that we used to obtain all
the results shown in the figures. ³ ³ 3 Notice that @xmath gives the
lower bound on @xmath for a thermal initial @xmath -abundance in the
limit @xmath . Eq. ( 2.52 ) is quite general and shows the effect of the
phase suppression [ 93 ] and of a higher absolute neutrino mass scale [
95 ] in making @xmath higher. In Fig. 2.5 we show @xmath (thick solid
line) for fully hierarchical light neutrinos ( @xmath ) and maximal
phase ( @xmath ).

It is convenient to introduce a value @xmath such that, for @xmath , the
final asymmetry calculated for a thermal initial @xmath -abundance (
@xmath ) differs from the one calculated for a vanishing initial @xmath
-abundance ( @xmath ) by less than some quantity @xmath . When @xmath ,
@xmath and one obtains the lowest value [ 93 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The lower bound on @xmath also translates into a lower bound on @xmath ,
the initial temperature of leptogenesis,

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.55)
  -- -- -- --------

A plot of this lower bound is shown in Fig. 2.5 (thick dashed line). The
relation between @xmath and @xmath can be understood from the top panel
of Fig. 2.4 , which shows that the final asymmetry is the result of the
decays occurring just around @xmath , when inverse decays switch off,
whereas all the asymmetry produced before is efficiently washed out.

Assuming a period of inflation at early stages, the minimal initial
temperature @xmath that allows for successful leptogenesis can be
identified with the minimal reheat temperature @xmath after inflation.
In locally supersymmetric theories, the high temperature required poses
a problem known as the gravitino problem , as we shall see in the next
section.

For increasing values of the absolute neutrino mass scale, @xmath ,
there is a joint effect of the suppression of the @xmath asymmetry, more
specifically of @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.48 )], plus the extra washout from
@xmath processes mediated by off-shell RH neutrinos, which can be
conveniently factored out of the efficiency factor in the following way
[ 80 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . This suppression leads to a stringent upper
bound on the lightest neutrino mass,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

as derived analytically in [ 80 ] and numerically in [ 99 , 88 , 75 ] .
The upper bound can be seen in the upper part of Fig. 4.3 ,
corresponding to the unflavored regime. It is obtained for high values
@xmath GeV.

There have been earlier attempts to get a bound on the absolute neutrino
mass scale simply from the fact that @xmath and then imposing an upper
limit @xmath , justified as a generic ‘out-of-equilibrium’ condition.
However, it turns out that such a restrictive upper limit on @xmath does
not hold for reasons that are clear from Fig. 2.4 : the
‘out-of-equilibrium’ condition is realized also in the strong washout
regime when @xmath . Therefore, within the @xmath DS, it is not a
problem to have @xmath as large as @xmath . Incidentally, the upper
bound can only be understood when the washout from @xmath processes and
the upper bound on the @xmath asymmetry are jointly taken into account [
99 ] .

We would like now to summarize the results of this section. As we have
seen, in the limit where the heavy neutrino mass spectrum is
hierarchical (HL), @xmath , the picture of leptogenesis in the
unflavored case simplifies considerably. A typical scenario of
leptogenesis, which we call “vanilla leptogenesis”, emerges and it turns
out that one has to study only the production of asymmetry by the
lightest RH neutrino, @xmath , reducing the number of parameters from 10
to 6. This is possible because the theoretically favored range for
@xmath lies between @xmath , given by the solar scale, and @xmath ,
given by the atmospheric scale. In this range, the washout from the
lightest RH neutrino is strong enough to make the contributions from the
heavier two RH neutrinos negligible, and the final result is independent
of the initial number of @xmath [ 88 , 80 , 93 ] . This is an extremely
nice feature of the strong washout regime. Note that the @xmath DS can
actually be ensured by setting @xmath , which exludes a large
contribution from @xmath [ 93 ] . Within vanilla leptogenesis, it is
possible to derive from successful leptogenesis a lower bound on @xmath
and on the initial temperature @xmath , as shown in Eqs. ( 2.54 ) and (
2.55 ). Moreover, there is a stringent upper bound on the absolute
neutrino mass scale, as shown in Eq. ( 2.57 ).

We shall discuss the implications of going beyond the assumptions
leading to vanilla leptogenesis in Chapter 5 .

### 2.3 Leptogenesis and supersymmetry

In the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM) complemented with
three RH neutrinos and the corresponding superpartners, the picture of
leptogenesis is qualitatively quite different from the
non-supersymmetric case, but it turns out that, quantitatively, they are
very similar.

The interactions of the heavy (s)neutrino field can be derived from the
leptonic superpotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the @xmath lepton doublets and singlets
chiral superfields, respectively, and @xmath and @xmath are the Higgs
chiral superfields. The scalar components of both Higgs bosons, which we
denote @xmath , have vacuum expectation values: @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath . Their ratio is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

When flavor effects (see next chapter) are included in supersymmetric
leptogenesis, the value of @xmath is relevant because @xmath , where
@xmath is the SM Yukawa coupling.

Typically, supersymmetry breaking terms are of no relevance for the
mechanism of lepton number generation, and we are left with the
following trilinear couplings in the Lagrangian, written in terms of
four-component spinors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denote sleptons, higgsinos and singlet
sneutrinos, respectively.

From these couplings one obtains the tree-level relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are now new diagrams contributing to the @xmath asymmetry. On top
of the usual contributions shown in Fig. 1.8 , there are three
additional sources coming from the decay of the heavy neutrinos into
sleptons, from the decay of RH sneutrinos into leptons and from the
decay of RH sneutrinos into sleptons. One can then define a @xmath
asymmetry for the decay of RH neutrinos into leptons and sleptons, and
another one for the decay of RH sneutrinos into leptons and sleptons, as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.62)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the total decay rate of RH neutrinos and
RH sneutrinos, respectively.

These @xmath asymmetries were computed in [ 87 ] to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we recall that @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the HL ( @xmath ), the @xmath asymmetry in the MSSM is therefore
twice as large as the one in the SM.

Then, since in the MSSM there are two Higgses, the coefficient @xmath is
slightly different from its value in the SM, and one obtains for the
baryon-to-photon ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have seen, there are new decay channels in the MSSM, which yield
an enhancement of the @xmath asymmetry by a factor 2. On the other hand,
there is also an enhancement of the washout by a factor of 2, which
implies that the constraints on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath derived in
the last section remain essentially unchanged [ 75 ] .

Assuming a period of inflation and reheating before leptogenesis occurs,
the lower bound on the initial temperature of leptogenesis @xmath can be
identified with a lower bound on the reheat temperature @xmath of the
Universe after inflation. Within locally supersymmetric theories, it is
well known that gravitinos are produced during the reheating phase. The
point is actually that they may be overproduced, i.e. their abundance
may overclose the Universe, leading to the so-called gravitino problem
(for early discussions, see [ 100 , 101 , 102 , 103 ] ). There are two
situations to be distinguished: stable gravitinos and unstable ones.

If the gravitino is the lightest supersymmetric particle, it is stable
and therefore represents a good dark matter candidate. In order for
gravitinos not to exceed the dark matter abundance, the reheat
temperature has to satisfy [ 104 , 105 , 106 , 107 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, if gravitinos are unstable, they may lead to a large
entropy production when they decay during or after big-bang
nucleosynthesis, spoiling the nice agreement between theory and
observations (see Fig. 1.3 ). This leads to the bound (see [ 108 ] and
references therein)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

unless the gravitino mass is larger than about 20 TeV.

Consequently, whatever specific scenario of supergravity one considers,
there is a clear tension with the lower bound from leptogenesis given
in Eq. ( 2.55 ). Different ways to relax this tension have been proposed
in the literature. Let us give three well-known examples.

One possibility is to produce RH neutrinos non-thermally in the decays
of the inflaton [ 109 , 110 , 111 , 111 , 112 , 113 , 75 ] . A recent
study [ 114 ] shows that the lower bound on @xmath from leptogenesis can
be relaxed in this way by two orders of magnitude.

Another possibility is provided by “soft leptogenesis” [ 115 , 116 ] ,
which is a supersymmetric scenario which requires only one heavy RH
neutrino. The interference between the @xmath -odd and @xmath -even
states of the heavy scalar neutrino resembles very much the neutral kaon
system. The mass splitting as well as the required @xmath violation in
the heavy sneutrino system comes from the soft supersymmetry breaking
@xmath and @xmath terms, associated with the Yukawa coupling and mass
term of @xmath , respectively. The lower bound on the reheat temperature
in this scenario can go as low as @xmath [ 75 ] .

Finally, it is also possible to use the enhancement of the @xmath
asymmetry for quasi-degenerate heavy neutrinos @xmath [ 87 ] (see Fig.
2.1 ) in order to relax the lower bound on the reheat temperature. This
inspired the scenario of “resonant leptogenesis” [ 117 , 118 , 76 ] , in
which case the scale can be lowered to TeV. We shall come back to
quasi-degenerate heavy neutrinos in Section 5.1 .

## Chapter 3 Adding flavor to vanilla leptogenesis

We described in the last chapter a picture of leptogenesis where the
flavor content of the lepton doublets produced in the decays of the
heavy neutrinos is neglected. This is done by summing over the flavor in
the @xmath asymmetry parameter [cf. Eq. ( 1.24 )], in the decay,
inverse-decay and scattering rates, and the properly normalized number
density in the Boltzmann equation ( 2.28 ) is @xmath . Summing over the
flavor implies that all quantities in unflavored leptogenesis depend on
some combination of @xmath , where the sum over @xmath was explicitly
carried out. Thus, even though the Yukawa coupling in the Lagrangian has
a flavor index @xmath [cf. Eq. ( B.1 )], the latter never shows up in
the calculation.

This picture of leptogenesis was thought to be the correct one, or at
least a good approximation of it, until the beginning of 2006, when two
groups published independently results that showed the importance of
flavor effects in leptogenesis [ 119 , 120 ] . In this chapter we would
like to explain in detail why flavor effects may be important, when they
are expected to matter and how they modify in practice the results
presented in the previous chapter.

### 3.1 When does flavor matter and why?

The SM Lagrangian contains a term that gives rise to the masses of the
charged leptons. Before spontaneous symmetry breaking, this term can be
written as @xmath , where @xmath denote the right-handed lepton fields,
which are singlets under @xmath , but with hypercharge -2. Note that we
chose a lepton basis such that this term is flavor diagonal.

In the early Universe the Yukawa coupling @xmath can be strong enough to
maintain processes like @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath are the @xmath
gauge bosons, in equilibrium, i.e. @xmath . With a vacuum Higgs mass of
@xmath , the interaction rate was estimated in [ 121 ] to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Obviously, when the temperature drops due to the expansion of the
Universe, the first interactions that will enter equilibrium are the
ones involving the @xmath -lepton, simply because its Yukawa coupling is
larger. It turns out that the temperature at which the @xmath -lepton
Yukawa interactions enter equilibrium is @xmath GeV. For the muon, this
will happen at @xmath GeV, and for the electron, at still much lower
temperature. ¹ ¹ 1 In supersymmetric leptogenesis, the rate in Eq. ( 3.1
) is multiplied by @xmath (see Section 2.3 ), so that flavor effects can
start to matter at higher temperatures [ 122 ] .

If the charged-lepton Yukawa interactions are in equilibrium ( @xmath )
and faster than inverse decays (see Section 4.1.2 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

during the relevant period of the asymmetry generation, then the lepton
quantum states @xmath [cf. Eq.( 2.1 )] lose coherence between the
production at decay and the subsequent absorption in inverse processes.
When the loss of coherence is complete, the Higgs bosons will interact
with incoherent lepton flavor eigenstates instead of the coherent
superposition @xmath produced in the decays. In the limit where the
quantum state becomes completely incoherent and is fully projected onto
one of the flavor eigenstates, each lepton flavor can be treated as a
statistically independent particle species. This is what we call the
“fully flavored regime”. One has to distinguish a two-flavor regime, for
@xmath , such that the condition Eq. ( 3.2 ) is satisfied only for
@xmath , and a three-flavor regime, for @xmath , where the condition
Eq. ( 3.2 ) applies also to @xmath .

In the fully flavored regime, there are two new effects compared to the
unflavored regime [ 119 ] . These can be understood introducing the
projectors and writing them as the sum of two terms,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The first effect is a reduction of the washout compared to the
unflavored regime and is described by the tree-level contribution @xmath
, which sets the fraction of the total asymmetry produced in @xmath
-decays that goes into each single flavor @xmath . In the fully flavored
regime, the Higgs will make inverse decays on flavor eigenstates @xmath
, instead of the linear superposition @xmath , and hence the washout
rate is reduced by the projector @xmath .

The second effect is an additional @xmath -violating contribution due to
a different flavor composition between @xmath and @xmath . This can be
described in terms of the projector differences @xmath , such that
@xmath . Indeed, defining the flavored @xmath asymmetries,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath and the total decay rates @xmath and @xmath were
introduced after Eq. ( 1.24 ), these can be now expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

showing that the first term is the usual contribution due to a different
decay rate into leptons and antileptons, and the second is the
additional contribution due to a possible different flavor composition
between @xmath and @xmath . Note that when the flavored @xmath
asymmetries are summed over the flavor, one recovers the total @xmath
asymmetry used in the unflavored regime, i.e. @xmath .

It is interesting to notice at this point that one can imagine a
scenario where the total @xmath asymmetry @xmath is 0, i.e. no asymmetry
would have been produced in the unflavored regime, but, thanks to the
@xmath contribution, the flavored @xmath asymmetries @xmath do not
vanish. More specifically, one can imagine that the only source of
@xmath violation comes from low-energy phases in the PMNS matrix. Since
the total @xmath asymmetry is insensitive to the PMNS matrix, @xmath in
this case. However, @xmath and @xmath do explicitly depend on the PMNS
matrix [see for instance Eq. ( 3.28 )], so that they can be non-zero
only thanks to the low-energy phases. In great contrast to the
unflavored picture, fully flavored leptogenesis can then be successful
solely thanks to the @xmath violation coming from low-energy phases.
This represents a very nice possibility which will be the subject of
Chapter 6 .

### 3.2 Flavored Boltzmann equations and spectator processes

We follow here the approach presented in [ 78 , 119 ] . Heavy neutrino
decays produce lepton flavor asymmetries, @xmath , that are computed
using Boltzmann equations similar to Eqs. ( 2.27 ) and ( 2.28 ).
Rigorously, one should include the effect of electroweak sphalerons,
which constitute an additional source of lepton flavor violation. This
can be symbolically done by adding a washout term @xmath . Then, for
consistency, we also need to add the equation @xmath to account for
baryon number violation by the sphaleron processes. Given that the
sphaleron interactions preserve the three charges @xmath associated to
anomaly-free currents, it follows that @xmath . By subtracting the
equations for the lepton flavor densities from the equation for baryon
number weighted by a suitable factor 1/3, one obtains the following
network of flavored Boltzmann equations [ 119 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where, @xmath and, for simplicity, we included only decays and inverse
decays with proper subtraction of the resonant contribution from @xmath
and @xmath processes, and only focused on the lightest RH neutrino
@xmath . Notice that @xmath is the @xmath number density, properly
normalized, and @xmath , where @xmath denote the RH lepton fields.

We are neglecting non-resonant @xmath and @xmath processes, a good
approximation for @xmath , as we will always consider. We are also
neglecting @xmath scatterings, which give a correction to a level less
than @xmath in the most interesting strong washout regime [ 123 ] , and
thermal corrections.

The number density asymmetries for the particles @xmath entering in
Eq. ( 3.8 ) are related to the corresponding chemical potentials through

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of degrees of freedom of @xmath . For any
given temperature regime, the specific set of reactions that are in
chemical equilibrium enforce algebraic relations between different
chemical potentials [ 83 ] . In the entire range of temperatures
relevant for leptogenesis, the interactions mediated by the top-quark
Yukawa coupling @xmath , and by the gauge interactions, are always in
equilibrium. Moreover, at the intermediate-low temperatures where flavor
effects can be important, strong QCD sphalerons [ 124 ] are also in
equilibrium. This situation has the following consequences:

-   Equilibration of the chemical potentials for the different quark
    colors is guaranteed because the chemical potentials of the gluons
    vanish, @xmath .

-   Equilibration of the chemical potentials for the two members of a
    @xmath doublet is guaranteed by the fact that @xmath above the
    electroweak phase transition. This condition was implicitly
    implemented in Eq. ( 3.8 ), where we used @xmath and @xmath to write
    the particle number asymmetries directly in terms of the number
    densities of the @xmath doublets.

-   Hypercharge neutrality implies

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denote the @xmath singlet fermions
    of the @xmath -th generation.

-   The equilibration condition for the Yukawa interactions of the top
    quark @xmath .

-   Because of their larger rates, QCD sphalerons equilibration occurs
    at higher temperatures than for the corresponding electroweak
    processes, presumably around @xmath [ 125 , 126 ] , and in any case
    long before equilibrium is reached for the @xmath -Yukawa processes.
    This implies the additional constraint

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

To express the asymmetries @xmath and @xmath in terms of the @xmath , we
define two matrices, @xmath and @xmath , through the relations [ 119 ,
127 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that Eq. ( 3.8 ) can be now rewritten as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The numerical values of the entries in @xmath and @xmath are determined
by the constraints among the various chemical potentials enforced by the
fast reactions that are in equilibrium in the temperature range ( @xmath
) where the @xmath asymmetries are produced.

In the temperature range @xmath , we consider the bottom-, tau- and
charm-Yukawa interactions to be in equilibrium, implying that the
asymmetries in the @xmath singlets @xmath , @xmath and @xmath degrees of
freedom are populated. The corresponding chemical potentials obey the
equilibrium constraints @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, the
electroweak sphaleron processes are also in equilibrium, implying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

As concerns lepton number, each electroweak sphaleron transition creates
all the doublets of the three generations, implying that individual
lepton flavor numbers are no longer conserved. An asymmetry will then be
generated along the @xmath and @xmath directions in flavor space, Even
though the electroweak sphalerons induce @xmath , where by the subscript
@xmath we mean the direction in flavor space perpendicular to @xmath and
@xmath , the condition @xmath is not violated, and hence Eq. ( 3.13 )
consists of just two equations for @xmath and @xmath . This is what we
call the two-flavor regime . As concerns baryon number, electroweak
sphalerons are the only source of @xmath violation, implying that baryon
number is equally distributed among the three quark generations, i.e.
@xmath in each generation. This modifies the detailed equilibrium
conditions for the quark chemical potentials. Solving the corresponding
set of linear equations for the chemical potentials, one obtains [ 128 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the temperature range @xmath , one has to include the equilibration
constraints from the strange-quark Yukawa interactions and, more
importantly, from the muon-Yukawa interactions. Given that the electron
remains the only lepton with a negligible Yukawa coupling, the Yukawa
interactions completely define the flavor basis for the leptons as well
as for the antileptons (that are now the @xmath -conjugate states of the
leptons). Correspondingly, the lepton asymmetries are also completely
defined in the flavor basis. In this regime the coefficients @xmath and
@xmath are given by [ 119 , 129 ]

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.16)
  -- -- -- --------

### 3.3 In practice, what changes?

We have seen in the last section that, if the relevant temperature for
leptogenesis is below roughly @xmath GeV, a rigorous description of the
asymmetry evolution has to be performed in terms of the individual
flavor asymmetries @xmath rather than in terms of the total asymmetry
@xmath , as usually done in the unflavored treatment.

We would like to make two remarks:

-   From Eq. ( 3.13 ) it can be seen that the two diagonal entries of
    @xmath sum up with the entries in @xmath . Actually, this sum turns
    out to be close to 1 both using Eq. ( 3.15 ) and Eq. ( 3.16 );
    moreover, the addition of the coefficients in @xmath tends to
    equalize the flavored diagonal elements [ 128 ] .

-   It was shown in [ 130 ] that the off-diagonal elements in the matrix
    @xmath have an effect smaller than 40% on the final asymmetry.
    Taking into account the matrix @xmath , this effect is even reduced.

Therefore, for simplicity, we shall use in the following @xmath , which
takes into account spectator processes in an approximate way. The
generalization of the flavored Eqs. ( 3.7 ) and ( 3.8 ) to three RH
neutrinos ( @xmath ) is then given by [ 131 , 132 , 119 , 120 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Notice that, in the two-flavor regime, @xmath , where @xmath or @xmath ,
and the two equations for the individual electron and muon asymmetries
are replaced by one kinetic equation for the sum @xmath , where the
individual flavored @xmath asymmetries and projectors have to be
replaced by their sum, namely @xmath and @xmath [ 129 ] . The total
asymmetry is then given by @xmath . The calculation is therefore
intermediate between the unflavored case and the three-flavor regime,
though the results are very similar to the three-flavor regime [ 123 ] .

The evolution of the @xmath ’s can be worked out in an integral form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the 6, in the two-flavor case, or 9, in the three-flavor case,
efficiency factors given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The final @xmath asymmetry is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which one obtains the baryon-to-photon ratio @xmath using Eq. (
2.15 ).

Using the convenient Casas-Ibarra parametrization, Eq. ( 2.18 ), the
tree-level projectors can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

It will also prove useful to introduce the flavored decay parameters,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

obtained using Eqs. ( 3.22 ) and ( 2.23 ).

The flavored @xmath asymmetries are given by the following expression [
87 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.24)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 2.17 ), and we recall that @xmath .

In general, the final asymmetry will depend on all 18 see-saw
parameters. As explained in the introduction (Section 1.2.2 ), until now
we have only measured two mass-squared differences and two mixing angles
in neutrino oscillation experiments. This is essentially the only
information on the 18 see-saw parameters we have. Thus, we can write
that @xmath . It is interesting that including flavor effects there is a
potential dependence of the final asymmetry also on the unknown
parameters contained in the PMNS mixing matrix @xmath [ 131 , 119 ] ,
namely the mixing angle @xmath and the @xmath -violating phases @xmath
and @xmath [cf. Eq. ( A.5 )].

Let us assume that the mass spectrum of the heavy neutrinos is
hierarchical, @xmath . In this case the general expression Eq. ( 3.24 )
for the @xmath asymmetries @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath                     (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Expressing the flavored @xmath asymmetries @xmath in terms of the
orthogonal parametrization, one obtains [ 129 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the explicit dependence on the PMNS matrix can be seen. Similar
expressions can be found for @xmath and @xmath , but as they are
slightly more complicated, we do not show them here.

In the following, we shall assume no rotation in the plane 23, i.e.
@xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.22 )]. Under these conditions, both total @xmath
asymmetries @xmath and @xmath are suppressed like @xmath . On the other
hand, it is interesting to notice that the @xmath ’s and the @xmath ’s
are not necessarily suppressed. This can potentially lead to a scenario
where the final asymmetry is produced by the decays of the two heavier
RH neutrinos, provided @xmath in order for the flavored regime to apply.
Here we do not pursue this possibility (see, however, Sections 5.2 and
6.2 ) and focus on a typical @xmath -dominated scenario where the
dominant contribution to the final asymmetry comes from the decays of
the lightest RH neutrino, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

It will prove important for our discussion that both the total @xmath
asymmetry @xmath and the flavored ones @xmath cannot be arbitrarily
large. The total @xmath asymmetry is indeed upper bounded by Eq. ( 2.45
), and each flavored @xmath asymmetry @xmath is bounded by [ 129 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we recall that @xmath . Therefore, while the total @xmath
asymmetry is suppressed when @xmath increases, the single-flavor @xmath
asymmetries can be enhanced. The existence of an upper bound on the
quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

independent of @xmath , implies, as in the unflavored analysis, Eq. (
2.52 ), the existence of a lower bound on @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we will always use the 3 @xmath lower value for @xmath [cf. Eq. (
2.53 )], and we indicated with @xmath the efficiency factor in the
unflavored case, corresponding to @xmath with @xmath . We also defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity represents the deviation introduced by flavor effects
compared to the unflavored treatment in the hierarchical light neutrino
case. We could then use @xmath to maximize @xmath . Notice however that,
first, the @xmath ’s cannot be simultaneously equal to @xmath because of
the bound on the total asymmetry, and, second, there are sign
cancellations in @xmath . Therefore, the bound ( 3.32 ) is more
restrictive than this possible estimation, and we prefer to keep it in
this form, maximizing @xmath in each particular situation.

As usual, the lower bound on @xmath implies an associated lower bound on
the initial temperature @xmath of leptogenesis and hence on the reheat
temperature @xmath .

### 3.4 Dependence on the initial conditions and lower bounds

From Eq. ( 3.20 ), extending an analytic procedure derived within the
unflavored treatment [ 80 ] , one can obtain simple expressions for the
flavored efficiency factors @xmath . In the case of a thermal initial
@xmath -abundance ( @xmath ), one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the function @xmath was given in Eq. ( 2.31 ). Notice that, in the
particularly relevant range @xmath , this expression is well
approximated by Eq. ( 2.35 ) replacing @xmath .

In the case of vanishing initial @xmath -abundance ( @xmath ), one has
to take into account two different contributions, a negative and a
positive one,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The negative contribution arises from a first stage when @xmath , for
@xmath , and is given approximately by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 2.38 ).

The positive contribution arises from a second stage when @xmath , for
@xmath , and is approximately given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is interesting to notice that @xmath is still regulated by @xmath
[cf. Eq. ( 2.38 )], since the RH neutrino production is not affected by
flavor effects, contrarily to the washout, which is reduced because
regulated by @xmath .

These analytic expressions make transparent the two conditions to have
independence from the initial conditions. The first is the
thermalization of the @xmath -abundance, such that, for an arbitrary
initial @xmath -abundance, one has @xmath . The second is that the
asymmetry produced during the non-thermal stage, for @xmath , has to be
efficiently washed out, leading to @xmath . They are both realized for
large values @xmath . More quantitatively, we introduced in Section 2.2
the quantity @xmath such that, for @xmath , the final asymmetry
calculated for a thermal initial @xmath -abundance differs from the one
calculated for a vanishing initial abundance by less than some quantity
@xmath . This can be used as a precise definition of the strong washout
regime. Let us consider some particular cases, showing how flavor
effects tend to enlarge the domain of the weak washout at the expense of
the strong washout regime.

#### 3.4.1 Alignment

The simplest situation is the alignment case, realized when the @xmath
-decays are just into one flavor @xmath , so that @xmath and @xmath ,
implying @xmath . Notice that we do not have to worry about the fact
that the lightest RH neutrino inverse decays might not be able to wash
out the asymmetry generated from the decays of the two heavier
neutrinos, since we are assuming negligible @xmath and @xmath anyway. In
this case the general set of kinetic equations ( 3.17 ) and ( 3.18 )
reduces to the usual unflavored equations and all results coincide with
those in the unflavored analysis [ 119 ] . In particular one has @xmath
.

In the case of alignment we are considering, we obtain @xmath for @xmath
, as shown in Fig. 3.1 .

The value of @xmath plays a relevant role since only for @xmath one has
predictions from leptogenesis on the final baryon asymmetry resulting
from a self-contained set of assumptions. On the other hand, for @xmath
leptogenesis has to be complemented with a model for the initial
conditions. Additionally, the calculation of the final asymmetry in the
weak washout regime requires a precise description of the RH neutrino
production, potentially sensitive to many poorly known effects. It is
then interesting that current neutrino mixing data favor @xmath to be in
the range @xmath [ 88 , 80 , 93 ] , where one can have a mild washout
assuring full independence from the initial conditions, as one can see
in Fig. 3.1 , but still successful leptogenesis. In this case one can
place constraints on the see-saw parameters which do not depend on
specific assumptions for the initial conditions and with reduced
theoretical uncertainties.

Since one has @xmath here [cf. Eq. ( 3.33 )], the general lower bound on
@xmath in Eq. ( 3.32 ), like all other quantities, becomes the usual
lower bound derived from an unflavored treatment. In the lower panel of
Fig. 3.1 , we have plotted it both for @xmath and @xmath (solid lines).
This corresponds precisely to the lower bound in the unflavored
treatment shown in Fig. 2.5 . One can see that the dependence on the
initial conditions in @xmath translates into a dependence on the initial
conditions in @xmath . The lowest model-independent values are then
obtained for @xmath and are given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.38)
  -- -- -- --------

We did not show the lower bound on @xmath in Fig. 3.1 , not to overload
the plot, but it is precisely given by the dashed line in Fig. 2.5 .
Another typically quoted lower bound on @xmath is the one obtained for a
thermal initial @xmath -abundance in the limit @xmath , given by @xmath
[ 81 ] .

#### 3.4.2 Democratic and semi-democratic cases

Let us now discuss another possibility. For definiteness, we assume a
three-flavor regime; the extension of the results to the two-flavor
regime is straightforward. Let us assume a democratic situation where
@xmath for any @xmath and consequently @xmath . This case was also
considered in [ 120 ] . From Eq. ( 3.20 ) it follows that the three
efficiency factors @xmath , like the three @xmath asymmetries @xmath ,
are all equal and thus Eq. ( 3.29 ) simplifies into @xmath , as in the
usual unflavored treatment. However, the washout is now reduced by the
presence of the projector, so that @xmath . The result is that, in the
case of a thermal initial @xmath -abundance, the efficiency factor, as a
function of @xmath , is simply shifted. The same happens for vanishing
initial @xmath -abundance in the strong washout regime. However, in the
weak washout regime, there is not only a simple shift, since the RH
neutrino production is still depending on @xmath . A plot of @xmath is
shown in the upper panel of Fig. 3.1 (short-dashed lines). One can see
how the reduced washout increases the value of @xmath to @xmath ,
approximately @xmath larger, thus compensating almost exactly the
washout reduction by a factor @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.35 )].

In this way the lowest bound on @xmath in the strong washout regime, at
@xmath , is almost unchanged. On the other hand, for a given value
@xmath , the lower bound gets approximately relaxed by a factor @xmath [
120 ] . The lower bound for the democratic case is shown in the lower
panel of Fig. 3.1 (short-dashed lines). It is apparent that the lower
bound for @xmath and thermal initial @xmath -abundance does not change
with respect to the alignment case (or the unflavored treatment). One
can then say that flavor effects simply induce a shift of the dependence
of the lower bound on @xmath .

The semi-democratic case is intermediate between the democratic and the
alignment cases. It is obtained when one projector vanishes, for example
@xmath , and the other two are @xmath . In this case, @xmath . The
corresponding plots of the efficiency factor and of the lower bound on
@xmath are also shown in Fig. 3.1 (dashed lines). The semi-democratic
case can actually be identified with the two-flavor regime, where the
two projectors are equal, @xmath .

#### 3.4.3 One-flavor dominance

There is another potentially interesting situation that motivates an
extension of the previous results to arbitrarily small values of @xmath
. This occurs when the final asymmetry is dominated by one flavor @xmath
, and Eq. ( 3.29 ) can be further simplified into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

analogously to the alignment case but with @xmath . Notice that this
cannot happen due to a dominance of one of the @xmath asymmetries, for
example with @xmath being close to its maximum value, Eq. ( 3.30 ), much
larger than the other two that are strongly suppressed, simply because
one has @xmath . One has then to imagine a situation where the @xmath
asymmetry @xmath is comparable to the sum of the other two, but @xmath ,
so that @xmath . The dominance is then a result of the much weaker
washout.

The analysis of the dependence on the initial conditions can then be
performed as in the previous cases calculating the value of @xmath for
any value of @xmath . The result is shown in Fig. 3.2 . The alignment
case corresponds to @xmath , the semi-democratic case to @xmath and the
democratic case to @xmath . Notice that the result is very close to the
simple estimation @xmath which would follow if @xmath were just
depending on @xmath .

In Fig. 3.3 we have plotted the values of the lower bounds on @xmath and
@xmath for hierarchical light neutrinos, implying @xmath in Eq. ( 3.30
). These can be obtained plugging @xmath in Eq. ( 3.32 ). They
correspond to the lowest values in the strong washout regime, when
@xmath .

There are two possible ways to look at the results. On the one hand,
flavor effects can relax the lower bounds for fixed values of @xmath .
Indeed, for each value @xmath , one can choose @xmath such that @xmath ,
thus obtaining the highest possible relaxation in the strong washout
regime. This is shown in the right panel of Fig. 3.3 .

It is important to say that this relaxation is potential. A direct
inspection is indeed necessary to determine whether it is really
possible to achieve at the same time not only small values of @xmath but
also a single-flavor @xmath asymmetry @xmath that is not suppressed
compared to @xmath .

On the other hand, as a function of @xmath the bounds get more stringent
when @xmath decreases, so that the minimum is obtained in the alignment
case, corresponding to the unflavored case. This is clearly visible in
the left panel of Fig. 3.3 . Therefore, it is important to emphasize
here that flavor effects cannot help to alleviate the conflict of the
lower bound on the reheat temperature @xmath from successful
leptogenesis with the upper bound on @xmath in order not to overproduce
gravitinos (see Section 2.3 for a discussion). In particular, the bounds
on @xmath and @xmath that are usually quoted in the literature [cf.
Eq. ( 3.38 )] are not changed by flavor effects.

Notice that together with the one-flavor dominance case, one can also
envisage, in the three-flavor regime, a two-flavor dominance case, where
two projectors are equally small and the third is necessarily close to
one, while all the three flavored @xmath asymmetries are comparable.

In the next section we consider a specific example that illustrates what
we have discussed on general grounds. At the same time, it will help to
understand which are realistic values for the projectors and their
differences, given a specific set of see-saw parameters and using the
information on the PMNS mixing matrix we have from neutrino oscillation
experiments.

### 3.5 Study of a specific example

The previous results have been obtained assuming no restrictions on the
projectors. Moreover, in the one-flavor dominance case, where there can
be a relevant relaxation of the usual lower bounds derived following an
unflavored treatment, we have assumed that the upper bound on @xmath ,
Eq. ( 3.30 ), is saturated independently of the value of the projector.

This assumption does not take into account that the values of the
projectors depend on the different see-saw parameters, in particular on
the neutrino mixing parameters, and that severe restrictions could
apply. Let us show a definite example considering a particular form of
the orthogonal matrix, @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.21 )]. This case is
particularly meaningful, since it realizes one of the conditions (
@xmath ) to saturate the bound ( 2.45 ) for @xmath . Moreover, the decay
parameter is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and we recall that @xmath . The expression ( 3.22 ) for
the projector gets then specialized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

while, specializing Eq. ( 3.28 ) for @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath .

If we first consider the case of fully hierarchical light neutrinos,
@xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the PMNS matrix @xmath we adopt the parametrization Eq. ( A.5 ). One
then finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fact that the projector on the electron flavor is very small and
@xmath for all flavors implies that the asymmetry generated in the
electron flavor will be small, while the muon and tauon contributions
will be equal, since the projectors on these flavors are equal. Summing
Eq. ( 3.18 ) over @xmath , one then simply recovers the unflavored case
with the washout reduced by a factor of @xmath . This is a realization
of the semi-democratic case that we were envisaging at the end of
Section 3.4.2 where @xmath . In this situation flavor effects do not
produce large modifications to the usual results, essentially a factor
of 2 reduction of the washout in the strong washout regime with a
consequent equal relaxation of the lower bounds (see dashed lines in
Fig. 3.1 ). Moreover, there is practically no difference between a
calculation in the two- or three-flavor regime.

Let us now consider the effect of a non-vanishing but small lightest
neutrino mass @xmath , for example @xmath . In this case the results can
also depend on the Majorana and Dirac phases. We will show the results
for @xmath purely imaginary, the second condition that maximizes the
total @xmath asymmetry if @xmath [ 93 ] . Notice that this is not in
general the condition that maximizes @xmath for @xmath ; however, we
will also use it in this case for simplicity.

We first consider the case of a real @xmath . The results are only
slightly sensitive to a variation of @xmath within the experimentally
allowed @xmath range 0–0.2. Therefore, we shall set @xmath ,
corresponding to @xmath , in all examples. In the left panel of Fig. 3.4

we show the values of the projectors @xmath and of the normalized @xmath
asymmetries @xmath as a function of @xmath . The calculations are
performed in the two-flavor regime since we obtain that successful
leptogenesis is possible only for @xmath , where the two-flavor regime
applies. Now a difference between the tauon and the sum of the muon and
electron projectors and asymmetries arises. On the other hand, for
@xmath , this difference tends to vanish and the semi-democratic case is
again recovered.

In the central panel we show the quantities @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 3.33 )]
and their sum @xmath . We recall that @xmath gives the deviation of the
total asymmetry from an unflavored calculation for hierarchical light
neutrinos. One can see how the contribution to the total asymmetry from
the tauon flavor is now twice as large as from the electron plus muon
flavors. For @xmath , the semi-democratic case is restored, the two
contributions tend to be equal to the unflavored case, and the total
final asymmetry is about twice larger. Finally, in the right panel we
show the lower bound on @xmath , and compare it with the results from
the unflavored analysis (dash-dotted line). At @xmath , the relaxation
in the strong washout is maximum, a factor @xmath . For @xmath , the
relaxation is reduced to a factor @xmath , as in the semi-democratic
case.

Let us now study the effect of switching on phases in the @xmath matrix,
again for @xmath . The most important effect arises from one of the two
Majorana phases, namely @xmath . The other Majorana phase @xmath is
irrelevant in the particular model we consider, @xmath . As for the
Dirac phase @xmath , it plays a role similar to @xmath , but its effect
is suppressed by the small angle @xmath . In Fig. 3.5 we show, again in
three panels, the same quantities as in Fig. 3.4 for @xmath .

One can see how this further increases the difference between the @xmath
and the @xmath contributions and further relaxes the lower bound on
@xmath . The effect is small for the considered value @xmath . However,
considering a much larger neutrino mass @xmath while keeping @xmath ,
the effect becomes dramatically bigger. In Fig. 3.6 we show the same
quantities as in Fig. 3.4 and Fig. 3.5 for @xmath .

In the left panel one can see that now, for @xmath , @xmath , much
larger than in the previous case. This means that the dominant
contribution to the flavored @xmath asymmetries comes now from the
@xmath term [cf. Eq. ( 3.6 )]. At the same time, very importantly,
@xmath and in this way, as one can see in the central panel, the
dominant contribution to @xmath is given by @xmath . This case thus
finally realizes a one-flavor dominance. The final effect is that the
lower bound on @xmath is about three orders of magnitude relaxed
compared to the unflavored case.

In Fig. 3.7 the dependence on @xmath of the lower bound on @xmath is
summarized, showing both the case with zero Majorana phase and the case
with @xmath . One can notice how the effect of the phase in relaxing the
lower bound increases with @xmath .

Finally, we want to study the interesting case of a real orthogonal
matrix @xmath , implying @xmath . In the particular model we are
considering, namely @xmath , there is no asymmetry produced if @xmath ,
since @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 3.5 )]. For a non-vanishing @xmath and a
non-real @xmath , we have that @xmath and consequently @xmath . In Fig.
3.8 we show the results for @xmath and @xmath . We present again the
same quantities as in Figs. 3.4 , 3.5 and 3.6 . One can see that an
asymmetry can still be produced, as envisaged in [ 119 ] . However,
successful leptogenesis is possible almost only in the weak washout
regime. In the strong washout regime, for values @xmath , there is a
small allowed region only for @xmath .

Let us summarize the main results of this section, where we assumed the
@xmath matrix to have the simple form @xmath .

We have seen that the relaxation of the lower bounds compared to the
unflavored case is only of order one for @xmath , but grows to several
orders of magnitude for @xmath , i.e. in the quasi-degenerate limit. The
reason is that for quasi-degenerate neutrinos ( @xmath ) a partial
cancellation in one of the projectors, Eq. ( 3.22 ), can be more easily
obtained, simply because all terms in the numerator are of the same
order. When a partial cancellation occurs, one projector will be
suppressed, leading to a one-flavor dominance and thus to a large
relaxation of the lower bound at large values of @xmath . This is
exactly what happened in the situation depicted in Fig. 3.6 .

The role of the phases in the @xmath matrix to achieve a cancellation in
one of the projectors is crucial. For @xmath , only one Majorana phase,
@xmath , is relevant, and the specific value it takes leads to very
different results. In Fig. 3.6 we used the value @xmath which
approximately maximizes the asymmetry. The Dirac phase @xmath can also
play a similar role to @xmath for @xmath , but its effect is always
suppressed by the small angle @xmath . It should be noted that for more
general cases like @xmath , the cancellation in the projector leading to
a one-flavor dominance is also possible when @xmath , because there is
more freedom in the @xmath matrix to achieve a cancellation. Moreover,
both Majorana phases in @xmath can play a role in principle, not only
@xmath .

It seems therefore that when flavor effects are taken into account, one
obtains an opposite result compared to the unflavored analysis we
performed in the previous chapter, where one had a suppression of the
final asymmetry for growing absolute neutrino mass scale, leading to the
stringent upper bound Eq. ( 2.57 ). This upper bound seems now to hold
only for @xmath [ 120 ] . However, as we shall argue in the next
chapter, this issue requires a full quantum kinetic calculation, in
order to keep track of the correlations in flavor space and of partial
losses of coherence [ 133 ] .

We wish also to emphasize that, when flavor effects are included,
leptogenesis is an interesting example of phenomenology, beyond
neutrinoless double beta decay, where Majorana phases play an important
role. The Dirac phase is also relevant, although it appears in
combination with the small angle @xmath . The importance of the @xmath
-violating phases in @xmath shows up at two levels. First, as we have
discussed above, they are crucial to achieve a cancellation in one of
the projectors, leading to a one-flavor dominance. Second, they can
provide the unique source of @xmath violation required for successful
leptogenesis, as illustrated in Fig. 3.8 . We shall come back to this
interesting possibility in Chapter 6 .

## Chapter 4 From classical to quantum kinetic equations

We saw in the last two chapters that two quite different pictures of
leptogenesis are valid in two different temperature regimes. Roughly
speaking, when the temperature relevant for leptogenesis is above @xmath
GeV, the unflavored picture should hold, whereas at lower temperatures,
@xmath GeV, the fully flavored regime should apply, either with two
independent flavors ( @xmath GeV) or with three ( @xmath GeV).

The final baryon asymmetry was estimated in both regimes, unflavored and
fully flavored, by means of classical Boltzmann equations. However, one
could expect that quantum effects, such as correlations in flavor space
and partial losses of coherence, might play some role in the
intermediate regime around @xmath GeV. In such a case, the classical
Boltzmann equation for the @xmath asymmetry given in Eq. ( 3.18 ) is not
expected to describe correctly the generation of asymmetry. One should
indeed turn to a density matrix equation, which provides the right
formalism to keep track of correlations in flavor space and partial
losses of coherence.

In this chapter we re-visit the conditions of validity of both the
unflavored and the fully flavored pictures. We shall give physical
arguments why one actually expects to have a substantial part of the
parameter space where quantum effects are important. Interestingly, this
part of the parameter space is exactly the one relevant for a discussion
about the upper bound on the absolute neutrino mass scale, which is
evaded if one believes a fully flavored analysis. We shall argue that
only solving the relevant density matrix equation will give a definite
answer to that question. In the final section we discuss the density
matrix formalism and give tentative equations for leptogenesis in the
transition region.

### 4.1 Validity of the different pictures

Let us first discuss in some detail the quantity that will be the
angular stone of the subsequent analysis, namely the washout rate by
inverse decays [cf. Eq. ( 2.12 )]. As usual, we restrict our analysis to
the lightest RH neutrino @xmath .

It was shown in [ 80 ] that the inverse-decay rate reaches a maximum
@xmath at @xmath . In the weak washout regime, when @xmath , one has
@xmath for any value of @xmath . In this case the washout is negligible,
and the final asymmetry depends on the initial conditions. In the strong
washout regime, when @xmath , there is an interval @xmath where @xmath .
The asymmetry produced at @xmath is very efficiently washed out, and
thus the final asymmetry is essentially what is produced around @xmath
by the out-of-equilibrium decays of the residual RH neutrinos, whose
number corresponds approximately to the final value of the efficiency
factor.

In Fig. 4.1 we show the washout term from inverse decays for three
different values of @xmath . For @xmath , we show the interval @xmath .
The maximum value, @xmath , is reached at @xmath . For @xmath , one has
@xmath . This can be taken as the threshold value distinguishing between
the strong and the weak washout regimes. For @xmath , one has @xmath for
any value of @xmath . Notice however that even in this case the weak
washout can be important for successful leptogenesis if the initial
@xmath -abundance is zero, since it prevents a full cancellation between
two different sign contributions to the final asymmetry [ 80 ] .

#### 4.1.1 When are flavor effects important?

As discussed in Section 3.1 , flavor effects are caused by
charged-lepton Yukawa interactions [ 127 ] that occur with the rate
given in Eq. ( 3.1 ). The largest rate is for @xmath where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, if @xmath , charged-lepton Yukawa interactions are not
effective, and all processes in the early Universe are flavor blind,
justifying the unflavored treatment. For @xmath , the @xmath -Yukawa
coupling is strong enough that the scatterings @xmath are in
equilibrium. However, this condition is not necessarily sufficient for
important flavor effects to occur, because we need to compare the speed
of the Yukawa interactions with that of the RH neutrino decays and
inverse decays. To this end, we study the weak and strong washout
regimes separately and consider only a two-flavor case, because the
@xmath -lepton Yukawa coupling causes the main modification.

In the weak washout regime, assuming a vanishing initial @xmath
-abundance, the production of RH neutrinos by inverse decays occurs
around @xmath . At this epoch, inverse decays are by definition slower
than the expansion rate. Therefore, the condition @xmath is sufficient
to conclude that the charged-lepton Yukawa interactions are faster than
the inverse decay rate. This translates into the condition @xmath
because the RH neutrino production occurs at @xmath , in agreement with
the previous literature [ 119 , 120 ] .

However, this condition does not guarantee that flavor effects indeed
have an impact on the final asymmetry, because this impact depends on
washout playing some role. For a vanishing initial @xmath -abundance,
this is the case in that washout effects prevent a full sign
cancellation between the asymmetry produced when @xmath and the
asymmetry produced later on. On the other hand, for a thermal initial
@xmath -abundance, no such effect arises from the weak washout and
flavor effects do not modify the final asymmetry. We will come back to
this point later on.

In the strong washout regime, the situation is very different. The rate
of RH neutrino inverse decays at @xmath is larger than the expansion
rate. Therefore, we need to compare the charged-lepton Yukawa rate
@xmath with the RH neutrino inverse-decay rate @xmath . For the
unflavored treatment to be valid for @xmath then requires

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is that value of @xmath where the two rates are equal, i.e.
@xmath . This condition guarantees that at temperatures @xmath flavor
effects will not be able to break the coherent propagation of the lepton
states. The final asymmetry is dominantly produced around @xmath .
Therefore, the condition for flavor effects to be negligible is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

similar to the weak washout regime. However, the corresponding condition
on the temperature

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

is now less restrictive.

If one starts with a non-vanishing initial @xmath -abundance, then the
final asymmetry is also determined by how efficiently the initial value
is washed out; this is described by the integral in Eq. ( 2.29 ). In
this case even a value of @xmath would be important to determine the
final asymmetry since washout in the unflavored regime would be
effective for @xmath , while a reduced washout would apply in the
flavored regime at lower temperatures such that @xmath .

We conclude that the condition ( 4.2 ) obeys the intuitive expectation
that there is always a threshold value for @xmath above which the
unflavored case is recovered. In this case the temperature below which
flavor effects play a role indeed becomes smaller and smaller. The
situation is illustrated in Fig. 4.1 where we compare @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

the analogous quantity for the charged-lepton Yukawa interactions. For
any value of @xmath and @xmath , there is a value @xmath such that
@xmath for @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath , corresponding to @xmath in
the strong washout regime, then @xmath , meaning that flavor effects are
important during the entire thermal history. On the other hand, for a
fixed value of @xmath , one has @xmath for @xmath , implying that flavor
effects tend to disappear for sufficiently large values of @xmath .
Notice however that if @xmath , then @xmath for any value of @xmath .
This confirms that only for @xmath flavor effects can be neglected and
the unflavored regime is recovered.

#### 4.1.2 Maximum flavor effects

We now turn to the opposite extreme case when flavor effects are
maximal, the “fully flavored regime.” In other words, the charged-lepton
Yukawa interactions are now taken to be so fast that the lepton flavor
content produced in @xmath on average fully collapses before the inverse
reaction can take place, i.e., the @xmath density matrix in flavor space
is to be taken diagonal in the charged-lepton Yukawa basis. In this case
each single-flavor asymmetry has to be calculated separately because
generally the washout by inverse decays is different for each flavor.
Moreover, the single-flavor @xmath asymmetries now have an additional
contribution compared to the total, as shown in Eq. ( 3.6 ) [ 119 , 120
] . Finally, the inverse decay involving a lepton in the flavor @xmath
does not wash out as much asymmetry as the one produced by one RH
neutrino decay. The reduction is quantified by the probability @xmath ,
averaged over leptons and antileptons, that the lepton @xmath produced
in the decay of @xmath collapses into the flavor eigenstate @xmath .
Focusing on the lightest RH neutrino @xmath , the fully flavored
Boltzmann equations are given by Eqs. ( 3.17 ) and ( 3.18 ), with @xmath
. Since we are dealing with the two-flavor case, here @xmath or @xmath
where the latter stands for a suitable superposition of the @xmath and
@xmath flavors, as explained after Eq. ( 3.18 ).

As in the unflavored case, we next identify the condition for the fully
flavored approximation to hold. The final asymmetry in the flavor @xmath
is dominantly produced at @xmath , where @xmath . Therefore, one must
require that @xmath holds already at @xmath , or else the washout
reduction takes place too late. We stress that flavor effects modify the
final asymmetry only if the flavor projection takes place before the
washout by inverse decays freezes out. Otherwise the washout epoch is
over and the unflavored behavior is recovered. It is easy to verify that
if the projectors are set to unity and the equations are summed over
flavors, the kinetic equation ( 2.28 ) for @xmath holding in the
unflavored regime is recovered. Therefore, we require

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

as an approximate condition for the fully flavored behavior.

In Fig. 4.2 we summarize the different possible cases in the plane of
parameters @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath , above the dashed line,
flavor effects are not important independently of @xmath . The
condition ( 4.6 ), in the most restrictive case when @xmath and @xmath ,
is satisfied below the inclined dotted line. This case typically occurs
in a one-flavor dominated scenario, as we explain below. The vertical
dot-dashed line is the border that separates the weak from the strong
washout regime in the unflavored case. In the flavored case the
condition @xmath still implies a weak washout regime because flavor
effects can only reduce the washout. However, the condition for the
strong washout regime can be more restrictive than @xmath , as discussed
in [ 123 ] . For @xmath , flavor effects modify the final asymmetry only
marginally and more specifically only if the initial @xmath -abundance
vanishes, as indicated in Fig. 4.2 . On the other hand, for @xmath and
below the diagonal line, flavor modifications of the final asymmetry can
be large, especially in the one-flavor dominated scenario.

There is a region in parameter space where neither condition ( 4.2 )
nor ( 4.6 ) holds. This intermediate regime can become very large in the
case of a one-flavor dominated scenario, where several orders of
magnitude enhancement of the final asymmetry compared to the unflavored
calculation are possible (see Fig. 3.6 ). In this case one of the two
projectors is very small compared to the other, and so the washout is
very asymmetric in the two flavors. On the other hand, if the two
flavored @xmath asymmetries are comparable, then the final asymmetry is
dominantly produced into one flavor and deviations from the unflavored
regime can become very large. This scenario is realized, in particular,
when the absolute neutrino mass scale increases, relaxing the
traditional neutrino mass bound.

However, the condition ( 4.6 ) strongly restricts the applicability of
the one-flavor dominated scenario. Even though the reduction of the
washout is driven by @xmath , implying @xmath , the possibility for
flavor effects to be relevant relies on the dominance of the
charged-lepton Yukawa interaction rate compared to the RH neutrino
inverse-decay rate, which however is still driven by @xmath . Therefore,
increasing @xmath , one can enhance the asymmetry in the one-flavor
dominated scenario compared to the unflavored case, if smaller and
smaller values of the projector @xmath are possible. On the other hand,
the inverse-decay rate increases so that the fully flavored behavior may
no longer apply. In particular notice that the maximum enhancement of
the asymmetry is obtained when @xmath , when @xmath and the condition (
4.6 ) is maximally restrictive.

### 4.2 Neutrino mass bound

One possible consequence of flavor effects is to relax the traditional
upper bound on the neutrino mass that is implied by successful
leptogenesis. In order to explore the impact of our modified criteria,
we first recall the origin of this bound in the unflavored case.
Maximizing the final value of the asymmetry over all see-saw parameters
except @xmath and @xmath yields [ 80 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.7)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have approximated @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.35 )], and we have
neglected the dependence of @xmath on @xmath in the derivative. This
constraint translates into @xmath shown by the curved solid line in the
upper part of Fig. 4.3 where the unflavored behavior obtains. This curve
sports an absolute maximum, @xmath , for @xmath .

The possibility that flavor effects could relax this bound is based on
the observation that the flavored @xmath asymmetries, for @xmath , are
proportional to @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 3.30 ]. On the other hand, the total
@xmath asymmetry is suppressed like @xmath , contributing to the upper
bound in the unflavored regime. However, if @xmath increases, then
@xmath has to increase as well, so that it is not guaranteed that the
fully flavored treatment remains justified.

Quantitatively, the value of @xmath is bounded from below by [ 92 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath , the final asymmetry is maximized when a one-flavor
dominated scenario is realized. In this case the final asymmetry is
approximately @xmath . The bound on the single-flavor @xmath asymmetry
was given in Eq. ( 3.30 ). It is then possible to find the value of
@xmath that maximizes the asymmetry as a function of @xmath and the
corresponding value of @xmath . Imposing @xmath implies a lower bound on
@xmath as a function of @xmath .

This limit can be translated into a lower bound on @xmath as a function
of @xmath by replacing @xmath with its minimum value @xmath . In this
way the washout is always minimized and the final efficiency factor and
the final asymmetry are maximized. Notice that the single-flavor @xmath
asymmetries, like the total, vanish for @xmath . Therefore, this lower
bound cannot be saturated. Notice moreover that for @xmath the
one-flavor dominated scenario does not necessarily hold because it is
possible that @xmath . Actually, for @xmath , flavor effects disappear
and one recovers the usual asymptotic value of the lower bound obtained
in the unflavored case for thermal initial @xmath -abundance, @xmath
[cf. Eq. ( 2.53 )]. For intermediate values of @xmath , one can use a
simple interpolation. The final result is shown in the bottom part of
Fig. 4.3 as a thick solid line.

In Fig. 4.3 we also show the condition ( 4.6 ) calculated for the same
value of @xmath that maximizes the final asymmetry , but replacing
@xmath with its minimum value @xmath (thick dashed line). Since @xmath
increases with @xmath , this produces a necessary, but not sufficient,
condition in the @xmath - @xmath plane for the fully flavored behavior.
This condition matches the validity of the unflavored regime at @xmath
and the lower bound on @xmath at @xmath . This means that for @xmath the
fully flavored behavior does not obtain. Notice also that this upper
limit is quite conservative because the lower bound on @xmath has been
obtained neglecting that, for @xmath , the flavored @xmath asymmetry
vanishes and thus the bound cannot be saturated. Moreover, we have
assumed that @xmath can always assume the value that maximizes the
asymmetry.

In Fig. 4.3 we also show (thin solid line) the lower bound @xmath in the
specific scenario considered in Section 3.5 , namely @xmath and @xmath
is taken purely imaginary [cf. Eq. ( 2.21 )]. In this case the value of
@xmath is not necessarily the same as the one that maximizes the
asymmetry in the one-flavor dominated scenario, and @xmath . Therefore,
a specific calculation is necessary in order to work out correctly the
condition ( 4.6 ). The result is shown in Fig. 4.3 with a thin dashed
line.

In this case the upper limit on @xmath for the applicability of the
fully flavored regime is much smaller, @xmath . Allowing for a
non-vanishing real part of @xmath , slightly larger values are possible.
It should be however kept in mind that these values are indicative since
they rely on a condition for the fully flavored regime that comes from a
simple rate comparison.

### 4.3 Limitations of a simple rate comparison

We have exploited a somewhat qualitative rate comparison for the
determination of the region where the fully flavored regime obtains.
While we believe that our approach nicely illustrates the modifications
that derive from our more restrictive criterion for the significance of
flavor effects, there are also important shortcomings. First, we have
simply compared the inverse-decay rate with the charged-lepton Yukawa
interaction rate, ignoring flavor oscillations caused by the
flavor-dependent lepton dispersion relation in the medium. If the
oscillations are much faster than the inverse-decay rate, they also
contribute effectively, together with inelastic scatterings, to project
the lepton state on the flavor basis. Therefore, including oscillations
will tend to enlarge the region where the fully flavored behavior
obtains (the inclined upper dot-dashed line in Fig. 4.3 ) and to reduce
the one where the unflavored behavior obtains (the horizontal upper
dot-dashed line in Fig. 4.3 ). In our case, the oscillation frequency is
comparable to @xmath , and so the two estimations are not too far off.

Moreover, we have also neglected @xmath scatterings. They also
contribute, like inverse decays, both to generate the asymmetry and to
the washout and hence, together with inverse decays, contribute to
preserving the flavor direction of the leptons. At the relevant @xmath ,
the @xmath scattering rate is actually larger than the inverse-decay
rate and thus tends to reduce the region where the fully flavored
behavior obtains (the lower inclined dot-dashed line in Fig. 4.3 ).
Therefore, the effects of oscillations and of @xmath scatterings may
partially cancel each other. In Fig. 4.3 the region between the two
inclined dot-dashed lines gives then an indication of the theoretical
uncertainty on the determination of the region where the fully flavored
regime holds. It can be seen that current calculations cannot establish
whether the upper bound holding in the unflavored regime is nullified,
just simply relaxed or still holding, when flavor effects are included.

Only a full quantum kinetic treatment can give a final verdict on the
effectiveness of flavor effects in leptogenesis and its impact on the
neutrino mass limit. While we have verified that our rate criteria are
borne out by the quantum kinetic equations stated in Ref. [ 120 ] (see [
134 ] ), these equations are not necessarily complete in that the term
describing the generation of the asymmetry has been added by hand.
Moreover, the “damping rate” caused by the flavor-sensitive Yukawa
interactions ultimately derives from a collision term in the kinetic
equation [ 135 ] . Extending the pioneering treatment of Ref. [ 120 ] to
allow for a complete understanding of flavor effects remains a
challenging task. In the next section we show how such a quantum kinetic
equation could be derived.

### 4.4 Density matrix equation

Here we aim to derive a density matrix equation for leptogenesis
following [ 135 ] , where the general formalism was introduced. We
consider exclusively the decay of the lightest RH neutrino, @xmath ,
with a mass between @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV where only the @xmath
-Yukawa interactions may be faster than the Hubble rate. We are
therefore either in the unflavored or in the two-flavor regime, the two
flavors being @xmath and a combination of @xmath and @xmath which we
call @xmath in the following.

We follow the definition of the matrices of densities for leptons and
antileptons given in [ 135 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath ( @xmath ) denoting the annihilation
(creation) operator for a lepton and @xmath ( @xmath ) the annihilation
(creation) operator for an antilepton. All matrix components are
implicitly given in a portion of comoving volume that would contain one
heavy neutrino in ultra-relativistic thermal equilibrium. Note that we
introduce here matrices of number densities, not occupation numbers as
in [ 135 ] . We shall explain later on how the integration over all
modes can be performed here. As usual in leptogenesis, one assumes
kinetic equilibrium, an assumption which should be good at the 10% level
in the strong washout regime [ 136 ] . Following this assumption, all
interaction rates are thermally averaged.

Let us first study the two simplest – nevertheless very important –
processes, namely decays and inverse decays: @xmath and @xmath . The
state @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 2.1 ).

The idea is to write the equation for the generation of lepton number in
the basis @xmath , and then rotate it into the flavor basis @xmath . The
unitary matrix for the change of basis is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.11)
  -- -- -- --------

The same can be done for antileptons, and one gets the following matrix
for the change of basis:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where it should be remembered that @xmath is not the @xmath -conjugate
of @xmath at the one-loop level.

Decays and inverse decays are just source and sink terms, so one can
proceed by analogy with [ 135 ] with the conventions of [ 80 ] on
leptogenesis quantities. In the basis @xmath , the equation tracking the
density matrix for leptons is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.13)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath , and for antileptons:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where both equations are written to first order in the @xmath asymmetry
parameter @xmath , and we neglected Pauli blocking effects.

Let us now rotate these equations to the flavor basis @xmath , applying
the transformations introduced above, Eqs. ( 4.11 ) and ( 4.12 ). It
will prove useful to define the following matrices which will appear in
the new equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the projectors are defined as @xmath and @xmath [cf. Eqs. ( 3.3 )
and ( 3.4 )]. At tree level, the two matrices just defined are equal and
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the flavor basis, Eqs. ( 4.13 ) and ( 4.14 ) become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Subtracting the first equation with the second, and defining @xmath ,
one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

to first order both in @xmath and @xmath . Note that we used the fact
that @xmath , where we neglected contributions of @xmath , because the
whole term is already at first order in @xmath . As usual in
leptogenesis, one notices that there is an asymmetry production even in
thermal equilibrium [ 82 ] . This is due to the missing contribution
from the on-shell @xmath processes @xmath . Properly accounting for them
yields [ 127 , 120 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which looks intuitively correct, with both the reduction of the washout
by the projector (a matrix now!) and the additional contribution to the
source term, of the type @xmath (also a matrix). If the off-diagonal
elements are quickly damped (see below), one recovers exactly the fully
flavored equations on the diagonal entries [cf. Eq. ( 3.18 ) with @xmath
].

Actually, the matrix of @xmath asymmetries, which can be defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

was proposed in [ 120 ] for the three-flavor regime to be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the HL, @xmath , where @xmath . It is straightforward to check that
the diagonal elements correspond to the single-flavor @xmath asymmetries
shown in Eq. ( 3.25 ).

Let us now examine the effect of the term @xmath , which we said in
Section 3.1 is responsible for flavor effects to manifest themselves.
This interaction is flavor diagonal, and we expect it to affect Eq. (
4.21 ) in two ways. First, it induces a contribution to the refractive
index for the lepton doublet @xmath , and, second, it makes the lepton
doublet interact with the lepton singlet @xmath .

Starting with the index of refraction effect, in perfect analogy with [
135 ] , one has a contribution in the form of a commutator both for
leptons and antileptons:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effective mass @xmath aquired by the lepton in the medium due to the
Yukawa coupling @xmath was calculated in [ 137 ] from the real part of
the diagram shown in Fig. 4.4 and used in the second equality.

It is important to be aware that the possibility to use a density matrix
of number densities, i.e. to have been able to integrate over the
3-momentum of the leptons, is non-trivial and comes from [ 138 ] , where
it was noticed that when gauge interactions are very fast, all modes
oscillate at the same frequency, given by the thermal average @xmath in
this case.

Similar to the effect of a vacuum mass, leptons and antileptons
oscillate in opposite directions, so that subtracting Eq. ( 4.25 ) to
Eq. ( 4.24 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, in the second equality, we defined @xmath , which has all
elements of @xmath since the diagonal part of @xmath has a part
proportional to @xmath which drops out of the commutator. In order to
have a closed set of equations, we must give the equation of evolution
of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

As for the new interactions between lepton doublets and singlets, they
yield again two terms, one source and one sink term, which describe how
the lepton asymmetry is shared between the doublets and the singlets. As
we already mentioned, only the @xmath -Yukawa coupling is relevant for
the range of RH neutrino masses we consider, and thus the relevant
interaction rate is given by @xmath , which we defined in Eq. ( 4.5 ).
Assuming a negligible asymmetry in the Higgs field, the resulting term
can be written in the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The asymmetry in the lepton singlets is found by solving the following
Boltzmann equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the upper left component of the density matrix @xmath .
Clearly, this equation will tend to equalize @xmath and @xmath . It is
interesting to notice that when the latter two quantities are equal,
Eq. ( 4.29 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.31)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the total lepton number @xmath is defined as @xmath . In
particular, this means that the upper left component of @xmath is given
by @xmath . The coefficient @xmath translates the fact that some of the
lepton asymmetry, being stored in the right-handed fields, escapes the
washout by inverse decays. This is nothing else than an effect caused by
one spectator process, as discussed in Section 3.2 , with the difference
that we consider here a simplified situation where the asymmetry stored
in the Higgs is assumed to be zero.

Eq. ( 4.31 ) is very illustrative in that it includes all the well-known
contributions discussed in [ 135 ] in a completely different context,
namely the production (source term), the washout (sink term), the double
commutator, which damps the off-diagonal elements, and the commutator,
which drives the oscillations in flavor space.

In the transition region @xmath , one cannot assume @xmath , and one has
to solve simultaneously four coupled equations, Eqs. ( 3.7 ), ( 4.28 ),
( 4.29 ) and ( 4.30 ). They constitute the system of equations to solve
in order to have a correct description of leptogenesis at the transition
between the fully flavored and the unflavored regime, with an
approximate treatment of spectator processes.

The system of equations we propose differ from what can be found in the
present literature [ 120 , 134 ] in that

1.  we explicitly include the effect of oscillations in flavor space,
    which adds one equation, since leptons and antileptons oscillate in
    different directions in flavor space;

2.  we keep track of the asymmetry in @xmath , which adds another
    equation, as should be done in the transition regime around @xmath .

The second point is actually the addition of one spectator process to
the picture. In principle, all spectator processes should be taken into
account, and a large number of Boltzmann equations should be solved
simultaneously. In particular, sphalerons should be included and the
final asymmetry obtained would then be in @xmath , as required. We did
not include these effects here for the sake of simplicity and clarity,
as well as because the difference is expected to be of order 20–30%.

The conditions for the validity of the different pictures of
leptogenesis which we discussed in the previous sections can be put in
perspective by looking at Eq. ( 4.29 ). Roughly speaking, if @xmath ,
one expects the unflavored regime to be recovered, whereas in the
opposite situation, the fully flavored regime should hold. To follow up
on the comments made in the last section about the inclusion of @xmath
scatterings, it should be noted that, even though we did not include
them for simplicity in our analysis, their addition is straightforward
in that one has to replace @xmath and @xmath , with the corresponding
analytic expressions given in Eqs. ( 2.6 ) and ( 2.11 ), respectively.

Finally, let us note that there is another quantum limit which can be
considered for the Boltzmann equations relevant for leptogenesis. It
relies on the closed time path formalism for non-equilibrium quantum
field theory. Within such an approach, the so-called “memory effects”
are for instance accounted for. In the case of leptogenesis, these
effects translate into a time-dependent @xmath asymmetry. This quantum
limit was studied in [ 139 , 140 ] , and the main conclusion reached
there is that memory effects have some impact in the case of resonant
leptogenesis in the weak washout regime. In all other cases, they can be
safely neglected.

## Chapter 5 Going beyond vanilla leptogenesis

We have always assumed up to now that the final @xmath asymmetry was
predominantly produced by the lightest RH neutrino, @xmath . A @xmath
-dominated scenario typically follows from the assumption of
hierarchical heavy neutrino masses, @xmath . Actually, it can even be
enforced by setting @xmath , since a large contribution from @xmath is
then unprobable, as we explained in Section 2.1 . This is “vanilla”
leptogenesis, where successful leptogenesis requires high-scale values
of the lightest RH neutrino mass, @xmath , and of the reheat
temperature, @xmath . Moreover, the upper bound on the absolute neutrino
mass scale implied by successful leptogenesis was discussed in Section
2.2 within an unflavored treatment and in Section 4.2 including flavor
effects.

In this chapter we would like to go beyond this picture. Actually,
flavor effects themselves allow that to some extent. For example, they
might modify the upper bound on the absolute neutrino mass scale, and
they open new ways to have @xmath - and @xmath -dominated scenarios.
First, we want to relax the assumption of a hierarchical heavy neutrino
mass spectrum, and concentrate on quasi-degenerate spectra, @xmath .
Then, we discuss the implications of having @xmath , opening the way to
the @xmath -dominated scenario. Actually, we also analyze this
possibility within a flavored perspective and notice that the window for
@xmath - and @xmath -leptogenesis opens up compared to the unflavored
case. Finally, we discuss the possible effects coming from one element
of the @xmath matrix, namely @xmath .

### 5.1 Degenerate limit for the heavy neutrinos

On theoretical grounds it is not difficult to motivate models with a
quasi-degenerate heavy neutrino mass spectrum. For example, a slightly
broken @xmath lepton flavor symmetry is enough to achieve this goal [
141 , 142 , 143 ] . Note that this possibility has other implications as
well, as we shall see below. Such a spectrum can also be motivated in
the context of “radiative leptogenesis” [ 144 , 145 ] .

In leptogenesis a quasi-degenerate mass spectrum for the heavy neutrinos
leads to important qualitative and quantitative differences with respect
to the vanilla picture described in Chapters 2 and 3 , because all heavy
neutrino contributions must be taken into account, both at the
production and washout levels.

It is straightforward to generalize, including flavor effects, a result
obtained in [ 94 ] for the efficiency factors within an unflavored
treatment in the degenerate limit, @xmath , and for @xmath , for all
@xmath . Indeed, one can now approximate @xmath in Eq. ( 3.20 ),
obtaining that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The function @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 2.31 ), and it approximates
@xmath in the hierarchical limit when @xmath . In the degenerate limit
(DL) one has then only to replace @xmath with the sum @xmath . The
number of efficiency factors to be calculated reduces from 6 to 2 in the
two-flavor case and from 9 to 3 in the three-flavor case, i.e. one for
each flavor, like in the hierarchical limit. If, instead of a full
degeneracy, one has only a partial degeneracy, @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is interesting to notice that, as a consequence of the orthogonality
of @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This means that the sum over the decay parameters will typically be in
the strong washout range, @xmath . This is a nice property of
leptogenesis with degenerate heavy neutrinos which still holds when
flavor effects are included. Consequently, we do not need to introduce
analytic expressions for a vanishing initial number of heavy neutrinos,
since it will give the same result as @xmath , which was derived for a
thermal initial @xmath -abundance.

Concerning the flavored @xmath asymmetries, one can rewrite the general
expression ( 3.24 ) in the DL,

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.4)
  -- -- -- -------

where we used the fact that @xmath and we defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As it is clear from Eq. ( 5.4 ), there can be an enhancement of the
@xmath asymmetry proportional to @xmath [ 87 ] for quasi-degenerate
heavy neutrino masses. This enhancement originates from the one-loop
self energy contribution. Note however that an enhancement of the @xmath
asymmetry might require that all three heavy neutrinos are
quasi-degenerate. As a matter of fact, when @xmath , there is no
enhancement when @xmath , but only when @xmath [ 94 ] .

We can now write in general for the final @xmath asymmetry

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the sums over @xmath and @xmath run from 1 to 3 in the case of
full DL and from 1 to 2 in the case of partial DL. When computing the
final asymmetry and the lower bound on @xmath in the DL, there will be a
competition between two effects, namely the increase of the washout
because of the sum of the decay parameters in the efficiency factor, and
the enhancement of the @xmath asymmetry. The second effect will become
dominant once the first one saturates, which occurs for @xmath [ 94 ] .
From this point going to higher degeneracies will lower the bounds
proportionally to @xmath . Therefore, as we pointed out in Section 2.3 ,
it is possible to relax the lower bound on the reheat temperature in
such a way that the gravitino problem is avoided.

One can go even further and look for the most extreme relaxation one can
achieve. This occurs when the resonance in the @xmath asymmetry is
reached, for @xmath [ 117 , 118 ] . We shall use a slightly modified
condition,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we introduced the uncertainty parameter @xmath because of the
claim in [ 85 ] that it is not possible to be exactly on resonance
without breaking perturbation theory, contrary to what was stated in [
117 , 76 ] . We do not aim here at a resolution of this discrepancy and
therefore introduced the parameter @xmath .

It is straightforward to check that the resonance condition ( 5.7 )
implies that @xmath in the unflavored case with maximal phase. In other
words, the resonance condition simply cancels out the dependence on the
heavy neutrino mass scale in the @xmath asymmetry and therefore also in
the final baryon asymmetry. Hence, in resonant leptogenesis there is
essentially no lower bound on @xmath and @xmath and one can go down to
the TeV scale [ 117 , 76 ] . The only requirement is actually to let the
heavy neutrinos decay before the freeze-out of the sphalerons (at around
100 GeV), in order to produce not only lepton number but also baryon
number. In [ 76 ] the authors followed an unflavored treatment where the
third heavy neutrino @xmath is decoupled and the other two are
quasi-degenerate. In such a scenario one cannot avoid the fact that the
Yukawa coupling must be quite small in order to have a successful
leptogenesis.

Accounting for flavor effects in the case of resonant leptogenesis, it
was realized in [ 146 , 132 ] that an even more dramatic situation could
be envisaged. If three quasi-degenerate RH neutrinos are considered, it
is possible to have some of the Yukawa couplings of order one, leading
to phenomenological implications, such as a rate for the lepton flavor
violating decay @xmath within reach of future experiments, as well as
successful leptogenesis at the TeV scale. The crucial point there was to
have one flavor, the @xmath , that is very weakly washed out thanks to a
very small projector @xmath , and one heavy neutrino, @xmath , that is
weakly coupled. However, the latter condition does not necessarily imply
that the @xmath asymmetry @xmath is suppressed because it receives other
contributions when @xmath , as we will explain in Section 5.3 . It must
be said, however, that the extreme situation needed seems to occur in a
region of the parameter space where the condition of validity ( 4.6 )
which was derived in the previous chapter is not satisfied.

Actually, strictly speaking, the possibility of explaining the smallness
of neutrino masses with large Yukawa couplings and relatively light RH
neutrino masses (TeV scale) does not involve a conventional “see-saw
mechanism”, even though the same matrix for the light neutrinos applies,
Eq. ( B.5 ). The point is that the neutrino masses are not in this case
small because of the suppression due to the heavy neutrino mass, but
because of a very large cancellation due to the @xmath matrix. The
elements of the @xmath matrix can indeed be arbitrarily large, as long
as they satisfy @xmath . This can be theoretically motivated by a
slightly broken @xmath lepton flavor symmetry [ 141 , 142 , 143 ] . It
is interesting that this type of model may lead to possible signatures
of heavy neutrinos at future colliders [ 147 , 143 , 148 ] .

### 5.2 @xmath-dominated scenario

In this section we consider again a hierarchical heavy neutrino mass
spectrum, @xmath . In the unflavored regime, this assumption typically
implies a @xmath -dominated scenario, where the final asymmetry is
dominated by the contribution from the lightest RH neutrino decays,
Eq. ( 3.29 ). Indeed, in general, in the HL one has two effects. The
first effect is that the asymmetry production from the two heavier RH
neutrinos, @xmath and @xmath , is typically later on washed out by the
@xmath inverse processes, implying @xmath . The second effect is a
consequence of the fact that the total @xmath asymmetries vanish in the
limit when all particles running in the loops become massless, and this
yields typically @xmath .

However, for a particular choice of the see-saw parameters, @xmath
[cf. Eq. ( 2.22 )] and @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 1.27 )], the contribution to
the final asymmetry from the next-to-lightest RH neutrino @xmath is not
only non-negligible but even dominant, giving rise to a @xmath
-dominated scenario [ 93 ] . Indeed, for @xmath , different things
happen simultaneously. First, @xmath , even though decoupled from @xmath
, is still coupled to @xmath and in the HL the total @xmath asymmetry
@xmath not only does not vanish, since it receives an unsuppressed
contribution from graphs where @xmath runs in the loops, but can even be
maximal [cf. Eq. ( 2.25 )]. On the other hand, one has now @xmath ,
since @xmath is essentially decoupled from the other two RH neutrinos.
At the same time, one has @xmath , so that the washout from @xmath
inverse processes is negligible. The final result is that @xmath , and
the final asymmetry is dominantly produced from @xmath -decays.

A nice feature of this model is that the lower bound on @xmath does not
hold anymore, being replaced by a lower bound on @xmath that, however,
still implies a lower bound on @xmath [ 93 ] . If one switches on some
small @xmath and @xmath complex rotations, then the lower bounds on
@xmath and @xmath become necessarily more stringent. Therefore, there is
a border beyond which this scenario is not viable and one is forced to
go back to the usual @xmath -dominated scenario for successful
leptogenesis.

Within an unflavored treatment and in the HL, the condition @xmath in
the @xmath -matrix parametrization [cf. Eq. ( 2.19 )], implying @xmath ,
is sufficient to have a negligible asymmetry production from the two
heavier RH neutrinos and to guarantee that the @xmath -dominated
scenario holds. This condition is even not necessary for @xmath , since
in this case, due to the fact that @xmath , one has necessarily @xmath
and the washout from @xmath inverse processes is strong enough to
suppress a possible contribution to the final asymmetry from @xmath
-decays.

When flavor effects are taken into account, the domain of applicability
of the @xmath -dominated scenario reduces because the importance of
@xmath and @xmath increases. There are two aspects to be considered.

The first aspect is that the washout from @xmath inverse processes
becomes less efficient. Indeed, the projectors @xmath can considerably
reduce the washout of the asymmetry produced in the flavor @xmath from
@xmath -decays [ 149 ] . This turns the condition @xmath into a looser
condition @xmath . Another effect is that @xmath inverse processes can
be fast enough to quickly destroy the coherence of @xmath . Then a
statistical mixture of @xmath and of the state orthogonal to @xmath
builds up, and hence part of the asymmetry produced in @xmath -decays is
protected from the washout from @xmath inverse processes [ 127 , 6 , 150
] . These effects may occur in the unflavored regime ( @xmath ) or in
the two-flavor regime ( @xmath ), but disappear in the three-flavor
regime, where the full flavor basis is resolved, since no direction in
flavor space is protected from the @xmath -washout. Recently, it has
been also pointed out that the off-diagonal elements in the matrix
@xmath introduced in Eq. ( 3.15 ) and which encodes the effects of all
spectator processes can lead to a reduction of the washout from @xmath
inverse processes as well [ 151 ] . One can therefore conclude that the
assumption @xmath is not valid in general, even when @xmath .

The second aspect concerns the flavored @xmath asymmetries. Even though
the results obtained at the end of Section 2.1 in the particular cases
@xmath and @xmath are still valid in the flavored case, i.e. @xmath for
@xmath , and @xmath for @xmath , there are other effects to keep in
mind. As we shortly mentioned in Section 3.3 , the flavored @xmath
asymmetries @xmath are not necessarily suppressed by factors @xmath
compared to @xmath , as it is the case in the unflavored regime for
@xmath compared to @xmath . This observation [ 123 ] can also
potentially contribute to enlarge the domain of applicability of the
@xmath -dominated scenario when flavor effects are taken into account.
Another related observation is that the @xmath ’s, contrarily to @xmath
, are not suppressed in the HL. This could open the door even to a
@xmath -dominated scenario, although this is possible only for @xmath ,
when flavor effects affect the generation of asymmetry by @xmath .

Therefore, when flavor effects are taken into account, the conditions of
applicability of the @xmath -dominated scenario become potentially more
restrictive than in the unflavored case. There is a clear choice of the
parameters, for @xmath and @xmath , where the @xmath -dominated scenario
holds. Indeed, in this case, one has that @xmath and @xmath is
suppressed as @xmath . This can be considered somehow opposite to the
case @xmath , where the @xmath -dominated scenario holds [ 93 ] .

In general, one can say that the asymmetry produced from the two heavier
RH neutrinos is non-negligible if two conditions are satisfied:

-   The asymmetry generated from @xmath -decays at @xmath is
    non-negligible compared to the asymmetry generated at @xmath from
    @xmath -decays. This depends on an evaluation of the @xmath
    asymmetries @xmath and of the washout due to the same @xmath inverse
    processes.

-   The asymmetry produced from @xmath -decays is not afterwards washed
    out by @xmath inverse processes. Notice that this second condition
    is subordinate to the first condition.

### 5.3 Effects of @xmath

The general formula for the total @xmath asymmetry @xmath was given in
Eq. ( 2.16 ) with @xmath . It can be rewritten in the illustrative form
Eq. ( 2.40 ), where the second term was said to be usually negligible
for hierarchies larger than @xmath . In fact, there is a situation where
the term @xmath in Eq. ( 2.40 ) becomes dominant over @xmath and one has
to require a stronger hierarchy than @xmath to recover the results
presented in Section 2.2 [ 98 ] . From another perspective one can say
that the second term in Eq. ( 2.40 ) offers a way to evade the bound on
the @xmath asymmetry Eq. ( 2.45 ) for mild hierarchies.

The term proportional to @xmath is maximized when @xmath , implying
@xmath . Moreover, if for definiteness one imposes @xmath and @xmath ,
so that @xmath [cf. Eq.( 2.47 )], then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can immediately see that when @xmath and @xmath , corresponding to
@xmath , one recovers @xmath , independently of the value of @xmath .
Notice also that when @xmath , the @xmath term vanishes. However, one
can now perceive another possibility: if @xmath , then the @xmath
asymmetry can be enhanced, i.e. @xmath , even when @xmath .

This possibility is interesting because having large @xmath values does
not imply that the washout is large. As a matter of fact, the decay
parameter @xmath does not depend on @xmath . So there can be an
enhancement of the @xmath asymmetry without any enhancement of the
washout. This observation was made in [ 98 ] and supplemented with
theoretical motivations for models with large @xmath in [ 152 ] . These
models make possible to evade the bound on the @xmath asymmetry Eq. (
2.45 ) without reducing the efficiency factor, thus relaxing the lower
bounds Eqs. ( 2.54 ) and ( 2.55 ). It was found that values of @xmath
for mild hierarchies @xmath were possible, hence avoiding the gravitino
problem. Note moreover that models with large @xmath can yield
observable signals at experiments searching for lepton flavor violating
decays @xmath , @xmath and @xmath [ 153 , 154 , 5 ] .

There is another important consequence of the term @xmath , which
concerns the upper bound on the absolute neutrino mass scale, Eq. ( 2.57
). First, when the absolute neutrino mass scale increases, it is well
known that the upper bound on the @xmath asymmetry decreases [cf. Eq. (
2.45 )]. Thus, a dominance of the @xmath term over the first term in
Eq. ( 2.40 ) can be more easily obtained when @xmath is larger, even for
moderate values @xmath . The term @xmath is indeed not suppressed at
large @xmath . Second, it can be argued that when @xmath , the light
neutrinos are quasi-degenerate, so that quasi-degenerate heavy neutrinos
with a mild degeneracy are more natural. Under the assumption of
‘natural’ mild degeneracy, the effect of the @xmath term has to be
included and leads to a relaxed upper bound @xmath [ 98 ] . Note that
the washout from the heavier RH neutrino @xmath must be taken into
account for degeneracies @xmath , as emphasized in Section 5.1 .

The bottom line is that there are situations where the @xmath term in
Eq. ( 2.40 ) is crucial and hence should not be neglected. The first
situation is when a large @xmath allows to evade the upper bound on the
@xmath asymmetry even when @xmath and for moderate hierarchies @xmath ,
without reducing the efficiency factor. The lower bounds on @xmath and
@xmath can then be relaxed by a few orders of magnitude. The second
situation is when a quasi-degenerate mass spectrum for the heavy
neutrinos is considered, @xmath , and @xmath . Then the contribution
from the @xmath term can be large, especially for quasi-degenerate light
neutrinos.

We think it is judicious to recall that Eq. ( 2.40 ) is only a
convenient rewriting of the general expression ( 2.16 ). All the effects
discussed in this section are of course present in the general
expression, but they can be overseen when the basic assumptions behind
some simplified expressions like @xmath in Eq. ( 2.40 ) are forgotten,
such as a sufficiently large hierachy @xmath .

## Chapter 6 Leptogenesis from low-energy Cp-violating phases

The possibility of relating the @xmath violation required for successful
leptogenesis with the one that could be seen in future neutrino
experiment is very attractive. However, in the context of unflavored
leptogenesis (see Chapter 2 ), we saw that the PMNS matrix, which
includes the observable @xmath -violating phases [cf. Eq. ( A.5 )],
cancels out in the general case. Yet, even in this unfavorable
situation, there have been attempts to relate low-energy @xmath
-violating phases with the baryon asymmetry of the Universe produced
through leptogenesis [ 155 , 156 , 157 , 158 , 159 , 160 , 79 ] . It
must be however said that a link could only be made for specific
textures of the Dirac mass matrix.

As discussed in Chapter 3 , flavor effects have modified the
conventional picture of leptogenesis in a number of ways. In particular,
the fact that the final asymmetry in the fully flavored regime depends
explicitly on the PMNS mixing matrix is interesting. Thanks to the new
source of @xmath violation implied by flavor effects, namely the @xmath
contribution, Eq. ( 3.6 ), one can imagine a situation where the only
source of @xmath violation comes from the PMNS matrix or, equivalently,
where the contributions from the unobservable phases in the @xmath
matrix are negligible. This leads to the exciting possibility of
explaining the baryon asymmetry of the Universe thanks to @xmath
-violating phases that are accessible in neutrino experiments. This
scenario has attracted some attention recently [ 123 , 161 , 162 , 163 ,
164 , 165 , 166 ] .

In this chapter we first introduce the concepts of low-energy @xmath
violation due to the Dirac phase and to the Majorana phases. Then, we
study the possibility that the Dirac phase, which offers the best
prospects for a possible measurement in the next years, provides the
unique source of @xmath violation required for leptogenesis. This can be
considered as the most conservative case, since we know that the Dirac
phase comes always together with the small angle @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 1.8
)]. Afterwards, we shortly comment on the role played by the Majorana
phases as sole sources of @xmath violation in leptogenesis. Finally, we
discuss the theoretical relevance of models where @xmath is real.

### 6.1 Cp violation in neutrino physics

#### 6.1.1 Neutrino oscillations and the Dirac phase

Searching for @xmath -violating effects in neutrino oscillations is the
only practical way to get information about Dirac @xmath violation in
the lepton sector, associated with the phase @xmath in the PMNS mixing
matrix @xmath [cf. Eq. ( A.5 )]. A measure of @xmath and @xmath
violation is provided by the asymmetries [ 167 , 168 , 169 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . For three-neutrino oscillations in vacuum, which respect
the @xmath symmetry, one has [ 170 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the distance travelled by the neutrinos, and @xmath is
their common energy [cf. Eq. ( 1.11 )]. Thus, the magnitude of the
@xmath -violating effects in neutrino oscillations is controlled by the
rephasing invariant associated with the Dirac phase @xmath , the
so-called Jarlskog invariant @xmath [ 171 ] . The existence of Dirac
@xmath violation in the lepton sector would be established if, e.g.,
some of the vacuum oscillation asymmetries @xmath are proven
experimentally to be non-zero. This would imply that @xmath and,
consequently, that @xmath . Without doubt, the search for @xmath
-violating effects due to the Dirac phase in @xmath represents one of
the major goals of the future experimental studies of neutrino
oscillations [ 172 ] , in experiments like T2K [ 173 ] or NO @xmath A [
174 ] as well as in the (far) future neutrino factories and/or beta beam
experiments [ 175 ] .

#### 6.1.2 Neutrinoless double-beta decay and the Majorana phases

Theories with neutrino mass generation of the see-saw type predict the
massive neutrinos @xmath to be Majorana particles. Determining the
nature of massive neutrinos is one of the most formidable and pressing
problems in today’s neutrino physics (see, e.g., [ 172 , 176 , 177 ] ).
Even if neutrinos are proven to be Majorana fermions, getting
information about the Majorana @xmath -violating phases in @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath [cf. Eq. ( A.5 )], will be very difficult. Moreover,
the oscillations of flavor neutrinos, @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , are
insensitive to the Majorana phases [ 168 , 178 ] . On the other hand,
they can affect significantly the predictions for the rates of
lepton-flavor-violating decays @xmath , etc. in a large class of
supersymmetric theories with type-I see-saw mechanism (see, e.g., [ 179
, 180 , 181 ] ).

In the case of three-neutrino mixing under discussion, there are, in
principle, three independent @xmath violation rephasing invariants. The
first is @xmath , the Dirac one, associated with the Dirac phase @xmath
, which we discussed in the previous subsection. The existence of two
additional invariants, @xmath and @xmath , is related to the two
Majorana @xmath -violating phases in @xmath . The invariants @xmath and
@xmath can be chosen as [ 182 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The rephasing invariants associated with the Majorana phases are not
uniquely determined. Instead of the flavor @xmath involved in both
@xmath and @xmath , one could have chosen @xmath or @xmath . Note also
that @xmath violation due to the Majorana phases imply that both @xmath
and @xmath , and similarly for @xmath .

The only feasible experiments which, at present, have the potential of
establishing the Majorana nature of light neutrinos and of providing
information on the Majorana @xmath -violating phases in @xmath are the
experiments searching for neutrinoless double-beta ( @xmath ) decay,
@xmath . The @xmath -decay effective Majorana mass, @xmath , as defined
in Eq. ( 1.18 ), which contains all the dependence of the @xmath -decay
amplitude on the neutrino mixing parameters, is given by the following
expressions for a normal hierarchical (NH, @xmath ), inverted
hierarchical (IH, @xmath , but the @xmath matrix changes, as explained
in Appendix A ) and quasi-degenerate (QD, @xmath ) neutrino mass
spectra:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Obviously, @xmath depends strongly on the Majorana phases: the @xmath
-conserving values of @xmath [ 183 ] , for instance, determine the range
of possible values of @xmath in the case of IH and QD spectra, while the
@xmath -conserving values of @xmath , can be important in the case of NH
spectrum.

The planned @xmath -decay experiments of the next generation such as
GERDA [ 49 ] , MAJORANA [ 50 ] or CUORE [ 51 ] are aiming to probe the
QD and IH ranges of @xmath (see, e.g., [ 177 , 176 ] ). If the @xmath
-decay is observed in these experiments, the measurement of the @xmath
-decay half-life might then allow to obtain constraints on the
combination of Majorana phases @xmath .

### 6.2 Dirac phase leptogenesis

In this section we would like to investigate in detail a scenario of
leptogenesis where the @xmath violation necessary for leptogenesis is
exclusively provided by the Dirac phase @xmath , hence the name @xmath
-leptogenesis. Following closely [ 164 ] we start analysing the case
where the heavy neutrino mass spectrum is hierarchical, i.e. @xmath ,
which, in the fully flavored regime, does not necessarily lead to a
@xmath -dominated scenario. Therefore, we shall not only consider the
decay of the lightest RH neutrino, but that of all three RH neutrinos.
Then, we will assume a quasi-degenerate mass spectrum for the heavy
neutrinos, @xmath , and perform the same analysis.

#### 6.2.1 The hierarchical limit

Throughout this section, we will always assume that the fully flavored
regime holds. However, the condition of validity of the fully flavored
regime, Eq. ( 4.6 ), is qualitative. One should not expect it to be
exact. For example, this simple condition neglects the effect of @xmath
scatterings and of refractive effects, the first contributing with
inverse decays to preserve the quantum state coherence, the second,
conversely, in projecting it on the flavor basis. Both of them can be as
large as the effect from inverse decays. Moreover, in a rigorous quantum
kinetic description, it is likely that other subtle effects will
contribute to the determination of the exact value of @xmath below which
the fully flavored regime can be assumed. Only making a precise study of
the transition region between the unflavored and the fully flavored
regimes solving the full system of equations, which includes the density
matrix equation ( 4.29 ), will allow to derive a better condition of
validity.

In the plots showing the lower bound on @xmath , we will then
distinguish four regions. All plots will be cut at @xmath , since above
this value, according to the condition ( 4.3 ), the unflavored regime is
recovered and the asymmetry production has to switch off, since only the
phases in the @xmath matrix can make the total @xmath asymmetries @xmath
non-zero. On the other hand, when the condition ( 4.6 ) is satisfied,
one can expect the fully flavored regime to hold. There is an
intermediate regime where a transition between the fully flavored regime
and the unflavored regime takes place. This regime will be indicated in
all plots with a squared region. This signals that, even though we still
show the results obtained in the fully flavored regime, important
corrections are expected, especially when @xmath gets close to @xmath .
Since this region describes a transition towards the unflavored regime,
where the asymmetry production has to switch off, these corrections are
expected to reduce the final asymmetry, making more stringent the lower
bounds shown in the plots. Furthermore, since large corrections to the
condition ( 4.6 ) cannot be excluded, we will also indicate, with a
hatched region, the area where the condition ( 4.6 ) holds but a very
conservative condition,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

does not. In this region some corrections to the results presented
cannot be excluded, but the fully flavored regime should represent a
good approximation.

We anticipate that, in the @xmath -dominated scenario, successful
leptogenesis always requires @xmath , where the two-flavor regime
applies. Therefore, considering that we are assuming @xmath , Eq. ( 3.29
) can be specialized into

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

showing that, in order to have a non-vanishing final asymmetry it is
necessary to have that @xmath . Indeed, the efficiency factors crucially
depend on @xmath . Useful analytical expressions for the flavored
efficiency factors, both for a vanishing and a thermal initial @xmath
-abundance can be found in Section 3.4 . As for the flavored decay
parameters in the usual orthogonal parametrization, Eq. ( 2.18 ), they
were given in Eq. ( 3.23 ).

The parameter @xmath defined in Eq. ( 3.31 ) is convenient to describe
the behavior of the @xmath asymmetry @xmath . Using Eq. ( 3.28 ) for
real @xmath , one obtains [ 129 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking @xmath and specifying the matrix elements @xmath from Eq. ( A.5
), one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, in the case of normal hierarchy for the light neutrinos ¹ ¹ 1 For
an inverted hierarchy, the elements @xmath must be computed using a
modified @xmath matrix, as explained at the end of Appendix A . ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In the case of @xmath -leptogenesis ( @xmath ), these expressions
further specialize into

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we defined @xmath .

It is now instructive to make some general considerations. Looking at
the expression Eq. ( 6.6 ), one can see that in order for the final
@xmath asymmetry to be non-zero, two conditions have to be
simultaneously satisfied : @xmath and @xmath . These two conditions are
a specialization of two of Sakharov’s necessary conditions for
baryogenesis to the case of @xmath -leptogenesis.

The first condition is the requirement to have @xmath violation and, as
one could expect, from the expressions found for the terms @xmath , one
can have @xmath only if @xmath .

The second condition is a specialization of the condition of departure
from thermal equilibrium in quite a non-trivial way. Indeed, in the case
of @xmath -leptogenesis, in a fully out-of-equilibrium situation where
only decays are active, no final asymmetry is generated since @xmath ,
implying that there is an equal number of decays into leptons and
antileptons. However, the presence of inverse processes can remove this
balance, yielding a different washout rate for the @xmath asymmetry and
for the @xmath asymmetry, so that, if @xmath , one has a dynamical net
lepton number generation. From the flavored decay parameters Eq. ( 3.23
), it can be seen that this is possible independently of the value of
the Dirac phase, which is therefore directly responsible only for @xmath
violation and not for lepton number violation, exactly as in neutrino
mixing, where lepton number is conserved.

It should also be noticed that the @xmath ’s are expressed through
quantities @xmath that are invariant under a change of the PMNS matrix
parametrization [ 182 , 161 ] . Actually, the @xmath asymmetry itself is
an invariant quantity [ 184 ] . Therefore, the final @xmath asymmetry
depends only on physical quantities, as it should be.

Maximizing the asymmetry over all involved parameters at fixed @xmath
and @xmath and imposing @xmath [cf. Eqs. ( 2.15 ) and ( 1.6 )], a lower
bound on @xmath is obtained, which can be conveniently expressed as in
Eq. ( 3.32 ). Notice that @xmath , implying @xmath as well. Therefore,
the maximum asymmetry is obtained for @xmath and @xmath .

As we explained in Section 5.2 , accounting for flavor effects it is not
clear whether the contribution from the lightest RH neutrino, @xmath ,
is the only one that matters. Since we want our analysis to be as
general as possible, we will always estimate the asymmetry produced by
the two heavier neutrinos @xmath and @xmath .

The calculation of the contribution to the asymmetry from @xmath -decays
proceeds in an analogous way. It can be again calculated in the
two-flavor regime, since, in the HL, successful leptogenesis always
implies @xmath . Therefore, one can write an expression similar to Eq. (
6.6 ) for the contribution to the final asymmetry from @xmath -decays,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The difference is now in the calculation of the efficiency factors as
they are suppressed by the washout from the @xmath inverse processes. In
the HL this additional washout factorizes and [ 94 , 123 , 149 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The tree-level projectors @xmath can be readily evaluated
using the general expression ( 3.22 ).

The calculation of the contribution to the final asymmetry from @xmath
-decays proceeds in a similar way and analogous expressions hold. The
only non-trivial difference is that now, in the calculation of the
efficiency factors, one has also to include the washout from @xmath
inverse processes, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that in the calculation of @xmath ( @xmath ) we are not including
a possible effect where part of the asymmetry in the flavor @xmath
produced in @xmath - or @xmath -decays is orthogonal to @xmath inverse
decays [ 127 , 150 ] and is not washed out. This washout avoidance does
not apply to the asymmetry in the @xmath -flavor. Since in all cases we
shall consider, a @xmath -dominated scenario will be realized, we shall
simply neglect this effect. For a short discussion about these effects,
see Section 5.2 .

Let us now calculate the final asymmetry in some interesting cases.

##### @xmath

The first case we consider is @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.21 )], implying @xmath
in Eq. ( 6.8 ). It is easy to check from Eq. ( 3.26 ) that @xmath , and
therefore there is no asymmetry production from @xmath -decays even if
@xmath . On the other hand, one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

essentially the same expression as for @xmath but with @xmath replaced
by @xmath . Therefore, for @xmath , one has to worry about a potential
non-negligible contribution from @xmath -decays. However, when the
washout from @xmath and @xmath inverse processes is taken into account
[cf. Eq. ( 6.11 )], we always find that the contribution from @xmath
-decays is negligible and the @xmath -dominated scenario holds.

The results are shown in Fig. 6.1 for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , a
choice of values that approximately maximizes the final asymmetry and
yields the lower bound @xmath .

In the left panel we show the tree-level projectors @xmath and the
normalized @xmath asymmetries @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 3.31 )]. It can be seen
how for @xmath one has @xmath , while for @xmath one has @xmath . In the
central panel @xmath and the @xmath ’s are plotted [cf. Eq. ( 3.33 )],
and one can see how for @xmath a @xmath -dominance is realized. Finally,
in the right panel, we show @xmath and we compare it with the lower
bound from an unflavored calculation where @xmath is taken purely
imaginary [ 93 ] . One can see how, at @xmath , the asymmetry production
rapidly dies, so that @xmath and @xmath . Notice that we have plotted
the lower bound both for thermal and vanishing initial @xmath
-abundances.

We also indicated @xmath , defined as that value of @xmath such that for
@xmath the dependence on the initial conditions can be neglected and the
strong washout regime holds. One can notice that the intermediate regime
between a fully flavored regime and the unflavored regime, the squared
area, is quite extended. In this regime corrections to the results we
are showing, obtained in the fully flavored regime, are expected in a
way that the unflavored regime should be recovered for @xmath . In this
limit the asymmetry production has to switch off and thus one expects
that the lower bound on @xmath becomes more restrictive and eventually,
for @xmath , the allowed region has to close up. One can see that there
is essentially no allowed region in the strong washout regime outside
the squared area. The hatched area, where corrections cannot be excluded
within current theoretical uncertainties, cuts away almost completely
any allowed region even in the weak washout regime.

In conclusion, the allowed region where one can safely rely on the fully
flavored regime according to current calculations is very restricted and
confined only to a small region in the weak washout regime.

##### @xmath

The second case we consider is the limit @xmath . This corresponds to an
effective 2-RH neutrino model, where the third RH neutrino is decoupled.
In this limit one has necessarily @xmath , implying @xmath , and the
@xmath matrix takes the special form [ 160 , 185 , 186 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that this form of @xmath corresponds to set @xmath and @xmath in
Eq. ( 2.19 ). In the expression ( 6.8 ) for @xmath , one has now @xmath
, and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , there is no contribution from the next-to-lightest RH
neutrino decays, since these occur in the unflavored regime where @xmath
. On the other hand, if @xmath , then one has to worry about a
(flavored) asymmetry generation from @xmath -decays. A calculation of
@xmath shows that the first term in Eq. ( 3.26 ) vanishes while the
second term gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is an example of how the second term in Eq. ( 3.26 ) is not
suppressed in the HL like the first term. However, like for the
contribution from @xmath -decays in the case @xmath , when the washout
from @xmath inverse processes is taken into account, one finds @xmath
and a @xmath -dominated scenario is realized.

Notice that there is a strong dependence whether one assumes a normal or
an inverted hierarchy. For normal hierarchy the results are shown in
Fig. 6.2 for @xmath and @xmath .

For inverted hierarchy the asymmetry is so suppressed that there is no
allowed region. This means that for any choice of the parameters one
always obtains @xmath .

Notice that some results for @xmath -leptogenesis in the particular case
where @xmath have been recently presented in [ 163 ] for vanishing
initial @xmath -abundance. For example the authors obtain a lower bound
@xmath imposing the existence of an allowed region for @xmath , while we
would obtain @xmath . Different reasons might explain this discrepancy.
First, we are using a ( @xmath ) more conservative lower bound on @xmath
[cf. Eq. ( 2.53 )]. Second, we do not include the effects of @xmath
scatterings on the efficiency factors, which might produce some
difference when @xmath , even though in the strong washout regime this
effect should be negligible. Finally, another likely minor source of
difference is that we are not accounting for the effect of spectator
processes encoded in the matrix @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 3.15 )] that relates
the @xmath asymmetries to the @xmath asymmetries [ 127 ] . However,
notice that we do not want here to emphasize too much a precise value of
this lower bound on @xmath , since we believe that it is anyway affected
by much larger theoretical uncertainties on the validity of the fully
flavored regime.

##### @xmath

The third case we consider is @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.20 )]. This time one
has @xmath in Eq. ( 6.8 ). In the case of normal hierarchy, the @xmath
asymmetry, compared to the case @xmath , is suppressed by a factor
@xmath , while it is essentially the same for inverted hierarchy. The
projectors present very similar features to the case @xmath . One can
also again calculate, for @xmath , the contribution from @xmath -decays
to the final asymmetry, and one finds again that the first term in Eq. (
3.26 ) vanishes, while the second produces a term @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

When the efficiency factors are taken into account, one finds that only
in the case of normal hierarchy the contribution to the final asymmetry
from @xmath -decays can be comparable to the one from @xmath -decays.
However, in this case both productions are suppressed and there is no
allowed region in the end. In the case of inverted hierarchy, the
contribution from @xmath -decays is always negligible compared to the
one from @xmath -decays. Notice, moreover, that @xmath for @xmath , and
hence there is no contribution from @xmath -decays.

In conclusion, for @xmath , the lower bound on @xmath for normal
hierarchy is much more restrictive than in the case @xmath , while it is
very similar for inverted hierarchy. A production from the two heavier
RH neutrinos can be neglected and the @xmath -dominated scenario always
applies when the asymmetry is maximized.

##### @xmath

The last interesting case is @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 2.22 )]. From Eq. ( 3.28
) one can easily check that @xmath . One can also check that, contrarily
to the case @xmath , the second term in Eq. ( 3.26 ) vanishes while the
first term does not and yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that this time @xmath and actually, more generally, one can see
that this expression is obtained from Eq. ( 6.8 ) for @xmath in the case
@xmath , just with the replacement @xmath . At the same time, one has
@xmath , so that the washout from @xmath inverse processes vanishes for
@xmath . For @xmath , one has to worry about a possible contribution to
the asymmetry from @xmath -decays. A straightforward calculation shows
that @xmath , and therefore an asymmetry is produced at @xmath .
However, we verified once more that the washout from @xmath inverse
processes is always strong enough for the contribution to the final
asymmetry from @xmath -decays to be negligible.

In complete analogy with the unflavored case [ 93 ] , one has that the
lower bound @xmath is replaced by a lower bound @xmath obtained for
@xmath and shown in the right panel of Fig. 6.3 .

One can see that also in this case, within the validity of the
condition ( 4.6 ), the allowed region is constrained to a small portion
falling in the weak washout regime. Assuming the very conservative
condition of validity for the fully flavored regime outside the squared
and hatched regions, there is essentially no allowed region even in the
weak washout regime.

One can wonder whether there is some choice of @xmath beyond the special
cases we analyzed where the final asymmetry is much higher and the lower
bound on @xmath much more relaxed, especially in the strong washout
regime. We have checked different intermediate cases, and we can exclude
such a possibility. Therefore, the lower bound shown in Fig. 6.1 has to
be considered, with good approximation, the lowest bound for any choice
of real @xmath .

Another legitimate doubt is whether going beyond the approximations we
made the lower bound in Fig. 6.1 can be considerably relaxed. The
inclusion of non-resonant @xmath or @xmath scatterings is not expected
to produce large corrections. Recently the effect of the off-diagonal
terms in the matrix @xmath [cf. Eq. ( 3.15 )] has been considered, but
it has been shown that it does not produce any relevant change in the
final asymmetry [ 130 ] .

Relevant corrections, as already pointed out, can only come from a full
quantum kinetic treatment, which should describe accurately the
transition between the unflavored regime and the fully flavored regime.

The same kind of considerations holds for the @xmath -dominated
scenario, realized for @xmath . As soon as @xmath deviates from @xmath ,
the washout from @xmath inverse processes comes into play suppressing
the final asymmetry and, at the same time, @xmath gets also suppressed.
Therefore, the lower bound on @xmath is necessarily obtained for @xmath
in complete analogy with the unflavored treatment [ 93 ] .

In conclusion, @xmath -leptogenesis in the HL is severely constrained,
confirming the conclusions of [ 123 ] and [ 122 ] . In particular,
imposing independence from the initial conditions, then not even a
marginally allowed region seems to survive. Notice moreover that all
plots have been obtained for @xmath , the current @xmath upper limit.
Assuming that for values of @xmath above the condition ( 4.6 ) the
unflavored regime is quickly recovered and therefore that the asymmetry
production quickly switches off, then a one-order-of-magnitude
improvement of the upper limit on @xmath would essentially rule out
@xmath -leptogenesis in the HL, even the marginally allowed regions
falling in the weak washout regime.

In the next section we consider the effect of close heavy neutrino
masses in enhancing the @xmath asymmetries and relaxing the lower bounds
on @xmath as well as the related one on @xmath . But before concluding
this section, we want to mention that in the more general case of real
@xmath with non-vanishing Majorana phases, an upper bound @xmath has
been obtained in the fully flavored regime [ 162 ] and for a
hierarchical heavy neutrino mass spectrum. This bound clearly applies
also to @xmath -leptogenesis, but in this case, considering the results
we have obtained and the expected quantum kinetic corrections to the
fully flavored regime, the issue is actually whether an allowed region
exists at all in the HL, even for @xmath . Therefore, we do not even try
to place an upper bound on @xmath in the HL. In the next section we show
that an upper bound on @xmath from successful @xmath -leptogenesis
actually holds even in the resonant limit, where the @xmath asymmetries
are maximally enhanced.

#### 6.2.2 The degenerate limit

We would like to show that going beyond the HL, the lower bound on
@xmath (or on @xmath ) can be considerably relaxed. Nevertheless, we
shall see that some interesting constraints on the involved parameters
still apply. For simplicity, we assume from the beginning that @xmath
(or @xmath ) @xmath , so that the three-flavor regime applies, where the
muon-Yukawa interactions are also faster than inverse decays. Therefore,
when we show the flavor index @xmath , we mean @xmath . This assumption
simplifies the calculation, since we do not have to describe a
transition between the two and the three-flavor regime, and because we
can completely neglect the effect envisaged in [ 127 , 150 ] where part
of the asymmetry produced from @xmath -decays is not touched by @xmath
inverse decays.

In order to go beyond the HL, it is convenient to use the quantity
@xmath defined in Eq. ( 5.5 ). We are interested in the degenerate limit
(DL), where at least one @xmath is small enough that both the asymmetry
production from @xmath -decays and the washout from the corresponding
inverse processes can be approximately treated as if they occurred at
the same temperature, so that they can be simply added up. The DL is a
good approximation for @xmath [ 94 ] .

If @xmath and @xmath , then one has a partial DL, where the efficiency
factors can be approximated as in Eq. ( 5.2 ) for thermal initial @xmath
-abundance. In all the cases we shall consider, we will always have
@xmath , so that the strong washout regime applies, and there is no need
to consider the case of vanishing initial @xmath -abundance.

Another possibility is to have a partial DL with @xmath , so that @xmath
. In this case one has to take into account the washout from the
lightest RH neutrino, implying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, in the full DL, @xmath , and the efficiency factor is given by
Eq. ( 5.1 ).

Let us now calculate the flavored @xmath asymmetries. In the case of
real @xmath , which implies real @xmath , the expression ( 5.4 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can again express the neutrino Yukawa coupling matrix through the
orthogonal representation. This time the presence of the factor @xmath
does not allow to remove the sum on @xmath , as it has been possible in
the HL in order to derive Eq. ( 3.28 ). However, considering the same
special cases as in the HL, only one term @xmath survives, and we can
write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same expression holds for @xmath simply exchanging the @xmath and
@xmath indexes. We can always choose @xmath such that @xmath . In all
the particular cases we shall consider, we will have that @xmath for
@xmath , and moreover the following simplifications apply:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Except for the case @xmath , we will always have @xmath
and @xmath . The final @xmath asymmetry can then be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.24)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and where @xmath is given by one of the three expressions Eq. ( 5.1 ),
Eq. ( 5.2 ) or Eq. ( 6.18 ) according to the particular case.

It is interesting to notice that because of the unitarity of @xmath ,
the sum over @xmath of the flavored decay parameters, Eq. ( 5.3 ), tends
to @xmath in the degenerate limit for the light neutrinos ( @xmath is
the common mass scale) independently of the flavor. Therefore, the sum
over the flavor in Eq. ( 6.24 ) tends to vanish. This will contribute,
as we shall see, to place a stringent upper bound on the absolute
neutrino mass scale in the full DL.

It is also worthwhile to notice that the sign of @xmath cannot be
predicted from the sign of the observed baryon asymmetry, since the sign
of @xmath depends on the sign of @xmath , which is undetermined. Notice
also that @xmath does not depend on @xmath , but nevertheless there is a
dependence of @xmath on @xmath and on @xmath coming from the tree-level
projectors @xmath in the sum @xmath . However, in any case, for @xmath
one has that @xmath , since the final asymmetry has to vanish when
@xmath or @xmath vanishes.

The function @xmath can be maximized over @xmath . Indeed for @xmath ,
since @xmath and @xmath , one has @xmath . Increasing @xmath there is a
suppression due to the fact that @xmath , and @xmath decreases
monotonically. Therefore, for any @xmath , there is a lower bound on
@xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath asymmetries, and consequently the final baryon asymmetry, are
maximally enhanced in the extreme case of resonant leptogenesis [ 117 ,
118 , 76 ] , when the heavy neutrino mass degeneracy is comparable to
the decay widths. An approximate resonance condition was given in Eq. (
5.7 ), where the uncertainty parameter @xmath was introduced because of
a discrepancy in the literature [ 85 , 117 ] . When the resonance
condition is satisfied, one has @xmath in the unflavored case with
maximal phase. This can be taken as a conservative limit that implies,
maximizing over @xmath , a lower bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now specialize the expressions for the four special cases we have
already analyzed in the HL.

##### @xmath

Remember that in this case one has @xmath , implying @xmath , a
consequence of the fact that the heaviest RH neutrino decouples.
Moreover, one has @xmath , so that terms @xmath can be neglected, @xmath
and @xmath for normal hierarchy or @xmath for inverted hierarchy.
Therefore, there is actually no dependence on @xmath in @xmath , which
is given by Eq. ( 6.24 ) with @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.27)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the case of normal hierarchy, @xmath slightly decreases when @xmath
increases, and so the maximum is found for @xmath and the dependence on
@xmath and @xmath disappears. Replacing the dependence on @xmath with a
dependence on @xmath , we have plotted @xmath in Fig. 6.4 for central
values of @xmath and @xmath . Including the errors, one finds @xmath .

The ( @xmath ) lower bound on @xmath for normal hierarchy, from the
general expression ( 6.25 ), is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of inverted hierarchy, the situation is somehow opposite,
since for @xmath the electron flavor contribution vanishes in Eq. ( 6.27
) and there is an exact cancellation between the @xmath and @xmath
contributions. Consequently, the asymmetry increases for increasing
values of @xmath and the maximum is found for @xmath and @xmath . In
this case one has that @xmath , which, plugged into Eq. ( 6.25 ), gives
at @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

It should be remembered that these conditions have been obtained in the
three-flavor regime and in the DL, i.e. they are valid for @xmath . This
implies that @xmath for normal hierarchy and @xmath for inverted
hierarchy.

Analogously, the general expression ( 6.26 ) gives the following (
@xmath ) lower bounds on @xmath for normal and inverted hierarchy,
respectively:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.30)
  -- -- -- --------

##### @xmath

In this particular case, the next-to-lightest RH neutrino is decoupled
from the other two heavy neutrinos, which implies that @xmath for any
@xmath and that @xmath does not depend on @xmath ; in particular, it
does not get enhanced if @xmath . Therefore, one has necessarily to
consider @xmath , implying a full DL with all three RH neutrino masses
quasi-degenerate. The function @xmath is now obtained from Eq. ( 6.24 )
with @xmath and @xmath and @xmath , or explicitly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.31)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is interesting to notice that in this case an @xmath -dominance is
realized. Moreover, one has that the dependence of @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath is slight, and the maximum is for @xmath and @xmath . We find
@xmath for normal hierarchy and @xmath for inverted hierarchy. The lower
bound on @xmath in Eq. ( 6.25 ) yields then at @xmath for normal and
inverted hierarchy, respectively,

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.32)
  -- -- -- --------

while in the case of resonant leptogenesis Eq. ( 6.26 ) yields

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.33)
  -- -- -- --------

Increasing @xmath , the value of @xmath decreases, and the lower bound
on @xmath in resonant leptogenesis becomes more and more restrictive.
This dependence is shown in Fig. 6.5 both for normal (left panel) and
inverted (right panel) hierarchies and for @xmath (solid line) and
@xmath (short-dashed line). Interestingly, imposing the experimental (
@xmath ) upper limit @xmath , one obtain the upper bound @xmath ,
depending on the value of @xmath .

This upper bound will become more stringent if no signal for a
non-vanishing mixing angle @xmath is seen in future neutrino oscillation
experiments, since the experimental limit on @xmath will then go down.
Assuming no discovery, the most stringent experimental upper limit is
expected to be reached in neutrino factories, where one could obtain
@xmath [ 187 ] . This asymptotical upper limit is also shown in Fig. 6.5
and would imply an upper bound @xmath for normal hierarchy and @xmath
for inverted hierarchy. Therefore, an interesting interplay between two
measurable quantities is realized, making @xmath -leptogenesis
falsifiable independently of the RH neutrino mass spectrum.

In the more conservative case of normal hierarchy (see left panel of
Fig. 6.5 ), a good approximation for the upper bound on @xmath ( @xmath
) is given by the fit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is interesting that this upper bound holds in the extreme case of
resonant leptogenesis and therefore holds for any RH neutrino spectrum.
However, we still have to verify if it holds also for a different choice
of @xmath .

##### @xmath

The situation for @xmath is quite different compared to the previous two
cases. One has now @xmath and @xmath , and it is possible to have both a
partial DL with @xmath and a full DL. In the first case, the general
expression ( 6.24 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.35)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This time the contribution from the electron flavor vanishes.
Furthermore, for normal hierarchy, there is an almost perfect
cancellation between the @xmath and the @xmath contributions. In the
left panel of Fig. 6.6 , we show the lower bound on @xmath versus @xmath
, and one can see that it is more restrictive than in the previous case,
@xmath . In particular, imposing @xmath , one obtains now a much more
stringent upper bound @xmath . On the other hand, for inverted
hierarchy, the cancellation between the @xmath and the @xmath flavors
does not occur, and one has a lower bound on @xmath for @xmath that is
similar to what has been obtained in the case @xmath (see the right
panel of Fig. 6.6 ). However, here there is no flavor cancellation for
increasing values of @xmath because @xmath does not tend to a common
value like @xmath . Therefore, one can see in Fig. 6.6 that this time
the upper bound on @xmath is much looser, both compared to normal
hierarchy and compared to @xmath .

In the full DL the flavor cancellation at large @xmath occurs. The
results are shown in Fig. 6.7 . One can notice that the upper bound on
@xmath is very restrictive for normal hierarchy, and one has a situation
similar to the case @xmath for inverted hierarchy.

##### @xmath

When @xmath , the lightest RH neutrino decouples and @xmath
independently of @xmath . Therefore, there is no contribution to the
final asymmetry from @xmath -decays. On the other hand, @xmath and
@xmath do not vanish and hence there is a contribution from the decays
of the two heavier RH neutrinos. Still @xmath inverse processes have to
be taken into account since they contribute to the washout. There are
two different possibilities.

In the full DL the washout from @xmath inverse decays just cumulates
with the washout from the two heavier. Therefore, using expression (
6.24 ) with @xmath and @xmath and @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.36)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In Fig. 6.8 we show the lower bound on @xmath versus @xmath for
successful resonant leptogenesis. This time there is a bigger
suppression than in the case @xmath , especially for inverted hierarchy.

In the case @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The lower bound on @xmath versus @xmath is shown in Fig. 6.9 for normal
hierarchy. One notices that the upper bound on @xmath is slightly less
stringent than in the full DL.

For inverted hierarchy the asymmetry production is so suppressed that
there is no allowed region.

We can conclude this section noticing that our results show that @xmath
-leptogenesis can be falsified. In the case of normal hierarchy, the
current upper limit @xmath implies @xmath , while, in future, a
potential upper limit @xmath would imply @xmath , with a more precise
determination depending on the possibility of improving the current
estimation of the parameter @xmath in resonant leptogenesis.

### 6.3 Leptogenesis from the Majorana phases

It is apparent from the elements @xmath in Eq. ( 6.8 ) that the Majorana
phases in @xmath also contribute to the @xmath violation necessary for
leptogenesis. Actually, they can also play the role of unique source of
@xmath violation, as illustrated in Fig. 3.8 for @xmath real and
non-zero Majorana phase @xmath ( @xmath ). One can even say quite
generally that the Majorana phases can be more easily responsible for
enough @xmath violation than the Dirac phase, simply because they are
not associated with the small mixing angle @xmath . To illustrate this,
we have plotted in the right panel of Fig. 6.1 with dotted lines the
case of @xmath and @xmath , compared with @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ,
i.e. the maximal allowed value. One notices that the lower bounds on
@xmath for the case of non-vanishing Majorana phase is about a factor of
2 lower than in the case of non-vanishing Dirac phase, even for the
maximal value of @xmath .

We do not aim here at making a thorough study of the role of the
Majorana phases as the sole source of @xmath violation for leptogenesis.
We think that the case of the Dirac phase, which we analysed in detail
in the previous section, represents a more conservative situation, and
the prospects for a measurement seem to be more encouraging. However,
for completeness, we would like to report some results obtained in [ 163
] and [ 166 ] concerning exclusively the Majorana phase and where only
the limit of hierarchical heavy neutrinos and a vanishing initial @xmath
-abundance were considered.

When a fully hierarchical light neutrino spectrum ( @xmath ) is
considered, the authors in [ 163 ] obtain two main results: for a normal
hierarchy (real @xmath matrix), they find the lower bound @xmath for
successful leptogenesis, whereas for inverted hierarchy (purely
imaginary @xmath ), they find @xmath . It should be noted that for
inverted hierarchy and real @xmath , there is no allowed region below
@xmath .

In [ 166 ] the study was extended to arbitrary @xmath , and some new
effects were found. In particular, even in the case of inverted
hierarchy and real @xmath , an allowed range was found, with the lower
bound @xmath . In the case of normal hierarchy, no such relaxation
occurs and the bounds quoted above still hold.

### 6.4 Discussion

We have discussed situations where the “observable” @xmath -violating
phases, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , act as the only source of @xmath
violation responsible for the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the
Universe. Such possibilities, especially for the Dirac phase, which can
be realistically discovered in the future, represent by themselves a
strong motivation. We may indeed soon be in the situation to probe the
second of Sakharov’s necessary conditions for baryogenesis (see Section
1.1 ).

As we have seen, successful leptogenesis from low-energy phases is only
marginally possible in the HL, @xmath , and with dependence on the
initial conditions. This is especially true when the only source of
@xmath violation is the Dirac phase @xmath . We have also argued that a
definite conclusion on the existence of such a marginally allowed region
requires a quantum kinetic treatment, which is expected to shrink the
already quite restricted allowed region.

Therefore, @xmath -leptogenesis and more generally leptogenesis from
low-energy phases motivate models with quasi-degenerate RH neutrino
masses, the extreme limit being resonant leptogenesis. Even in this
extreme limit, imposing successful @xmath -leptogenesis we could derive
interesting conditions on quantities accessible in low-energy neutrino
experiment: @xmath , the absolute neutrino mass scale, normal or
inverted hierarchy, the Dirac phase itself. An interesting aspect of
@xmath -leptogenesis is then that it is falsifiable independently of the
heavy neutrino mass spectrum.

There are however some objections to the scenario of leptogenesis
exclusively from low-energy phases. At the moment, it still lacks a
strong theoretical motivation. In [ 162 ] a model where such a situation
naturally arises was shortly discussed. There, it was said that the
simplest way of restricting the number of @xmath -violating phases is
through the assumption that @xmath is a good symmetry of the Lagrangian,
only broken by the vacuum. For example, one can add to the standard
type-I see-saw framework three Higgs doublets, together with a @xmath
symmetry under which the left-handed fermion doublets @xmath transform
as @xmath and the Higgs doublets as @xmath , while all other fields
transform trivially. It can be readily shown that there is a region of
parameters where the vacuum violates @xmath through complex vacuum
expectation values @xmath . Due to the @xmath restrictions on the Yukawa
couplings, the combination @xmath is real, thus implying a real @xmath
matrix, but keeping @xmath complex. Of course, even though such a model
might work, it is not the simplest and most economical one.

There has been a recent claim that sequential dominance models [ 188 ]
(see [ 189 ] for a more complete discussion) could represent a
theoretical framework for leptogenesis from low-energy phases. In [ 184
] it was shown that these models correspond to have an @xmath matrix
that slightly deviates from the unit matrix or from all the other five
that can be obtained from the unit matrix exchanging rows or columns.
However, it has been noticed in [ 88 , 93 ] that in the limit @xmath ,
the total @xmath asymmetries @xmath do not necessarily vanish. Writing
@xmath , the correct condition to enforce @xmath is to take the limit
@xmath . This is a more demanding limit than @xmath , and it is not
currently motivated by generic sequential dominance models. This limit
is not motivated either by radiative leptogenesis [ 144 , 145 ] within
the context of minimal flavor violation [ 190 ] , as recently considered
in [ 191 , 192 , 165 ] . It must however be said that the limit @xmath ,
when assuming a vanishing initial abundance of RH neutrinos, as done in
the works cited above, can effectively mimic the condition @xmath
because the efficiency factor @xmath , when @xmath and @xmath , implying
@xmath .

Another possible objection to leptogenesis from low-energy phases is
that it cannot be distinguished from the general scenario where both
high- and low-energy phases are present. In particular, the Dirac phase
will likely give in this case only a subdominant contribution, since its
effect is always suppressed by the small @xmath mixing angle. Following
this approach, one can even say that the baryon asymmetry produced
through leptogenesis is not sensitive to the phases in @xmath [ 193 ] ,
in the sense that the baryon asymmetry can be accounted for with the
phases of @xmath having any value. Conversely, if the phases in @xmath
are measured, the baryon asymmetry is still not constrained. The hope is
then that the theoretical framework supporting leptogenesis from
low-energy phases has some other testable predictions. An experimental
support for this model would then represent a support for leptogenesis
from low-energy phases.

However, even if a model supports leptogenesis from low-energy phases,
how can one know if the source of @xmath violation comes from the Dirac
phase or from the Majorana phases? Actually, it was noticed that the
contribution to the final asymmetry from Majorana phases is in general
dominant compared to the one coming from the Dirac phase (see right
panel of Fig. 6.1 ). Thus, it will be only possible to tell if @xmath
-leptogenesis really occurs once the Majorana phases are constrained
from neutrinoless double-beta decay experiments to give small
contributions.

One can even imagine a situation where there is an exact cancellation
between the Dirac and Majorana contributions. It would be however
strange to think that nature disposes a sufficient source of @xmath
violation, sets up a second source that exactly cancels the first one,
and the observed asymmetry is explained by yet a third one, e.g. the
phases in @xmath .

## Chapter 7 Conclusion

The amount of baryonic matter in the Universe which we infer, for
instance, from the CMB temperature anisotropies represents one of the
most important puzzles of modern cosmology. In order to explain this
number, one needs a baryogenesis mechanism which generates dynamically a
small baryon asymmetry in the early Universe. We discussed in the
introduction that a solution to this problem necessarily leads to
physics beyond the SM. It is very exciting that this puzzle of cosmology
may actually be related to the existence of tiny but non-zero neutrino
masses, which are now established. As a matter of fact, a simple
extension of the SM naturally leads to small neutrino masses via the
see-saw mechanism, and its cosmological consequence is leptogenesis ,
which elegantly yields the required baryon asymmetry.

In the present thesis, we have thoroughly discussed the mechanism of
leptogenesis, where a lepton asymmetry is produced by the decays of
heavy right-handed (RH) neutrinos and then transferred to a baryon
asymmetry by the non-perturbative sphaleron processes. Let us now
summarize the main points discussed throughout the thesis.

First, we have presented the unflavored treatment of leptogenesis, where
the leptons produced in the decays of the heavy neutrinos have no flavor
structure. It was shown that in the hierarchical limit for the heavy
neutrino mass spectrum, @xmath , it is typically enough to consider only
the decay of the lightest RH neutrino ( @xmath -dominated scenario),
with a reduction of the number of parameters relevant for the
computation. In this minimal scenario, which we refer to as the
“vanilla” scenario, the contribution from the lightest RH neutrino
washes out all previous asymmetry and, for the theoretically favored
values of the effective neutrino mass [cf. Eq. ( 1.26 )] @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath stand for the solar and atmospheric neutrino mass
scales, respectively, the strong washout regime is obtained, with no
dependence of the final asymmetry on the initial conditions.
Additionally, the strong washout regime implies that the simple picture
with only decays and inverse decays, i.e. neglecting all scattering
processes, and without including thermal corrections yields a very good
estimation of the final asymmetry.

Interestingly, in the @xmath -dominated scenario, general constraints on
a few parameters of the model can be derived. For successful
leptogenesis, the mass of the lightest RH neutrino, @xmath , cannot be
smaller than about @xmath for the strong washout to be obtained [ 96 ,
81 ] . This lower bound leads to a related lower bound on the initial
temperature of leptogenesis, @xmath , which can be identified with a
lower bound on the reheat temperature @xmath within inflation. Such a
high value of the reheat temperature may be in conflict with locally
supersymmetric theories due to an overproduction of gravitinos.

The baryon asymmetry produced through leptogenesis is also sensitive to
the absolute neutrino mass scale. In the context of vanilla
leptogenesis, the stringent upper bound @xmath was obtained [ 99 , 88 ,
75 ] .

Then, we introduced the “flavored” picture of leptogenesis, which has
been understood only recently to be the correct one for a large fraction
of the parameter space (roughly when @xmath ) [ 120 , 119 ] . Flavor
effects introduce a dependence of the final asymmetry on essentially all
parameters of the model. On the one hand, this makes the computation
more involved, but, on the other hand, some interesting parameters, such
as the @xmath -violating phases in the PMNS matrix, become accessible.
About flavor effects, one can say in general:

-   In most of the parameter space they lead to modifications of the
    predictions by a factor 2–3 compared to the unflavored analysis, due
    to a reduction of the washout by this factor. Incidentally, the
    region of independence from the initial conditions shrinks by the
    same amount [ 123 ] .

-   Large modifications are possible in two cases: i) when the
    high-energy phases in the @xmath matrix are zero or close to zero;
    ii) when a one-flavor dominance is obtained.

-   The usually quoted values of the lower bounds on @xmath and @xmath
    (see above) do not change when flavor effects are included [ 123 ] .

Next, we re-analysed the conditions on the temperature @xmath and on
@xmath for flavor effects to be important. We found that there should be
a region in the parameter space where classical Boltzmann equations
(“fully flavored regime”) are not enough to describe the generation of
asymmetry [ 133 ] . Correlations in flavor space and partial losses of
coherence might indeed be relevant there, so that a quantum kinetic
equation in the form of a density matrix equation should be used.
Interestingly, the region concerned is exactly the one where the upper
bound on the absolute neutrino mass scale seems to be evaded. Therefore,
at the moment it is not clear whether the upper bound on @xmath from
successful vanilla leptogenesis quoted above disappears, is simply
relaxed, or still holds.

Then, we went beyond the minimal picture where only the lightest RH
neutrino is considered. In the quasi-degenerate limit, @xmath , the
contributions from all RH neutrinos have to be included. Due to the
enhancement of the @xmath asymmetry in this limit [ 87 ] , the lower
bounds on @xmath and @xmath can be lowered down to the TeV scale in the
extreme case of resonant leptogenesis [ 117 , 76 ] . Accounting for
flavor effects, this might even be possible without having all Yukawa
couplings unnaturally small [ 146 , 132 ] , even though it remains to be
proven that the condition of validity of the fully flavored equations is
satisfied in this case.

Actually, the production of asymmetry from the heavier RH neutrinos
@xmath and @xmath is not only important when considering
quasi-degenerate heavy neutrinos. Even for hierarchical heavy neutrinos,
it was noticed in [ 93 ] that a particular choice of the @xmath matrix
leads to production of asymmetry by @xmath instead of @xmath . This
implies that the lower bound on @xmath does not apply anymore and is
replaced by a lower bound on @xmath , which still yields a lower bound
on @xmath [ 93 ] . When flavor effects are included, the contributions
from @xmath and @xmath are potentially more important, due to the
reduced washout from @xmath [ 149 , 150 ] . Specifically, the domain of
applicability of the @xmath -dominated scenario is expected to be
enlarged, and @xmath might be important as well, even though it seems
complicated to avoid the washout both from @xmath and @xmath .

The last possibility of going beyond the typical scenario that we
discussed is when one element of the @xmath matrix, namely @xmath , has
a non-trivial value different from 0 or 1. It turns out that making
@xmath large opens the possibility of relaxing the lower bound on @xmath
by 3 orders of magnitude even for @xmath [ 152 ] . Moreover, with
moderate values of @xmath and moderate degeneracies @xmath , the upper
bound on the neutrino mass can be evaded [ 98 ] .

Finally, we studied the special case where the source of @xmath
violation required for leptogenesis stems exclusively from the phases in
the PMNS matrix. We focused on the Dirac phase, for which the prospects
of measurement are the most promising. We found that for hierarchical
heavy neutrino masses leptogenesis from the Dirac phase ( @xmath
-leptogenesis) is only marginally allowed and in the weak washout
regime. For quasi-degenerate heavy neutrinos, the strong washout is
recovered, and we could even derive a upper bound on @xmath dependent on
@xmath for successful resonant leptogenesis, which is the most favorable
case one can imagine. Roughly speaking, for the @xmath upper limit
@xmath , resonant @xmath -leptogenesis only works for @xmath [ 164 ] .
If the experimental upper limit on @xmath decreases in the future, so
does the upper bound on @xmath for successful @xmath -leptogenesis.

The see-saw mechanism and leptogenesis have very appealing features.
However, in their vanilla form, they seem very difficult to prove or
disprove. The scale of the heavy neutrinos necessary for leptogenesis,
as well as to have a “natural” see-saw mechanism, is too large to be
accessible at future colliders. The only possibility to produce heavy
neutrinos at colliders would be to have at the same time TeV masses and
large Yukawa couplings. Even though such a possibility relies on a
cancellation mechanism rather than a see-saw mechanism [ 143 , 148 ] ,
the question whether it is imaginable to have signals from heavy RH
neutrinos at colliders is very exciting by itself [ 147 , 143 , 148 ] .
The inclusion of successful leptogenesis in the picture certainly
deserves investigation.

Another way of probing directly leptogenesis would be to measure a
primordial lepton asymmetry of the order of the baryon asymmetry. The
relic neutrino background would carry such an information. Although the
sole detection of relic neutrinos is in principle possible [ 194 , 195 ,
196 ] , measuring an asymmetry of order @xmath in it seems hopeless.

If a direct test of leptogenesis seems to be out of reach, then one has
to wait for an accumulation of indirect hints in favor of this scenario.

First, the observation of neutrinoless double-beta decay would establish
the Majorana nature of light neutrinos, hence supporting the see-saw
mechanism and leptogenesis. The next-generation experiments such as
GERDA [ 49 ] or CUORE [ 51 ] are likely to observe a signal if the light
neutrino mass hierarchy is quasi-degenerate or inverted. Furthermore,
the discovery of the Majorana nature of neutrinos would immediately tell
that lepton number is violated, hence verifying the first Sakharov’s
condition, thanks to the presence of sphalerons.

Second, the discovery of @xmath violation in the neutrino sector in
future long-baseline neutrino experiments such as T2K [ 173 ] or NO
@xmath A [ 174 ] will certainly strengthen the case for leptogenesis. It
will indeed tell that the second Sakharov’s condition is verified.
Moreover, the source of @xmath violation in neutrino mixing might be
sufficient to explain the origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry of
the Universe without resorting to the unobservable high-energy phases in
the @xmath matrix.

Conversely, it is interesting to ask oneself if there are ways to
disprove leptogenesis. A non-observation of neutrinoless double-beta
decay in the next-generation experiments would not disprove by itself
the see-saw mechanism and leptogenesis. The mass hierarchy might simply
be normal, hence out of reach of the next-generation experiments.
However, if neutrino oscillation experiments determine the mass
hierarchy to be inverted [ 197 , 198 ] , but no signal is found in
neutrinoless double beta decay experiments, then one would conclude that
the see-saw mechanism is not at the origin of the neutrino masses, and
that leptogenesis is not responsible for the baryon asymmetry of the
Universe.

As concerns @xmath violation, the non-observation of leptonic @xmath
violation in future neutrino experiments will not weaken the case for
leptogenesis in a significant way. Instead, it would mean that the Dirac
phase and/or the angle @xmath are too small to give an noticeable
contribution to the final asymmetry. The source of @xmath violation
responsible for leptogenesis can be still given by the remaining 5
@xmath -violating phases present in the model.

The absolute neutrino mass scale may also provide a way to contrain
significantly leptogenesis. As a matter of fact, we have seen that the
latter scenario leads to an upper bound on the absolute neutrino mass
scale of about @xmath , which is however subject to modification due to
flavor effects. Assuming that the upper bound remains below roughly
@xmath , implying @xmath , a signal in the future KATRIN experiment [ 41
] , which claims a discovery potential down to about @xmath , would
severely constrain leptogenesis in its minimal version. On the other
hand, other versions, such as the one with quasi-degenerate heavy
neutrinos, would still remain viable.

Even though the production of heavy neutrinos at future colliders seems
to be unlikely, the LHC experiment at CERN will still have an indirect
impact on leptogenesis. Indeed, if supersymmetry is discovered and the
parameters measured are consistent with successful electroweak
baryogenesis (e.g. light stop and light Higgs [ 199 , 200 ] ), then the
case for leptogenesis will become weaker. On the other hand, if
electroweak baryogenesis is ruled out at the LHC, then leptogenesis, as
one of the remaining possibilities to explain the baryon asymmetry of
the Universe, will become stronger.

In conclusion, since leptogenesis is unavoidable when considering the
see-saw mechanism for the generation of neutrino masses, it provides a
very elegant explanation to one of the outstanding problems of modern
cosmology, the origin of the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the
Universe. Even though a direct test is challenging, there is no doubt
that in the next few years more experimental evidence will become
available to weaken or strengthen the case for leptogenesis.

## Appendix A Neutrino mixing parameters

The currently existing data from neutrino oscillation experiments can be
well described by the Lagrangian,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which includes the weak charged current interaction in the lepton
sector, a Majorana mass term for neutrinos, and a Dirac mass term for
charged leptons. When diagonalizing the neutrino and charged lepton mass
matrices via @xmath and @xmath , one obtains the lepton mixing matrix,
known also as the Pontecorvo-Maki-Nakagawa-Sakata (PMNS) mixing matrix [
17 , 18 , 19 ] , in the weak charged lepton current

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The charged current interaction can then be written in the mass basis as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that it is conventional to choose the basis where the mass matrix
for the charged leptons is diagonal, in which case @xmath , i.e. the
PMNS matrix is the matrix that diagonalizes the neutrino mass matrix.
Neutrinos with a given flavor are then related to neutrinos with a given
mass through the PMNS matrix, ¹ ¹ 1 If one wants the relation between
the flavor eigenstates and the mass eigenstates, it is given by @xmath .
At first sight, this may seem surprising, but it is simply due to the
fact that, by convention, field operators create antiparticles, or
annihilate particles! [ 23 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note also that the number of neutrino flavor states with mass below
@xmath is known to be three from the precise measurement of the @xmath
-width at LEP I [ 5 ] .

The standard parametrization of the PMNS matrix was given in Eq. ( 1.8
). Carrying out the matrix product, one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We shall use in all calculations @xmath and @xmath , compatible with the
results from neutrino oscillation experiments discussed in the
introduction, Eqs. ( 1.13 ) and ( 1.15 ). For the third angle, we shall
use the @xmath range @xmath obtained from Eq. ( 1.16 ).

Concerning the mass spectrum of light neutrinos, we shall use the
convention that @xmath , whatever the hierarchy is. This means that when
a normal hierarchy is considered, one has @xmath and @xmath [cf. Eqs. (
1.12 ) and ( 1.14 )], whereas for an inverted hierarchy, one has @xmath
and @xmath . Defining the two convenient quantities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

one has that the light neutrino spectrum is quasi-degenerate when @xmath
, while for @xmath it is fully hierarchical.

Within the convention for the light neutrino masses we are using, it
must be pointed out that the case of inverted hierarchy is obtained by
performing a cyclic permutation of the columns in the PMNS matrix Eq. (
A.5 ), such that the @xmath -th column becomes the @xmath -th [ 164 ] .

Finally, let us note that we shall always neglect the effect of the
running of neutrino parameters from high energy to low energy [ 90 , 91
] .

## Appendix B The see-saw mechanism with three RH neutrinos

The (type-I) see-saw mechanism is based on the following extension of
the SM:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , three new fields @xmath , ¹ ¹ 1 In principle, it would be
possible to consider the addition of only two RH neutrinos, since only
two light neutrinos are known to be massive. But, in the following, we
want to be slightly more general and therefore keep three RH neutrinos.
a Majorana mass matrix @xmath and a Yukawa coupling matrix @xmath have
been introduced. We chose here the basis where the charged-lepton Yukawa
matrix and the Majorana mass matrix are diagonal. The superscript @xmath
denotes charge conjugation, defined as @xmath , where the charge
conjugation matrix @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The subscripts @xmath and @xmath denote the left-handed and right-handed
chiral projections, respectively: @xmath . Finally, the @xmath charge
assignments are as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

It should be stressed that the new fields @xmath , often called
right-handed (RH) neutrinos, are singlets under @xmath .

In Eq. ( B.1 ) the Yukawa-type term is simply the analog of the other
mass terms for fermions in the SM. Concerning the Majorana mass term, it
is new and unique, but in full generality there is no reason why it
should be absent. This particularity for neutrinos is due to the fact
that they are the only neutral fermions in the SM.

After spontaneous symmetry breaking, a Dirac mass term @xmath , is
generated by the vacuum expectation value of the Higgs field, @xmath
GeV. Using the identity @xmath , one can then rewrite the mass term in a
more compact form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The see-saw mechanism then assumes that the entries of the Majorana mass
matrix matrix are much larger than all Dirac matrix elements, i.e.
@xmath . Under this assumption, the mass matrix in Eq. ( B.3 ) can be
block-diagonalized with a @xmath unitary matrix @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath matrix only makes sure that the mass eigenvalues are
positive.

The matrix in Eq. ( B.5 ) corresponds to the light neutrino mass matrix,
which has naturally suppressed entries due to the heavy scale in the
denominator. This is the reason why this mechanism is called the see-saw
mechanism. As explained in Appendix A , the matrix that diagonalizes the
mass matrix @xmath for the light neutrinos is the PMNS mixing matrix
[cf. Eq. ( A.5 )], so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are the masses of the three light neutrinos. The corresponding
mass eigenstates are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can be easily checked that @xmath , which means that the light
neutrinos are Majorana particles.

On the other hand, the lower right block on the right-hand side of Eq. (
B.4 ) was diagonal before the diagonalization and, to leading order, it
remains diagonal, i.e. @xmath . The entries are @xmath , corresponding
to three heavy neutrinos. The corresponding mass eigenstates are given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be checked again that @xmath , which means that the heavy
neutrinos are Majorana particles.

Finally, let us note that the extension of the SM in Eq. ( B.1 )
introduces 18 new parameters: 6 masses, 6 mixing angles and 6 @xmath
-violating phases. The number of parameters in principle accessible in
low-energy neutrino experiments is 9: the masses of the 3 light
neutrinos and the 6 parameters (3 mixing angles and 3 @xmath -violating
phases) in the PMNS matrix [cf. Eq. ( A.5 )].