##### Contents

-    1 Yang–Mills theory as a constrained dynamical system
    -    1.1 Definition of Yang–Mills theory
    -    1.2 Constrained dynamics
    -    1.3 Quantum electrodynamics
    -    1.4 Constrained quantization of Yang–Mills theory
-    2 Infrared ghost dominance
    -    2.1 Gribov–Zwanziger scenario of confinement
    -    2.2 Stochastic vacuum in Coulomb gauge
    -    2.3 Dyson–Schwinger equations
    -    2.4 Connection to Landau gauge
    -    2.5 Ghost-gluon vertex
    -    2.6 Analytical solution for propagators
    -    2.7 Linear confining potential
    -    2.8 On the uniqueness of the solution
-    3 Variational solution for the vacuum state
    -    3.1 Gaussian types of wave functionals
    -    3.2 Minimizing the energy density
    -    3.3 Renormalization
    -    3.4 Full numerical solutions
    -    3.5 Vertices
    -    3.6 Coulomb form factor
    -    3.7 Subcritical solutions
-    4 Running coupling and ultraviolet behavior
    -    4.1 Anti-screening of color charges
    -    4.2 Nonperturbative running coupling
    -    4.3 Ultraviolet behavior of Green functions
    -    4.4 Infrared fixed point
-    5 Inclusion of external charges
    -    5.1 Gluons in a quasi-particle representation
    -    5.2 Coherent states
    -    5.3 Energy of Yang–Mills theory in the coherent state
    -    5.4 The gluon chain
    -    5.5 Squeezed states
-    A Conventions and notation
    -    A.1 Units, metric and group conventions
    -    A.2 Notation
-    B Two-point integrals
-    C Infrared limit of the ghost-gluon vertex
-    D Hamiltonian approach to @xmath theory
-    E Identities for Gaussian expectation values

## Chapter 1 Yang–Mills theory as a constrained dynamical system

In the development of quantum electrodynamics (QED) [ Wey29 ] , local
gauge invariance of the matter fields served as a guiding principle and
it successfully led to a highly accurate description of electromagnetic
forces [ Peskin ] . The fundamental requirement of locality necessitates
the existence of bosonic gauge fields which mediate the forces between
the fermions. An impediment to the canonical quantization of such a
dynamical system is the existence of redundant degrees of freedom. This
obstacle can be overcome for the electromagnetic theory, thanks to the
linear structure of its equations of motion. Quantum chromodynamics
(QCD), on the other hand, bears non-linearities that make the treatment
far more complicated. Since QCD is the non-abelian generalization of
QED, the general structure of a gauge theory is inherited and along with
it its difficulties. It will be shown in this chapter how the redundant
degrees of freedom can be related to constraints in the classical phase
space, and how quantization of such a dynamical system can be pursued.
After a brief definition of Yang–Mills (YM) theories, amongst which QCD
is the @xmath version, we first examine constrained systems in the
context of classical mechanics to pave a way for the terminology.
Second, constrained quantization is exhibited for electrodynamics as an
illuminating example. Finally, we demonstrate how to systematically
follow the steps of constrained quantization in the difficult case of
Yang–Mills theory in Weyl and Coulomb gauge. The explicit form of the
quantized Hamiltonian operator will thus be derived in a quantization
approach that differs from the canonical method.

### 1.1 Definition of Yang–Mills theory

After a first sporadic attempt by Klein as early as 1939 to generalize
the electromagnetic theory imposing non-abelian group structure [ Kle38
] , it took another 15 years until Yang and Mills were able to provide
the full account of @xmath non-abelian gauge theory [ YanMil54 ] . Its
generalization to @xmath (with @xmath realized in QCD) is
straightforward, a clear introduction to the currently accepted
definition of YM theory can be found, e.g., in Ref. [ Jac80 ] . There
are some good text books on this topic, e.g. Ref. [ ItzZub ] , yet the
main elements of YM theory are outlined here to set up a notation for
this thesis.

The basic idea, following electromagnetism as a guiding example, is to
cancel the change of the Dirac Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

under a local symmetry transformation of its fermion fields @xmath in
the intrinsic space ¹ ¹ 1 The roman color indices are used as subscript
or superscript interchangeably.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

by the introduction of a gauge field @xmath . To achieve this, the
derivative @xmath in the Lagrangian ( 1.1 ) is replaced by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which transforms homogeneously, @xmath , whereas the matrix-valued gauge
fields @xmath transform inhomogeneously, according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The subsequent interaction of gauge and matter fields is controlled by
the coupling constant @xmath . Originally, this procedure coined the
term “minimal substitution”. Nowadays, with a deeper understanding of
the geometrical aspects which allow close analogies to general
relativity [ DeW67 ] , we call @xmath the “covariant derivative”,
defined in Eq. ( 1.3 ) as acting on a field in the fundamental
representation, such as the quark field @xmath .

The unitary group elements @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

are continuously generated by @xmath antihermitian matrices @xmath that
obey the Lie algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the structure constants @xmath . For the quarks to transform as
@xmath -vectors in the fundamental representation of @xmath , one uses
the well-known @xmath Gell–Mann matrices for @xmath . The gauge fields
@xmath , on the other hand, live in a @xmath -dimensional vector space
spanned by the generators @xmath with the additional operation of
commutation ( 1.6 ). By an infinitesimal expansion of ( 1.4 ) in @xmath
using ( 1.6 ), one can see that @xmath must transform in the adjoint
representation of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Any linear combination of the matrices @xmath with field operators shall
be denoted by a caret, e.g. @xmath , as opposed to the matrices @xmath
introduced in Eq. ( 1.4 ). The covariant derivative @xmath acting on
fields in the adjoint representation is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Knowing the transformation properties of the gauge field ( 1.4 ), one
may construct from the gauge covariant field strength tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

a gauge invariant contribution to the Lagrangian density that is purely
gluonic. It is the first term in the Yang–Mills Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas the second term represents the coupling to the quark Nöther
current of the color symmetry,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

here treated as a classical external field. This thesis shall mainly be
concerned with the dynamics of the Yang–Mills Lagrangian ( 1.11 ) and
disregard the influence of dynamical quarks. It is hypothesized that
unquenching has a small effect on the gauge field sector. ² ² 2 The
nonperturbative confinement phenomenon is known to exist in the absence
of flavors, @xmath , from lattice calculations [ Bal00 ] . In the
perturbative regime, a small number of quark flavors ( @xmath ) will not
remove the property of asymptotic freedom. Recent continuum studies [
FisWatCas05 ] as well as lattice calculations [ Dav+04 ] indicate that
the effect of unquenching on hadronic observables is small. The color
trace in Eq. ( 1.11 ) with the convention @xmath guarantees that the
gluonic energy is positive definite, cf. ( 1.18 ).

With the action principle, the Lagrangian formalism provides a
possibility to derive equations of motion where Lorentz invariance is
manifest. Applying a functional derivative w.r.t. the gauge field to the
Yang–Mills action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

one finds ³ ³ 3 Note that @xmath transforms in the adjoint
representation, therefore it is natural that the covariant derivative
@xmath is found here.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, using the Bianchi identity @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to derive a Hamiltonian, one introduces conjugate momenta

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and readily notes that due to the antisymmetry of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 1.17 ) is understood as a constraint on the phase space variables
and will be shown to complicate the quantization process. The Legendre
transform gives the Hamiltonian @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with the abbreviations for the external color charge density @xmath ,
the color magnetic field @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the Lagrangian equations of motion we recognize that the Gauss law
can be written as @xmath , see Eq. ( 1.14 ) for @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4 In
electrodynamics, one defines the electric field as @xmath and thus gains
the familiar form of the Maxwell equation @xmath . However, in the
Hamiltonian approach, the Gauss law cannot be found as an equation of
motion but must be implemented as a constraint, as will be discussed
below.

The quantization of a gauge theory is a delicate task, already in the
abelian case. Since the gauge transformation indicates that the field
variables @xmath contain unphysical degrees of freedom, it is not clear
a priori whether the canonical quantization leads to the correct
results, i.e. whether it contains the classical theory in the limit
@xmath . It is discussed in some detail in the following sections how a
gauge theory can be understood as a constrained system and how to go
about with its quantization.

Although in the Lagrangian formalism Lorentz invariance can be made
manifest, it is sometimes favorable to use the Hamiltonian formalism
instead. The path integral method provides an elegant way of quantizing
a theory covariantly in the Lagrangian formalism. However, it is rather
unsuitable to calculate, e.g., the Balmer formula for hydrogen, one of
the first exercises in quantum mechanics [ DurKle79 ] . The Hamiltonian
approach to the quantum theory of electromagnetism and YM theory shall
be the main focus of this work. Once the conjugate momenta are defined
and one passes over to the Hamiltonian, Lorentz covariance is lost since
a reference frame has been chosen. Nevertheless, Lorentz invariance is
maintained. This can be understood, e.g., by explicit calculation in
Coulomb gauge for electromagnetism [ BriGoo67 ] or by criteria for
commutation relations in Coulomb gauge quantum Yang–Mills theory [ Sch62
] .

### 1.2 Constrained dynamics

In this section we shall discuss the importance of constraints of a
dynamical system for its time evolution and for its quantization
procedure. The basic idea was developed by Dirac [ Dir50 , Dir58 ] and
very pedagogically presented in his Yeshiva lectures [ Dir64 ] . Dirac
and many of his successors tried to maintain a high level of generality
in favor of the applicability to any given system, say electrodynamics
or even general relativity [ Car01 ] . However, it turned out that
exceptions to the quite general claims can be found. Therefore, only the
concepts relevant to Yang–Mills theory will be introduced here. For
additional information, see e.g. [ HenTei92 , Sun82 , HanRegTei76 ] .

Consider a classical mechanical system described by a Lagrangian @xmath
. The Legendre transformation to a Hamiltonian @xmath with conjugate
momenta @xmath can be achieved if we can solve the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the velocities @xmath , which is locally guaranteed by a regular
Hessian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The phase space @xmath is then defined as a set of independent elements
@xmath . In the case of a singular Lagrangian where Eq. ( 1.21 ) does
not hold, some of the momenta @xmath are dependent. Moreover, additional
dependences among the @xmath and @xmath may arise from the Hamiltonian
equations of motion. Generally, one may formulate all dependences as a
number of constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

by which the dimension of phase space is reduced. Below, the symbol ’
@xmath ’ is explained. The constraints ( 1.22 ) then hold in a subset
@xmath of the original phase space. The Hamiltonian @xmath can be
supplemented by the constraints ( 1.22 ) with some arbitrary Lagrange
multipliers @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We refer to @xmath as the “total Hamiltonian”. The common variational
calculus with constraints gives rise to Hamiltonian equations of motion
in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.24a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.24b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Above, we have made use of the Poisson bracket for any functions @xmath
and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that there is a ’ @xmath ’ symbol in Eq. ( 1.24 ), a notation due
to Dirac which emphasizes that one is to first calculate the Poisson
brackets and then set the constraints ( 1.22 ) to zero. These kinds of
relations are termed “weak equations” and are specific to the use of
Poisson brackets. It may be stressed here that the canonical
quantization with such weak equations leads to the circumstance that
some quantum constraints cannot be imposed as operator identities but
only as projections on states. Below, we shall introduce generalized
Poisson brackets that make the usage of weak equations redundant.

The time evolution of any given phase space function @xmath that does
not explicitly depend on time is given by the Poisson bracket in a
concise way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total Hamiltonian @xmath obviously serves as the generator of time
evolution. However, the multiplier functions @xmath contained in it
leave an arbitrariness. Given some initial conditions, say @xmath ,
@xmath at some finite time @xmath is not unique since we can choose the
@xmath to be one value or another. After an infinitesimally small time
@xmath , the function @xmath will yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Imagine we take two different sets of multiplier functions @xmath and
@xmath . Comparing these two arbitrary choices to calculate @xmath and
@xmath , using ( 1.27 ), leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Evidently, the two physically equivalent values @xmath and
@xmath are related by a term generated by the constraints @xmath . This
suggests that the physical state remains unchanged under transformations
of the kind

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, we have to be careful with the interpretation, as shown below.

The constraints ( 1.22 ) need to be checked for consistency, i.e. they
should hold at all times. In view of Eq. ( 1.26 ) this requirement gives
rise to the conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can actually fix the multiplier functions @xmath so long as the
matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

is invertible. We now distinguish first-class and second-class
constraints [ Dir64 ] . By definition, a first-class constraint has
vanishing Poisson brackets with all other constraints. With first-class
constraints present, the matrix @xmath in Eq. ( 1.31 ) becomes singular,
@xmath . In the absence of first-class constraints, all constraints are
termed second-class, and one can show [ Sen76 ] that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

If Eq. ( 1.32 ) holds and only second-class constraints are present, we
can fix the multiplier functions @xmath using the consistency conditions
( 1.30 ) by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and derive that @xmath with second-class constraints satisfies the
equation of motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the Dirac bracket was introduced,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is clear from Eq. ( 1.34 ) that the time evolution of the initial
state @xmath is unique. The Dirac bracket provides a formalism that
yields equations of motion with (second-class) constraints. Furthermore,
the constraints ( 1.22 ) which are regarded as weak equations
w.r.t. Poisson brackets, can be used as strong (ordinary) equations if
one uses the Dirac bracket instead, since for any function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

These ideas led Dirac to propose a quantization technique for
constrained dynamical systems, known as constrained quantization ⁵ ⁵ 5
It is also associated with the lengthy expression “reduced phase space
quantization”. , making use of the Dirac brackets in the fundamental
commutation relations of operators @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the Dirac brackets has most of the features of the Poisson
bracket—e.g. antisymmetry, linearity, Jacobi identity, product rule—the
fundamental Dirac brackets are generally not as simple as the Poisson
brackets, @xmath . In linear theories, such as QED (discussed in the
next section) this does not pose a problem to the quantization
prescription ( 1.37 ) since the fundamental Dirac brackets do not
involve field variables. However, in the non-linear YM theory,
constrained quantization is more difficult. This will be dealt with in
section 1.4 .

Let us come back to the claim that constraints generate transformations
among physically equivalent states, see Eq. ( 1.29 ). For second-class
constraints, this can certainly not be correct, since all multiplier
functions are fixed, as we have seen in Eq. ( 1.33 ). To understand this
caveat, note that the transformations ( 1.29 ) generated by second-class
constraints kick the system out of the reduced phase space @xmath since
for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, the transformations ( 1.29 ) generated by second-class
constraints are not symmetries of the theory.

On the other hand, if we consider first-class constraints only, then the
Poisson brackets all vanish, @xmath , and the transformations ( 1.29 )
are indeed such that the system remains in the reduced phase space
@xmath where the constraints are satisfied. They give rise to an
equivalence class ⁶ ⁶ 6 The equivalence relation @xmath is here
represented by the transformations infinitesimally defined in Eq. ( 1.29
).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

of phase space variables that all correspond to the same physical state.
Any set of @xmath uniquely determines the state but the reverse is not
true, see Fig. 1.1 . These considerations infer that the first class
constraints are the generators of symmetries of the theory .

It should be noted here that the above statement, known as “Dirac’s
conjecture” is not a rigorous theorem. Counter examples can be
constructed [ Caw79 ] , and it takes further classifications of
constraints (“primary” and “secondary”) to identify the exact set of
generators of symmetry transformations in general. However, all physical
applications agree with Dirac’s conjecture and the issue is somewhat
academic. In particular, the gauge transformations of QED and YM theory
are generated by first-class constraints (see below). In this context,
the equivalence class ( 1.39 ) is also referred to as the gauge orbit .

The quantization in the presence of first-class constraints is performed
either in the path-integral formalism [ Fad70 ] , or by a projection on
the physical Hilbert subspace [ Jac80 , ChrLee80 ] . Alternatively, one
can fix the gauge on the classical level and then quantize with the
Dirac prescription ( 1.37 ). When fixing the gauge, one effectively
picks out a single representative from the equivalence class ( 1.39 )
generated by the first-class constraints. In practice, this is achieved
by imposing supplementary constraints (“gauge conditions”)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

that turn the first-class constraints @xmath into second-class ones and
hence obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constraints @xmath that formerly were first-class thus cease to
cause an ambiguous time evolution of the system. With all constraints
being second-class, all multiplier functions are fixed and one can use
the Dirac bracket to proceed with the quantization.

In order to arrive at a “physical gauge” where all unphysical degrees of
freedom are eliminated, the number of gauge conditions must equal the
number of first-class constraints, hence the matrix that appears in
Eq. ( 1.41 ) is quadratic. In principle, the gauge conditions ( 1.40 )
are quite arbitrary, except for the requirements of uniqueness and
attainability. Uniqueness can be established locally as follows:
Consider in Fig. 1.1 (right panel) the gauge orbit at a fixed time
@xmath and assume without loss of generality that the point @xmath
satisfies @xmath . The transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

within the gauge orbit is not to yield any further solutions @xmath
unless it is the identity transformation, @xmath . Otherwise, the gauge
fixing condition specifies (at least) two elements of the gauge orbit,
see @xmath in Fig. 1.1 . With the condition ( 1.41 ) on the @xmath , one
can see from Eq. ( 1.42 ) immediately that @xmath is the only solution
to @xmath and therefore the point @xmath is unique. ⁷ ⁷ 7 The global
issues of uniqueness will be discussed below in the context of YM
theory. Moreover, a sensible gauge condition has to be attainable by a
gauge transformation. Otherwise, we would have the situation in which
the gauge fixing condition does not intersect with the gauge orbit at
all, see @xmath in Fig. 1.1 .

In summary, the general procedure of quantizing classical mechanics in
the presence of constraints has been discussed. It has not been shown
how to find the entire set ( 1.22 ) of constraints starting from the
Lagrangian. This can be achieved with the so-called Dirac-Bergmann
algorithm [ Dir50 , Dir58 , Ber56 ] . It incorporates the stationarity
of constraints that are found in the equation of motion or in the mere
definition of conjugate momenta.

### 1.3 Quantum electrodynamics

An illuminating example of the formalism exhibited above is the
quantization of electrodynamics in Weyl and Coulomb gauge. There are no
difficulties in promoting the ideas from point mechanics to a field
theory, the discrete indices of the generalized coordinates are merely
replaced by the continuous spacetime dependence.

The electromagnetic theory is the abelian version of the general set of
YM theories described in section 1.1 , recovered by setting @xmath in
the Lie algebra ( 1.6 ). In the absence of external charges, one finds
from ( 1.11 ) the well-known Lagrangian density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

As quoted in Eq. ( 1.17 ), the conjugate momentum of the @xmath field
vanishes and we can write down a first constraint @xmath as ⁸ ⁸ 8 In
field theory, an infinite number of constraints is specified, one at
each spacetime point.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian function depending on the fields @xmath , @xmath and the
conjugate momenta @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

From now on, we write @xmath for the components of the contravariant
tensor @xmath . This change in notation will become useful in the
nonabelian case where the field operators also have a color index. The
Hamiltonian ( 1.45 ) determines the time evolution via the Poisson
brackets. The fundamental Poisson brackets are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the constraint ( 1.44 ) is stationary,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

has to hold weakly where @xmath is an arbitrary multiplier function. We
recognize Eq. ( 1.47 ) as the Gauss law. Following the Dirac-Bergmann
algorithm, we can check if further constraints arise from requiring that
@xmath is constant in time. One finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus the complete matrix of constraints @xmath , see Eq. ( 1.31 ),
is given by @xmath and @xmath which are obviously first-class, @xmath .

As we have shown in the preceding section, the first-class constraints
serve as generators of gauge transformations. Here, it can be explicitly
verified that the transformations @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.49a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.49b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

are symmetries of the Lagrangian ( 1.43 ). The general form ( 1.4 ) of
gauge transformations in the Lagrangian formalism, with generator @xmath
of the group @xmath and gauge coupling @xmath , reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we wish to identity an @xmath in Eq. ( 1.50 ) that corresponds to the
transformations ( 1.49 ), it is recognized that Eq. ( 1.49a )
corresponds to spatially independent gauge transformations @xmath with
@xmath whereas Eq. ( 1.49b ) corresponds to time-independent gauge
transformations with @xmath .

In the quantization procedure, the problem arises that due to the gauge
invariance ( 1.49 ) there are more variables than physical degrees of
freedom. The constraints ( 1.44 ) and ( 1.47 ) then should be taken into
account in the Dirac formalism. Before we do so, it is briefly sketched
here how the canonical quantization is usually pursued with Poisson
brackets. With the choice of Weyl gauge, @xmath , the first constraint,
@xmath , does not cause any difficulties for the quantization of the
time-components of the fields. The canonical Poisson brackets are used
to promote the spatial classical fields to operator-valued fields that
obey the equal-time commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the Gauss law ( 1.47 ) is an equation that holds only weakly on
the classical level, it is not a surprise that it leads to a
contradiction with the commutation relations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The requirement that the Gauss law holds as an operator identity is
therefore abandoned and one usually restricts the Hilbert space to the
kernel of the Gauss law operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us mention here that the quantum theory is described in the
Schrödinger picture where the field operators are independent of time.

Constrained quantization has the generic feature that the constraints
can be imposed as strong equations once the Poisson brackets are
replaced by the Dirac brackets. In the so quantized theory, the
constraints hold as operator identities and can be used to eliminate
unphysical degrees of freedom. Before the Dirac brackets can be
introduced, all first-class constraints have to be degraded to second
class by imposing gauge fixing conditions. We now choose Weyl and
Coulomb gauge to render the constraints ( 1.44 ) and ( 1.47 ) second
class,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.54a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.54b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The Weyl or “temporal” gauge condition ( 1.54a ) fixes the gauge
transformations ( 1.49a ) generated by the first-class constraint @xmath
, whereas the Coulomb gauge condition ( 1.54b ) fixes the gauge
transformations ( 1.49b ) generated by the first-class constraint @xmath
which is the Gauss law. Thus, the gauge is fixed completely ⁹ ⁹ 9 Up to
global gauge transformations. on the classical level and we will refer
to the joint conditions ( 1.54a ) and ( 1.54b ) as the temporal Coulomb
gauge .

All (second-class) constraints are now collected in a vector @xmath ,
and we redefine the matrix ( 1.31 ) by @xmath which can be evaluated for
a fixed time @xmath using the fundamental Poisson brackets ( 1.46 ) to
yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is regular by construction, we can also write down its
inverse,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The fundamental Dirac brackets can be calculated straightforwardly from
the definition ( 1.35 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.57)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the last line defines the transverse projector @xmath . The
definition of the matrix-valued distribution @xmath will be useful as
well.

Quantization is achieved by the prescription ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The field
operators are denoted by the same symbols as their classical
counterparts. It should be clear from the context which objects the
symbols refer to.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

which provides information on how the momentum operator @xmath acts on
the wave functional @xmath in the coordinate representation. Yet, not
all components of @xmath are determined by Eq. ( 1.58 ) since the
transverse projector has zero modes, @xmath . To be specific, the
longitudinal components of the field operators are left unconstrained by
Eq. ( 1.58 ). We split the field operators into longitudinal and
transversal components, @xmath with @xmath (and for @xmath accordingly),
and find from Eq. ( 1.58 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The additional information needed for @xmath and @xmath comes from the
constraints themselves, Eqs. ( 1.47 ) and ( 1.54b ), that now hold as
operator identities. The longitudinal projections by @xmath of both
field operators are identically zero,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.60)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, no contradiction to the commutation relations ( 1.58 ) arises,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

unlike in the quantization procedure with Poisson brackets, cf. Eq. (
1.52 ). The transverse components of the momentum operator is found in
view of Eq. ( 1.59 ) to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Quantization is thus complete and one may find from ( 1.45 ) the
gauge-fixed quantum Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

After all, we have arrived at a Hamiltonian expressed in terms of
gauge-invariant variables. Note that @xmath is left unchanged by gauge
transformations ( 1.50 ) and @xmath transforms homogeneously in view of
( 1.10 ) and hence transforms trivially in the abelian theory.

### 1.4 Constrained quantization of Yang–Mills theory

The transfer of the techniques used in the previous section to
non-abelian theories is aggravated by non-linearities in the equations
of motions. Nevertheless, constrained quantization of YM theory in the
temporal Coulomb gauge is feasible. This section is devoted to
presenting the steps of calculation that lead to the gauge-fixed
Hamiltonian operator of YM theory with static external quark fields.

Usually, the canonical quantization is performed in the Weyl gauge where
the spatial components of the gauge field can be treated as a set of
Cartesian coordinates, and after quantization a coordinate
transformation to curvilinear coordinates in the Coulomb gauge is
undertaken [ ChrLee80 , CreMuzTud78 , GerSak78 , CheTsa87 ] . This
corresponds to an incomplete gauge fixing before quantization and is
known to bring about a number of difficulties [ Lan89 ] . For instance,
if only the Weyl gauge, @xmath , is enforced, the Gauss law cannot be
used as an operator equation and has to be imposed as a projection onto
a physical Hilbert space [ Bjo80 , Jac80 ] , see also [ Rei97 ] . The
physical states are not normalizable as an artefact of the residual
gauge invariance [ RosTes84 ] . Moreover, the commutator @xmath may be
anomalously broken which obscures the projection on states [ FadSha86 ,
FadSla91 ] . Another difficulty in fixing only the Weyl gauge is that
the perturbative gauge field propagator is plagued by unphysical poles [
CarCurMen82 ] .

In the present thesis, the gauge shall be completely fixed ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 See
footnote 9 . already at the classical level by imposing the temporal
Coulomb gauge conditions

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.65a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.65b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and only afterwards, the quantization will be issued with the Dirac
brackets. This choice was also discussed in [ LerMicRos87 , GirRot84 ] .
Complete gauge fixing, such as the temporal Coulomb gauge ( 1.65 ), has
the advantage that it can be chosen such as to remove all unphysical
degrees of freedom. The Gauss law then holds as an operator identity. In
exchange, the algebra of the quantization procedure is slightly more
involved.

Analogously to electrodynamics, the first constraint to momentum
phase-space is given by the time component of the momentum operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian ( 1.18 ) with @xmath for simplicity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

serves as the generator of time translations. ¹² ¹² 12 In the same way
as in the previous section, we write @xmath , meaning @xmath . The
stationarity of the constraint ( 1.66 ) gives a further constraint,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the equal-time fundamental Poisson brackets were employed,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constraint @xmath is found to be stationary using the well-known
identity [ FadSla91 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above quantity weakly vanishes ¹³ ¹³ 13 A theorem due to Dirac [
Dir50 ] ensures that a Poisson bracket of two first-class constraints is
again first-class. in view of Eq. ( 1.68 ) and therefore the constraints
@xmath and @xmath in Eqs. ( 1.66 ) and ( 1.68 ) form the complete set of
constraints. The latter are first-class and are turned into second-class
by the gauge fixing condition ( 1.65 ).

Before proceeding to the calculation of the Dirac brackets, let us
introduce a convenient short-hand notation. The coordinate dependence is
absorbed into the color index which is thus understood as a collective
index. Vectors in Lorentz space keep their Lorentz indices to avoid an
over-estranged notation. All fields are considered at a fixed time.
Repeated indices are summed over, i.e. for the color indices this
implies an integration over the implicit coordinate dependence.

For instance,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

In addition, derivatives are written as matrices in coordinate and color
space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that these matrices are antisymmetric under the exchange of the
collective indices,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also note the symmetric matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constraints along with the gauge-fixing conditions are collected in
a vector @xmath with elements

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.75a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.75b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.75c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.75d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

to give a regular constraint matrix @xmath . The relevant Poisson
brackets for its calculation yield

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.76a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.76b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.76c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.76d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.76e)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the last line we have defined the non-local matrix @xmath which is
symmetric in view of the antisymmetric matrices in Eq. ( 1.73 ).
Furthermore, due to the Coulomb gauge condition ( 1.65b ), it obeys the
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its inverse @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

All (weakly) non-zero matrix elements @xmath are now given by Eqs. (
1.76a ) and ( 1.76e ) so that the constraint matrix reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its inverse is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point, let us emphasize that the matrix @xmath , which will be
the classical counterpart of the ghost operator, can only be made
explicit by an infinite series expansion in the coupling constant @xmath
. ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 On top of that, zero modes of the matrix @xmath infer that
@xmath exists only in subspace of @xmath . This will be discussed in
chapter 2 . This has led some authors to refrain from the constrained
quantization with such a constraint matrix, see Refs. [ Sun82 , KugoBook
, HalRen03 ] . In Refs. [ Tud79 , GirRot82 ] , a Hamiltonian operator is
obtained but one is left with operator ordering ambiguities. In other
gauges, where @xmath , the expression for @xmath becomes even more
complicated [ HanRegTei76 ] . Our approach aims at a comparison to the
Christ-Lee Hamiltonian [ ChrLee80 ] in the temporal Coulomb gauge.
Therefore, let us press on with the formal expression for @xmath defined
by ( 1.78 ) and with the inverse constraint matrix ( 1.80 ).

The fundamental Dirac brackets are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and, using Eq. ( 1.76 ), are calculated to yield

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.82)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.83)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is clear that the Dirac brackets ( 1.82 ) must vanish since, by
construction, the Dirac bracket of a constraint with any phase space
function vanishes, recall Eq. ( 1.36 ). In particular, the Gauss law
functional @xmath has vanishing Dirac bracket with any function @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

as one may easily convince oneself, cf. Eq. ( 1.36 ). All second-class
constraints equations hold strongly. The non-symmetric matrix @xmath
occurring in Eq. ( 1.83 ) can be understood in some sense as a
non-abelian generalization of the transverse projector @xmath . ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15
Letting @xmath , one regains the familiar expression ( 1.57 ). Note the
sign in @xmath . It obviously has the projector property @xmath , and
the projector orthogonal to it is given by @xmath . We thus have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Just like for @xmath , it is important to note that @xmath has zero
modes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are now ready to pass to the quantum theory with the prescription

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is understood that all fields are operators henceforth. The
second-class constraints ( 1.75 ) now hold strongly and can be imposed
as operator identities,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to arrive at a representation for the momentum operator @xmath
that is to obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is helpful to split it into the orthogonal projections (from the
right side) of @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

The commutation relations ( 1.89 ) are thus decomposed into two separate
ones,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.91)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.92)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and a situation similar to the abelian case, cf. section 1.3 , occurs.
Recall that the longitudinal component @xmath obeyed a trivial
commutation relation equivalent to @xmath in ( 1.91 ) and had to be
determined by the (strong) Gauss law ( 1.61 ). The transverse component
@xmath obeyed @xmath which has the easily found solution ( 1.63 ). Here,
the “non-abelian projector” @xmath ( 1.85 ) in @xmath contains field
operators @xmath . Nevertheless, a representation of @xmath can be found
to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

as verified by plugging Eq. ( 1.93 ) into Eq. ( 1.92 ). Note here that
@xmath is not symmetric.

The component @xmath is determined by the Gauss law ( 1.68 ) which
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the contribution of @xmath vanishes in view of Eq. ( 1.86 ). To
solve Eq. ( 1.94 ) for @xmath , one may use the Helmholtz theorem to
write @xmath as the gradient field of some field operator @xmath since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then write @xmath and solve the Gauss law ( 1.94 ) by @xmath .
The operator @xmath then is explicitly given as a functional of field
operators @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

One may subsequently verify the commutation relation ( 1.91 ).

Before we go on to derive the Hamiltonian operator from the classical
one ( 1.67 ) by promoting the fields @xmath and @xmath to their
operator-valued counterparts, operator ordering is briefly discussed,
cf. Ref. [ ChrLee80 ] . Gauge fixing gives rise to non-trivial factors
in the Hamiltonian, as can be seen in the path integral formalism. Using
the the Faddeev–Popov trick [ FadPop67 ] , the kinetic energy @xmath
yields ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The result is reminiscent of the Laplace–Beltrami
operator @xmath with a non-trivial metric @xmath and its determinant
@xmath , see Ref. [ Nak90 ] ,

@xmath (1.97)

as pointed out in Refs. [ ChrLee80 , Kuc86 ] . The Weyl gauge operators
are then in Cartesian coordinates, whereas the Coulomb gauge operators
correspond to curvilinear ones. In contrast to Ref. [ ChrLee80 ] , we
here have no Cartesian coordinates to start with, since the temporal
Coulomb gauge was already fixed on the classical level.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the state norm @xmath was chosen such as to cancel the group
volume, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the Faddeev–Popov determinant. The last line in Eq. ( 1.4 ) is
obtained by taking the hermitian adjoint of the product @xmath with
respect to the inner product in functional space when bringing the
@xmath to the left. One can read off from Eq. ( 1.4 ) the form of the
kinetic part of the Hamiltonian operator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The decomposition of the momentum operator @xmath with the expressions (
1.93 ) and ( 1.96 ) can now be inserted into ( 1.100 ), giving rise to
four terms. Let us consider these separately. One term reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.101)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

and is recognized as the Coulomb interaction of external charges via the
Coulomb Green function @xmath . Using the relation @xmath as well as the
identification of the dynamical gluonic charge @xmath in ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 With
the conventions used here, @xmath . Thus, one arrives at @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we further find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.103)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.104)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

two contributions that account for the Coulomb interaction of dynamical
and external charges. Using the identity @xmath we get two further
contributions to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.105)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

namely the kinetic energy of transverse gluons as well as the Coulomb
interaction of dynamical charges. The magnetic potential operator @xmath
can be obtained straightforwardly from its classical counterpart in
Eq. ( 1.67 ) since it only comprises the coordinates @xmath . It simply
yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Adding the contributions ( 1.101 ), ( 1.103 ), ( 1.104 ), ( 1.105 ) and
( 1.106 ), we finally arrive at the Hamiltonian operator in temporal
Coulomb gauge. In explicit notation, it reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, we have defined the total charge density

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For future reference, let us write down the explicit form of the Coulomb
operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and of the inverse ghost operator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Christ and Lee [ ChrLee80 ] derived the same result as in Eq. ( 1.107 )
using a different approach. They quantized the Cartesian coordinates in
Weyl gauge and only subsequently transformed into the Coulomb gauge,
keeping the Gauss law as a constraint on the wave functional. Here, we
were able to reinforce the Gauss law as a operator identity, having used
Dirac’s concept of constrained quantization. It is reassuring to see
that the two methods produce the same result for the Yang–Mills energy
spectrum, keeping in mind that in general such an equivalence cannot be
established [ Kuc86 , RomTat89 , Sch90 , Lol90 , Sha00 ] .

## Chapter 2 Infrared ghost dominance

The complex structure of the Yang–Mills Hamiltonian ( 1.107 ) derived in
the previous section does not allow for a rigorous calculation of the
energy spectrum or the Green functions. Perturbation theory in the gauge
coupling @xmath provides a possibility to describe interactions with
high momentum transfer in QCD where asymptotic freedom guarantees that
@xmath can be treated as a small parameter. The infrared sector,
however, is not accessible by perturbative methods since we know from
the renormalization group that @xmath increases as we go to lower
energies. An understanding of long-range interactions of quarks and
gluons thus calls for nonperturbative methods. Color confinement , the
experimental evidence that quarks and gluons have never been detected as
asymptotic states and must be confined into color singlets, is to date
one of the most challenging topics in theoretical physics.

By means of lattice calculations, it has been possible to penetrate the
infrared nonperturbative sector of QCD and uncover a confining potential
between (static) quarks [ Gre03 , Bal00 ] . At present, however,
available lattice sizes do not suffice to describe the Green functions
in the deep infrared [ Fis+07 , FisAlkRei02 ] . Despite the ever-growing
computational power, a numerical simulation of confinement on the
lattice will always fall short of proving it. Nevertheless, the
achievements of the lattice community with calculations that are
particularly reliable in the intermediate momentum regime, are
indispensable for the mutual dialogue with the continuum approach. A
joint theoretical investigation of QCD phenomena is a promising project
for progressive research.

The continuum approach has the intriguing feature that the asymptotic
infrared limit can be studied analytically. In the last decade, a new
understanding of infrared QCD has arisen from studying continuum
Yang–Mills (YM) theory via Dyson–Schwinger equations. The Landau gauge
has the advantage of being covariant, allowing for straightforward
perturbative calculations, and it therefore encouraged many to intensive
investigation of the infrared properties of YM theory [ SmeAlkHau97 ,
SmeHauAlk98 , Fis06 ] . In Coulomb gauge, non-covariance brings about
severe technical difficulties which are only recently on the verge of
being overcome [ WatRei06 , WatRei07a , WatRei07b ] . Nevertheless, the
Coulomb gauge might be the more efficient choice to identify the
nonabelian degrees of freedom. It is well-known that screening and
anti-screening contributions to the interquark potential are neatly
separated in Coulomb gauge perturbation theory [ Khr70 ] . As for the
infrared domain, the Gribov–Zwanziger scenario serves as a transparent
confinement mechanism [ Gri78 , Zwa97 ] .

In this chapter, the Gribov–Zwanziger scenario shall be introduced and
analyzed in the temporal Coulomb gauge. It will be thus possible to
provide information on the asymptotic infrared behavior of the Green
functions and recover a linearly rising potential between static color
charges, i.e. heavy quark confinement. A full numerical calculation in
chapter 3 will be seen to reproduce the infrared asymptotics given here
analytically. Moreover, the infrared asymptotics of Landau gauge can be
retrieved from a generalization of the results in the temporal Coulomb
gauge.

### 2.1 Gribov–Zwanziger scenario of confinement

Having outlined the issues of redundant degrees of freedom in section
1.2 , a discussion of gauge fixing in the context of Yang–Mills theory
may follow naturally. In particular, we have touched upon the issue of
uniqueness of a gauge fixing condition condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Uniqueness was shown to be locally guaranteed by the criterion ( 1.41 )
which reads for the classical YM theory

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Locally means here that only a small neighborhood of the point @xmath in
configuration space that satisfies ( 2.1 ) is considered. An
infinitesimal gauge transformation according to Eq. ( 1.29 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

shows that @xmath is the unique solution to ( 2.1 ) only if Eq. ( 2.2 )
holds. Let us now turn to the quantum theory in the Schrödinger picture.
Gribov [ Gri78 ] discovered that if the Coulomb gauge condition @xmath
is chosen, uniqueness of its solution @xmath is lost if the matrix
@xmath with components

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

develops zero modes. From the explicit form of @xmath this is seen to
happen for large magnitudes of @xmath , i.e. in the nonperturbative
domain. The field configuration @xmath can then shown to be connected by
a gauge transformation to one or more @xmath , called Gribov copies ,
that also obey the Coulomb gauge condition. Gribov copies lead to
incorrect results in the calculation of expectation values due to
over-counting of physically equivalent field configurations. The
criterion for avoiding Gribov copies is the quantum analogue of Eq. (
2.2 ), noting that @xmath , and reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is illuminating to see how the above uniqueness condition follows
from a direct calculation. Consider a gauge transformation @xmath where
@xmath is very close to unity. The field @xmath is a Gribov copy of
@xmath if

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Since the matrices @xmath are regular and @xmath are linearly
independent, Eq. ( 2.6 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, if the condition ( 2.5 ) is fulfilled, then @xmath and @xmath ,
and the solution @xmath of the gauge fixing condition ( 2.1 ) is unique.

The configuration space is therefore decomposed into the so-called
Gribov regions , alternating in sign of the Faddeev–Popov determinant
@xmath . By definition, the first Gribov region @xmath contains the
perturbative vacuum, @xmath , and has a positive definite Faddeev–Popov
determinant,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to avoid Gribov copies, it is necessary to restrict the
configuration space to the first Gribov region @xmath , bounded by the
Gribov horizon @xmath , see Fig. 2.1 . Practically, it is not
straightforward to implement this restriction. One might naturally ask
whether a gauge fixing condition exists, different from the Coulomb
gauge, for which the Faddeev–Popov determinant is manifestly positive
and the Gribov problem does not arise. However, a theorem due to Singer
[ Sin78 ] states that (on a three- or four-dimensional compact manifold)
there exists no gauge fixing condition that does not have the Gribov
problem.

A restriction to @xmath can be realized by an action principle, as noted
by Polyakov ¹ ¹ 1 See footnote in Ref. [ Gri77 ] . . It requires that
the @xmath norm of the gauge field @xmath be minimal along its orbit,
parametrised by the gauge transformations @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The stationarity condition sets @xmath and the minimum condition yields
@xmath . Action principles are a common technique to implement gauge
fixing on the lattice [ ManOgi86 ] .

However, the restriction to @xmath is not sufficient to exclude gauge
copies. Various examples [ JacMuzReb78 , Hen79 ] indicate that there are
Gribov copies inside @xmath . A proof of existence was given by Ref. [
SemFra82 ] , see also Ref. [ DelZwa91 ] . These remnant Gribov copies
show that the minima of @xmath in Eq. ( 2.9 ) are degenerate. Lattice
calculations confirm that there are indeed Gribov copies inside @xmath [
ManOgi90 , Mar93 , Qua+07 ] . A further restriction of configuration
space is needed to completely exclude Gribov copies. The fundamental
modular region @xmath is defined to be the set of unique ² ² 2 Up to
global gauge transformations. absolute minima of the functional ( 2.9 )
among gauge orbits,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

It was shown that the interior of @xmath is indeed free of Gribov copies
whereas the boundary @xmath still contains Gribov copies [ Baa92 ] . The
gauge condition specified by Eq. ( 2.10 ) is also termed “minimal
Coulomb gauge” [ Zwa98 ] . Although conceptually vital, the fundamental
modular region as yet lacks the utility for explicit calculations.
Little is known about the boundary @xmath . Fortunately, it was shown in
Ref. [ Zwa03 ] by means of stochastic quantization that despite the
Gribov copies inside @xmath , expectation values are computed correctly
if the integration domain is @xmath instead of @xmath . This is due to
the finding [ Zwa94 ] that the dominant field configurations lie on
@xmath , the common boundary of @xmath and @xmath . ³ ³ 3 In this
context, let us mention that the field configurations on @xmath can be
identified as center vortices. These field configurations were found to
drive the confining mechanism on the lattice in Coulomb gauge [ GreOle03
] as well as in Landau gauge [ GatLanRei04 ] . We shall therefore
restrict the configuration space to @xmath in the following. Gauge
fields @xmath are always transverse and the superscript @xmath is
abandoned for brevity.

The restriction to a compact region in configuration space, be it @xmath
or @xmath , has important consequences for the infrared sector of the
theory. Due to asymptotic freedom, the ultraviolet is not affected by
the horizon since when the coupling becomes small, all relevant
configurations are in the vicinity of @xmath . It was shown that this
point always has a finite distance from the horizon [ DelZwa89 ] . The
nonperturbative infrared sector, on the other hand, can in principle be
governed by any region within @xmath . From statistical mechanics, we
know that in a compact sphere with radius @xmath of high dimension
@xmath , the probability distribution is concentrated at the boundary,
due to the “entropy factor” @xmath . If Yang–Mills theory is regularized
on the lattice, Zwanziger argued [ Zwa97 ] that the situation is
comparable to the latter example, the dimensionality @xmath even
diverges in the continuum limit. In the asymptotic infrared, the
momentum space ghost propagator

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.11)
  -- -- -- --------

is therefore expected to diverge strongly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

due to divergent eigenvalues of the operator @xmath on the Gribov
horizon. Eq. ( 2.12 ) is known as the horizon condition . Gribov
discussed perturbatively in Ref. [ Gri78 ] that only for @xmath the
ghost propagator @xmath can have a pole. Zwanziger’s horizon condition (
2.12 ), on the other hand, is a nonperturbative statement. Since the
Coulomb potential @xmath between external color charges is proportional
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

the infrared enhancement of @xmath from effects on the Gribov horizon
might be the driving mechanism for @xmath to diverge as @xmath and for a
linear confining potential between heavy quarks to emerge. This notion
is known as the Gribov–Zwanziger scenario of confinement in the Coulomb
gauge.

### 2.2 Stochastic vacuum in Coulomb gauge

Vacuum expectation values that are solely dominated by entropy in
configuration space are intriguingly simple. According to the
Gribov–Zwanziger scenario, infrared correlation functions of Coulomb
gauge YM theory fall under this category and hence can asymptotically be
described by a vacuum wave functional @xmath stochastically distributed
in configuration space. Whilst the full structure of a vacuum
expectation value, in particular the perturbative regime, is sensitive
to a non-trivial probability distribution @xmath , the infrared limit is
fully determined by the geometry in phase space, and one may write
@xmath to find correct results [ Zwa03a ] . This choice of the wave
functional is here referred to as the stochastic vacuum and suggests the
following schematic prescription for the asymptotic evaluation of
Coulomb gauge expectation values of any operator @xmath , depending on
momentum @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.14)
  -- -- -- --------

We introduced a factor @xmath to normalize the wave functional, @xmath ,
which is possible in the compact region @xmath . A legitimate question
to ask is whether the factor of the Faddeev–Popov determinant @xmath
does not spoil the argument that the probability distribution is
strongly enhanced at the Gribov horizon. Recall that the Gribov horizon
@xmath was defined as the boundary of @xmath where the Faddeev–Popov
matrix @xmath picks up vanishing eigenvalues. Hence, the factor @xmath
will suppress the probability distribution on @xmath . Nevertheless, it
is not clear a priori whether this suppression is strong enough to spoil
the enhancement of entropy and we shall put forth as a working
hypothesis that it does not. ⁴ ⁴ 4 As a simple example [ Zwa91 ] ,
consider a @xmath -dimensional sphere with @xmath and let the
probability distribution @xmath be damped at the boundary by a factor
@xmath with order @xmath . The entropy factor from the integral measure,
@xmath , enhances the probability at the boundary. For large dimensions
@xmath , @xmath is then sharply peaked at @xmath , provided @xmath ,
despite the damping factor. On the lattice, the density of eigenmodes of
the Faddeev–Popov operator is under current investigation [ GreOleZwa04
] .

Although the prescription ( 2.14 ) for infrared correlations can be
motivated from the Gribov–Zwanziger scenario, it cannot be taken for
granted that the solutions thus obtained are mathematically unique on
the one hand, or physical on the other. To further contemplate Eq. (
2.14 ), note that @xmath is the correct wave functional in @xmath
dimensional Yang–Mills theory [ Raj88 , HetHos89 ] . However, the
entropy argument is lacking in @xmath dimensions where the gauge field
becomes a compact quantum mechanical variable. In @xmath dimensions, the
dynamics might be substantially different. After all, we will try to
find the vacuum wave functional in @xmath dimensions that describes not
only the infrared limit but also ultraviolet correlations. In the
Hamiltonian formalism, the Ritz-Rayleigh variational method gives the
possibility to introduce a variational parameter into the wave
functional and determine it by minimizing the energy. This method will
be discussed in chapter 3 to discuss the full momentum dependence of the
Green functions. It will turn out that the full solutions agree with the
solution in the stochastic vacuum for asymptotically small momenta [
FeuRei04 , FeuRei04a , ReiFeu04 , EppReiSch07 ] . Turning the argument
around, these findings support the Gribov–Zwanziger scenario and the
notion of a stochastically distributed probability distribution @xmath
in the infrared. The investigation of the stochastic vacuum pursued in
this chapter is quite different from a variational approach in that it
lacks equations of motion arising from minimizing the energy. However,
we may extract information from the geometry in configuration space. In
the following section, it will be shown how the boundary conditions of
the Gribov region give rise to Dyson–Schwinger integral equations that
determine the properties of the Green functions.

### 2.3 Dyson–Schwinger equations

A convenient tool for the evaluation of expectation values are
generating functionals. In particular, the Dyson–Schwinger equations
that intercorrelate all Green functions can be straightforwardly derived
from the path integral representation of a generating functional. The
classification of Green functions into full , connected and proper Green
functions is common and the same applies for generating functionals [
ItzZub ] . Full Green functions corresponding to the stochastic vacuum
@xmath can be found by

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.15)
  -- -- -- --------

if we define the generating functional @xmath of full Green functions by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easily verified that Eq. ( 2.15 ) indeed reproduces the
expectation values in the stochastic vacuum, see Eq. ( 2.14 ).
Dyson–Schwinger equations follow from a quite simple statement, namely
that the (path) integral of a total derivative can be expressed by
boundary terms. This idea is applied to the path integration in
configuration space, bounded by the Gribov horizon. The gauge-fixing
procedure endowed us the Faddeev–Popov determinant @xmath in the path
integral, see Eq. ( 2.4 ). One is thus led to the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

since at the Gribov horizon the Faddeev–Popov determinant vanishes by
definition, @xmath . Applying to Eq. ( 2.17 ) a functional derivative
@xmath , dividing by @xmath and setting sources to zero, @xmath , gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to make sense of the above expression, first note that ⁵ ⁵ 5 It
is convenient to denote by @xmath a matrix with elements @xmath in color
and (continuous) coordinate space. The trace “ @xmath ” sums up diagonal
elements in both the latter spaces. For notation, see also appendix A .
[ FeuRei04 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the tree-level ghost-gluon vertex, here matrix-valued
with components

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Second, plugging ( 2.19 ) into ( 2.18 ), the object @xmath can be
identified as the dressed connected ghost-gluon vertex that may be
decomposed by ⁶ ⁶ 6 If the generating functional is Gaussian, Wick’s
theorem infers the factorization in the first line of Eq. ( 2.21 ).
Without the use of Wick’s theorem, as for the stochastic vacuum, one may
use functional methods [ Zwa03 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (2.21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

into the proper ghost-gluon vertex @xmath with propagators attached,
namely the gluon propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the (here matrix-valued) ghost propagator @xmath , with matrix
elements

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The present calculations circumvent the common introduction of ghost
fields by interpreting @xmath as a Gaussian integral over Grassmann
variables. In fact, the introduction of Grassmann fields and their
sources spoils the argument that boundary terms from the Gribov horizon
vanish [ Zwa03 ] . It is therefore advisory to stick to the functional
determinant @xmath and not to introduce ghost sources. Nevertheless, we
refer to @xmath as the “ghost” propagator and @xmath as the
“ghost-gluon” vertex.

With the above definitions, the Dyson–Schwinger equation ( 2.18 )
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (2.24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It would be pleasant to invert the gluon propagator in Eq. ( 2.24 ), but
the transverse projector @xmath is singular. Yet, without loss of
generality, we can define the matrix @xmath by @xmath and its inverse,
@xmath . The translationally invariant function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

is referred to as the inverse gluon propagator. ⁷ ⁷ 7 Note that @xmath
is inverse to @xmath only in the transverse subspace of the full Lorentz
space,

@xmath (2.26)

One can now deduce from Eq. ( 2.24 ) the coordinate space gluon DSE in
its most useful form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 2.2 , the gluon DSE ( 2.27 ) is interpreted diagrammatically. By
the loop diagram on the r.h.s., the so-called ghost loop , the gluon
propagator @xmath is correlated with the ghost propagator @xmath . The
latter needs to be determined by its own DSE. To derive it [ FeuRei04 ]
, first note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Multiplying the above equation with @xmath from the left and @xmath from
the right gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the expectation value of ( 2.29 ) and using the identity ( 2.21 )
for the connected ghost-gluon vertex yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the ghost self energy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

A multiplication with @xmath from the left and @xmath from the right
gives the final form of the ghost DSE in coordinate space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

shown in Fig. 2.2 . Let us emphasize that Eq. ( 2.32 ) was not derived
from the path integral, in contrast to the gluon DSE ( 2.27 ). The
“operator method” using Eq. ( 2.29 ) offers an alternative to the
conventional path integral method, without the introduction of ghost
sources. Restriction to the Gribov region @xmath is ensured by cutting
off the path integral at @xmath , the operator method formally also
accounts for this restriction since the operator @xmath in Eq. ( 2.29 )
is not defined on @xmath .

Having at hand the gluon DSE ( 2.27 ) and the ghost DSE ( 2.32 ) shown
in Fig. 2.2 , one may now try and solve for the two-point Green
functions (“propagators”) @xmath and @xmath . However, the proper
ghost-gluon vertex that appears in both DSEs couples the propagators to
higher @xmath -point functions, thus giving rise to the typical infinite
tower of coupled integral equations. After establishing a connection to
the Landau gauge, an approximation for the ghost-gluon vertex will be
motivated in section 2.5 which makes a solution for @xmath and @xmath
feasible.

### 2.4 Connection to Landau gauge

Linear covariant gauges are a natural choice for perturbative
calculations in the Lagrangian formalism. With Lorentz invariance being
manifest and after Wick rotation to Euclidean space, perturbative loop
integrals can be computed with standard methods [ Smirnov ] . However,
this is at the cost of losing a positive definite metric in Hilbert
space. One cannot simultaneously maintain locality, positivity and
manifest Lorentz invariance [ Yndurain ] . A Hamiltonian approach is
thus obscured and the potential between static quarks as it occurs in
the Coulomb gauge Hamiltonian is not accessible in the Landau gauge. The
confinement problem must therefore be studied by alternative means,
e.g. the Kugo–Ojima confinement criterion [ KugOji79 , Kug95 ] .

Usually, the class of linear covariant gauge conditions @xmath , is
implemented in the path integral by means of the Faddeev–Popov method.
The arbitrary function @xmath is integrated out with a Gaussian
weighting of width @xmath , which effectively smears of the Lorenz gauge
condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

controlled by an arbitrary parameter @xmath . Apart from the
Faddeev–Popov determinant @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

the YM Lagrangian is thus supplemented by a gauge fixing term @xmath .
The Landau gauge is then obtained in the limit @xmath . From gauge
invariance, a Slavnov–Taylor identity can be derived [ Sla72 ] that
states that the longitudinal part of the gluon propagator remains
unchanged by radiative corrections,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is important to realize that during calculations, @xmath is kept
non-zero, so that the gluon propagator has an inverse. The fields @xmath
are therefore not transverse, only the Landau gauge correlation
functions are. In particular, the ghost-gluon vertex in Landau gauge
does not have a transverse projector attached to its gluon leg, since
the transversality is imposed “off-shell”. This is in contrast to the
constrained quantization in temporal Coulomb gauge, where the
transversality condition is enforced “on-shell” and the operators @xmath
are manifestly transverse. ⁸ ⁸ 8 The terminology using “on-shell” and
“off-shell” to describe the gauge-fixing technique is encountered, e.g.,
in Ref. [ Zwa03 ] .

The Gribov problem affects the configuration space in Landau gauge just
like it does for Coulomb gauge. In fact, the Faddeev–Popov gauge fixing
procedure in Landau gauge gives rise to the Faddeev–Popov determinant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and one cannot miss to acknowledge the similarity to the one in Coulomb
gauge. It was pointed out by Gribov in his seminal paper [ Gri77 ] that
if Wick rotation is employed, the Landau gauge condition becomes
equivalent to the Coulomb gauge condition. The dimension @xmath of
Minkowski spacetime infers that @xmath after Wick rotation, as opposed
to @xmath in the temporal Coulomb gauge.

Recall the Gribov–Zwanziger scenario in the Coulomb gauge. The entropy
argument for infrared dominant field configurations at the Gribov
horizon along with the horizon condition ( 2.12 ) for the ghost
propagator applies to the Landau gauge in Euclidean space just the same
[ Zwa94 ] . One may therefore expect that the infrared limit in Landau
gauge yields the same set of integral equations as for the Coulomb
gauge, with the dimension shifted to @xmath . To see how it comes about,
consider the expression for a Landau gauge-fixed expectation value,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the weight of field configurations is determined by the Euclidean
Yang–Mills action. Shifting the field variable by @xmath , the weight
acquires the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and one recognizes that to zeroth order of the strong coupling expansion
in @xmath , the evaluation of expectation values depends only on the
Faddeev–Popov determinant [ Zwa03 ] and is therefore equivalent to the
stochastic vacuum ( 2.14 ), with the difference that the Faddeev–Popov
determinant in ( 2.36 ) is to be computed in @xmath dimensional
Euclidean Lorentz space.

The full structure of Landau gauge Dyson–Schwinger equations was studied
intensively in the past decade [ AlkSme00 , Fis06 ] . It turned out that
the infrared sector of the solutions is asymptotically determined by the
set of equations shown in Fig. 2.2 . Apparently, the strong coupling
expansion in the Landau gauge Lagrangian formalism accounts for the
correct infrared physics, while in the Coulomb gauge Hamiltonian
formalism the stochastic vacuum is a simple but sufficient state to
describe infrared correlations. The approximation needed to arrive at a
solution to the coupled Dyson–Schwinger equations shown in Fig. 2.2
concerns the ghost-gluon vertex. This will be the topic of the next
section.

### 2.5 Ghost-gluon vertex

In gauges where the gluon propagation is transverse, such as Coulomb and
Landau gauge, the ghost-gluon vertex has the feature of
nonrenormalization. In this context, one can motivate that the vertex is
approximately tree-level for all momentum configurations. The solutions
to all Green functions will qualitatively depend on the simple structure
of the ghost-gluon vertex and therefore this section is devoted to
assess the tree-level approximation.

As far as renormalization is concerned, the ghost-gluon vertex in
Coulomb or Landau gauge is quite an unusual Green function. Whereas one
usually encounters ultraviolet divergences in a perturbative expansion
of a Green function, the ghost-gluon vertex appears to be a finite
function, to all orders of perturbation theory. This can be understood
by considering a Dyson–Schwinger equation for this vertex. In the Landau
gauge, the ghost-gluon vertex Dyson–Schwinger equation was derived in
Ref. [ Sch+05 ] and can be represented in momentum space as shown in
Fig. 2.3 . The proper ghost-gluon vertex @xmath is related to its
tree-level counterpart @xmath and a connected four-point function @xmath
that will be explicitly defined in section 3.5 . Here, it shall suffice
to recognize the generic structure of the loop diagram,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taylor anticipated in Ref. [ Tay71 ] the structure of the
Dyson–Schwinger equation ( 2.39 ) and perceived that the contribution of
@xmath to the loop integration can be factored out due to the
transversality of the gluon propagator. In momentum space, with the
color structure suppressed, the contraction of the gluon propagator
@xmath with the tree-level ghost-gluon vertex, @xmath , yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the degree of divergence of the @xmath -integration is
diminished. Landau gauge perturbation theory explicitly confirms that
the divergent part of the @xmath contribution to the vertex is
proportional to @xmath , i.e. it vanishes in the Landau gauge limit, see
e.g. [ DavOslTar96 ] . Taylor further argued that if the loop diagram
does not develop any poles in the infrared, one can take the infrared
limit of the incoming ghost momentum @xmath and find from Eq. ( 2.39 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the labelling of momenta, see Fig. 2.3 . Since one particular
momentum configuration, given by Eq. ( 2.41 ), is found where the
ghost-gluon vertex is finite, its multiplicative renormalization
constant @xmath , being momentum independent, has to be finite, @xmath .
In an appropriate renormalization scheme, @xmath can defined to be
trivial, @xmath . Multiplicative renormalization of the bare ghost-gluon
vertex @xmath , understood here as a vector, is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and relates @xmath to the renormalized vertex @xmath . Since in the
Landau gauge limit, @xmath , one has @xmath , we can drop all
dependences on the regulator @xmath . The dependence of @xmath on the
dimensionful renormalization scale @xmath must drop out since @xmath and
@xmath are both dimensionless. The number @xmath is then defined by a
renormalization prescription, i.e. a certain momentum configuration
@xmath is chosen for which @xmath . In order to avoid cuts in the
complex plane, @xmath is usually chosen in the perturbative regime.
Nevertheless, the renormalization prescription with @xmath is a
convenient one since Eq. ( 2.41 ) then infers that @xmath . Marciano and
Pagels [ MarPag78 ] pointed out that for the symmetric point @xmath with
@xmath , one generally has @xmath (cf. [ LerSme02 ] ). The symmetric
point with @xmath , however, does not necessarily give @xmath since the
infrared limits of momenta are not interchangeable, as argued below in
section 3.5 . In Ref. [ CucMenMih04 ] , the choice @xmath was advocated.
In the following, we will set @xmath , but come back to it in chapter 4
.

Due to the nonrenormalization of the ghost-gluon vertex and the related
property ( 2.41 ), recent Landau gauge DSE studies used a tree-level
ghost-gluon vertex for all momentum configurations [ AlkSme00 , Fis06 ]
. Of course, this approximation needs to be assessed further. It was
discussed in Ref. [ Sch+05 ] that with the tree-level vertex as a
starting point, the iteration of the vertex DSE ( 2.39 ) will not lead
too far away from the tree-level value. The changes stay in the range of
@xmath . Furthermore, lattice calculations [ CucMenMih04 , Ste+05 ,
Maa07 ] confirmed that the vertex is basically tree-level. In Fig. 2.4 ,
the DSE results along with the lattice results for the vertex are shown.
Thus, strong support is available that the perturbative arguments of
Taylor, stated above, hold in the nonperturbative regime.

In Coulomb gauge, the argumentation for a tree-level ghost-gluon vertex
is similar. Although the perturbative calculations in Coulomb gauge are
far from trivial [ WatRei06 , WatRei07a , WatRei07b ] , the DSE for the
ghost-gluon vertex can be shown to reproduce the Landau gauge struture
depicted in Fig. 2.3 [ WatRei06 ] . The gluon propagator is transverse
as well and therefore Taylor’s reasoning for nonrenormalization can also
be applied to the Coulomb gauge. Within a set of interpolating gauges,
the nonrenormalization of the ghost-gluon vertex can be established as
well, considering the Coulomb gauge limit [ FisZwa05 ] . The Landau
gauge calculations shown in Fig. 2.4 were also carried out in @xmath
spatial dimensions and the results were qualitatively the same [ Sch+05
] . Therefore, it seems to be an appropriate approximation to the
Coulomb gauge DSEs to use a tree-level vertex instead of a proper
vertex, analogously to the Landau gauge,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.6 Analytical solution for propagators

The approximation scheme ( 2.43 ) exhibited in the previous section
enables us to find a solution to the coupled set of Dyson–Schwinger
equations. With the Coulomb and Landau gauge differing in the number
@xmath of spatial dimensions only, it is convenient to keep @xmath as an
unspecified parameter. The gluon DSE ( 2.27 ) can be transformed into
momentum space defining the scalar gluon propagator @xmath by ⁹ ⁹ 9 Note
that in momentum space, the matrix notation of coordinate space is no
longer used. Moreover, we simplify the notation henceforth by abandoning
the bold-face typesetting for spatial vectors. Latin Lorentz indices now
range from @xmath to @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Translational invariance allows us to write @xmath as a function of one
variable which makes momentum space calculations convenient. The color
structure of propagators is chosen to be diagonal, i.e. @xmath . In the
approximation scheme with a tree-level ghost-gluon vertex, it is
verified straightforwardly in a perturbative expansion to all orders
(“rainbow expansion”) that color-diagonal propagators solve the set of
integral equations. Using Eq. ( 2.11 ) for the definition of the
momentum space ghost propagator @xmath , Fourier transformation of the
gluon DSE ( 2.27 ) expressed in terms of @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the tree-level ghost-gluon vertex in momentum space is derived by
Fourier transform from Eq. ( 2.20 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The color trace in ( 2.45 ) was computed using @xmath , see appendix A .
Eq. ( 2.45 ) is seen to be manifestly transverse. This follows from the
fact that in the derivation of the DSEs in section 2.3 the Coulomb gauge
condition was imposed “on-shell”. We shall see in section 2.8 that the
“off-shell” gauge condition leads to a (slightly) different gluon DSE.
In Eq. ( 2.45 ), we can take the trace in Lorentz space to find, using
@xmath and Eq. ( 2.6 ) and writing @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ghost DSE ( 2.32 ) can be Fourier transformed in the same manner.
With a tree-level ghost-gluon vertex, it reads in momentum space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 2.48 ) can be put in a form that explicitly satisfies the horizon
condition ( 2.12 ) by subtracting @xmath at zero momentum. This
subtraction does not introduce an extra parameter since by the horizon
condition ( 2.12 ), @xmath , and we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the ghost DSE with an integral that converges more strongly in the
ultraviolet than the one in Eq. ( 2.48 ). In the ultraviolet sector, the
horizon condition can be used to remove ultraviolet divergences in the
ghost DSE.

The set of equations ( 2.47 ) and ( 2.49 ) was first solved without
approximations in Refs. [ LerSme02 , Zwa02 ] by a power law ansatz. The
derivation and the solution is reviewed here, and some subtleties are
pointed out.

With power law ansätze for the propagators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

the integrals in ( 2.47 ) and ( 2.49 ) turn into linear combinations of
a particularly simple kind of integrals we refer to as two-point
integrals ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

In appendix B , explicit solutions for the two-point integrals ( 2.51 )
are given and their convergence properties are discussed. The gluon DSE
( 2.47 ) may be rewritten in terms of two-point integrals as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and it converges in the ultraviolet (as @xmath ) for @xmath . Infrared
divergences are absent so long as @xmath .

In the ghost DSE ( 2.49 ), the horizon condition allowed for a
subtraction which in turn improves the UV convergence. The two-point
integral occurring in the “unrenormalized” DSE ( 2.48 ) is divergent,
but it can be unambiguously split into a momentum-independent divergent
part and a regular part, see appendix B . The divergent part is
subtracted using the horizon condition in ( 2.49 ) and the formulae (
B.6 ) for @xmath yield the correct values for the regular part. Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the remark “reg.” indicates that the regular part of @xmath is
taken. The integrals in ( 2.53 ) are then UV-convergent if @xmath . In
the infrared, poles are avoided for @xmath . Only values for @xmath and
@xmath are considered for which the integrals converge.

Solving a well-defined (convergent) set of integral equations, we can
rescale the integration variable in ( 2.51 ) by @xmath , and readily
find that @xmath with some dimensionless functions @xmath . These power
law solutions can be plugged into the DSEs ( 2.47 ) and ( 2.49 ) and a
relation between the exponents @xmath and @xmath is gained,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 2.54 ) is referred to as the “ sum rule (for power law
exponents)”.

Let us emphasize that the sum rule ( 2.54 ) can be directly traced back
to the nonrenormalization of the ghost-gluon vertex [ SchLedRei06 ] .
Following Ref. [ WatAlk01 ] , a quite general ansatz for the proper
ghost-gluon vertex is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constraint @xmath guarantees the independence of the
renormalization scale @xmath , i.e. nonrenormalization of the vertex. It
is readily shown that the sum rule ( 2.54 ) is not affected by a
dressing of the ghost-gluon vertex such as ( 2.55 ), since it turns into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Any consequence of the sum rule is therefore understood as due to the
nonrenormalization of the ghost-gluon vertex.

By virtue of the sum rule ( 2.54 ), one of the exponents @xmath and
@xmath can be eliminated. We choose to define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

and express @xmath in terms of @xmath .

The integrals in ( 2.47 ) and ( 2.49 ) can now be written down
concisely, using the formulae in ( B.6 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.58a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.58b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the dimensionless functions @xmath and @xmath were introduced,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.59a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.59b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Eq. ( 2.58 ) requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The infrared exponent @xmath is therefore implicitly defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Above, convergence of the integrals in the DSEs was discussed. In terms
of the exponent @xmath , the conditions for convergence can be
re-expressed. However, recall that the ultraviolet behavior of @xmath
and @xmath is not governed by the stochastic vacuum but by perturbation
theory. The power law behavior ( 2.50 ) is just regarded as a possible
infrared limit that will actually be realized (see chapter 3 ). Hence,
the restriction on the infrared exponents by analyzing the UV
convergence is spurious. Discarding UV criteria for both @xmath and
@xmath , we find from the condition that no divergences appear in the
infrared integration domain the relation @xmath . Moreover, the horizon
condition demands @xmath . Altogether, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in this range solutions to ( 2.61 ) are investigated. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10
According to the principle of locality, the Green functions should be
tempered distributions which restricts @xmath further. We do not focus
on this aspect here. Manipulating the gamma functions in ( 2.59 ), one
finds the compact expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

for finding @xmath . The solutions are shown in Fig. 2.5 . These are
exhaustive for @xmath in the range ( 2.62 ) and complete a recent
calculation [ Hub+07 ] .

For a given Euclidean dimension @xmath , several solutions for @xmath
are available. One of them can be found by algebraic manipulations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

as verified by plugging @xmath into Eq. ( 2.63 ). The other (irrational)
solutions @xmath and @xmath were determined numerically.

There are some exceptional points in the @xmath diagram that are only
solutions to Eq. ( 2.63 ) if approached in a certain direction. One of
them is the point @xmath that solves Eq. ( 2.63 ) if approached along
the line ( 2.64 ). This peculiarity appears for even dimensions @xmath
and integer values for @xmath . Setting

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.65)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , we approach in the limit @xmath the values for even @xmath
and integer @xmath . The parameter @xmath controls the slope @xmath of
the line on which the point @xmath is approached in a @xmath -diagram.
Choosing @xmath guarantees the integrability of infrared poles in the
ghost loop integral, see Eq. ( 2.62 ). Treating the @xmath expressions
that occur in ( 2.63 ) carefully, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Pochhammer symbol. Setting @xmath corresponds to
keeping a fixed dimension throughout the calculation. From Eq. ( 2.67 )
it can be deduced that for no values of @xmath the equation @xmath (
2.63 ) is solved if @xmath . Hence the failure of trying to find the
point @xmath as a Landau gauge solution [ FisAlk02 ] , with arguments in
Refs. [ AtkBlo98a , Zwa02 ] that this solution should exist. For the set
of points with @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find from ( 2.67 ) the simple result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Tuning @xmath , the points ( 2.68 ) are solutions to ( 2.63 ), at least
in principle. One may adopt the point of view that the dimension @xmath
is fixed and the points in Fig. 2.5 can only be approached along
vertical lines. In fact, rendering @xmath a variable is here not
understood in the context of dimensional regularization where
divergences are thus regularized. Rather, @xmath is here a fixed
parameter for which ( 2.63 ) needs to be solved. The exceptional points
( 2.68 ) are therefore discarded.

As seen in Fig. 2.5 , there are several solutions for @xmath as a
function of @xmath . How many solutions are found for a given dimension?
For even dimensions @xmath , Eq. ( 2.63 ) can be turned into a
polynomial equation in @xmath of degree @xmath which has the @xmath
integer solutions @xmath for @xmath given by Eq. ( 2.67 ). The double
root at @xmath is excluded by the horizon condition. Thus, these integer
solutions lie below (or on) the branch ( 2.64 ) looking somewhat odd in
Fig. 2.5 . There are further non-integer solutions for even dimensions,
@xmath at the most being real.

Apart from the branch @xmath in Eq. ( 2.64 ), there are two other
solutions @xmath and @xmath in the range in @xmath , see Fig. 2.5 . Let
us investigate the continuity of these three solution branches as
functions of @xmath , cf. [ Zwa03a ] . Here, we do not consider the
limit @xmath since the @xmath dimensional theory does not have any
degrees of freedom and power law solutions might not be appropriate.
Instead, we discuss the high- @xmath range. The Gribov–Zwanziger
scenario should work particularly well for higher-dimensional YM theory
where entropy is even more enhanced at the boundary of configuration
space. First of all, the solution @xmath holds for all @xmath . The two
other solutions in @xmath and @xmath in the interval @xmath connect to
the curves shown in Fig. 2.6 or higher @xmath . The upper solution
approximately yields @xmath for @xmath and oscillates around @xmath for
@xmath . It ceases to be real for @xmath . The lower solution matches
@xmath for @xmath , in agreement with Ref. [ Zwa03a ] , but oscillates
around @xmath for @xmath and becomes complex at @xmath . The continuity
of the solutions for @xmath as functions of @xmath is therefore
strongest for the solution @xmath which holds for all @xmath .

A restriction on the set of solutions in Fig. 2.5 comes from dealing
with only power laws for the propagators, due to the ansatz ( 2.50 ).
The two-point integrals in ( 2.51 ) cease to be power laws if @xmath .
Actually, they cease to exist, due to a logarithmic ultraviolet
divergence. We have argued that these ultraviolet divergences are
subtracted by some renormalization scheme in the perturbative sector.
One might therefore suggest to consider instead the integrals @xmath
subtracted at @xmath and then approach @xmath . For instance, if @xmath
, then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.70)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Evidently, after subtraction of the ultraviolet divergence, the solution
of the two-point integral (with exponent zero) is a logarithm. These
functions call for a separate treatment. The allowed values of @xmath (
2.62 ) are therefore further restricted by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

to avoid a ghost loop that gives a logarithm. The lower solution branch
@xmath in Fig. 2.6 oscillates around the forbidden values ( 2.71 ) for
high @xmath , exactly yielding ( 2.71 ) for @xmath . A discussion on a
possible extension to solutions with logarithms will follow in section
2.8 .

To summarize this section, we solved the momentum space Dyson–Schwinger
equations of the stochastic vacuum with a tree-level ghost-gluon vertex
by power law ansätze and thoroughly discussed the validity of the
solutions. For the propagators in the temporal Coulomb and the Landau
gauge, with @xmath and @xmath , resp., the solutions are shown in Table
2.1 . In @xmath dimensional YM theory, the temporal Coulomb gauge
corresponds to @xmath and the Landau gauge to @xmath .

### 2.7 Linear confining potential

The Hamiltonian approach in the temporal Coulomb gauge allows for a
direct calculation of the potential energy between two static quarks.
Let the external charge density be given by two point charges, separated
by the distance @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The color vector @xmath was here chosen in the @xmath -direction of
@xmath , for convenience. From the Hamiltonian ( 1.107 ) the @xmath
dependent color Coulomb potential @xmath can be identified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

With Eq. ( 2.72 ), the Coulomb potential @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the self-energy of the quarks, @xmath .

An approximation is needed to express @xmath in terms of the known Green
function @xmath . In arriving at the solutions for the propagators in
the previous section, the ghost-gluon vertex was approximated to be at
tree-level. An approximation for writing @xmath in terms of @xmath that
is equivalent to the vertex approximation would be desirable. Let us
recall that factorizing the expectation value @xmath implies @xmath ,
see Eq. ( 2.21 ). In the same manner, we factorize

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.75)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Checking the validity of this approximation is an issue dealt with in
section 3.6 . The expression ( 2.74 ) thus turns into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging in @xmath from ( 2.50 ) permits an explicit evaluation of
@xmath , ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 In the first line, the pole at @xmath is regularized
by integrating only from @xmath to @xmath and letting @xmath at the end.
In the second line, partial integration is used repeatedly, and in the
last line an integral representation of the gamma function in Ref. [
Gradshteyn ] , formula @xmath was used.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (2.77)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

for values @xmath where this integral exists. In the latter interval,
two solutions of the DSEs exist, see Table 2.1 . One of them, found on
the branch @xmath in Fig. 2.5 , yields @xmath and thus a heavy quark
potential @xmath that rises linearly. From Eq. ( 2.77 ) one gets for
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the above linear potential, heavy quarks are held together by a
constant force given by the Coulomb string tension @xmath . Thus, heavy
quarks are confined.

Let us reflect on how we obtained such a heavy quark potential. It is
known that @xmath cannot rise stronger than linearly [ Sei78 , Bac86 ] ,
but it could saturate for large @xmath (see further discussions in the
chapters below). The linearity of the potential agrees exactly with
lattice calculations (see e.g. Ref. [ Bal00 ] ). Hence, support is given
for the validity of the result ( 2.78 ). It is enlightening to survey
the origin of this outcome. The Gribov–Zwanziger scenario was exhibited
in section 2.1 . Gribov copies necessitate the restriction of
configuration space and Zwanziger’s entropy arguments demand the horizon
condition. The simplest possible state, the stochastic vacuum, is deemed
sufficient to describe the infrared properties of the theory.
Dyson–Schwinger equations comprise the information on the Green
functions and with a few approximations, we thus arrived at the linear
potential ( 2.78 ). One might be astonished by the simplicity of these
ideas. In particular, discarding the entire Yang–Mills action @xmath
(setting @xmath ) and still producing sensible results seems puzzling.
The only physical content in the generating functional

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

that drives the (infrared) dynamics comes from the gauge fixing
procedure. ¹² ¹² 12 Note that the Faddeev–Popov determinant is gauge
invariant. This notion goes by the name infrared ghost dominance .
Merely the Faddeev–Popov kernel @xmath ( 2.34 ) and its boundary
conditions on the Gribov horizon @xmath are sufficient to give rise to a
linear confinement potential. The crucial infrared properties are thus
governed by entropy in configuration space.

A caveat in the above reasoning for quark confinement in the Coulomb
gauge is that the Coulomb potential @xmath is only an upper bound to the
gauge-invariant potential @xmath defined by the Wilson loop [ Zwa03b ] .
The Coulomb string tension is therefore larger or equal to the string
tension from the Wilson loop, @xmath . Hence, it cannot serve as an
order parameter for the deconfinement transition. The mechanism that
lowers the Coulomb string tension to its physical value is expected to
be due to constituent gluons along the color flux tube. So far, the
vacuum Green functions are unaware of the presence of external charges.
It will be the subject of chapter 5 to investigate the effect of the
back reaction of the external color charges onto the gauge field sector.

Some further critical remarks are at order.

-   Perturbative sector . If the solutions in the stochastic vacuum are
    independent of @xmath , how do they connect to the ultraviolet
    regime?

-   Approximations . How can we estimate the effect of the
    approximations made in deriving the Green functions?

-   Uniqueness . Are the power law solutions found unique? Which one of
    them is realized in physics?

In the following it will be attempted to give answers to the questions
listed above. The latter item is dedicated to the next section.

### 2.8 On the uniqueness of the solution

Whether the solutions for the propagators found in section 2.6 can be
regarded as unique solutions to the infrared sector of YM theory is an
important issue addressed in this section. A thorough discussion of
uniqueness would probably have to begin with the perturbative sector and
any approximations should be avoided. Here, we shall turn to a much
simpler task. In view of the approximated DSEs ( 2.47 ) and ( 2.49 ), it
is investigated if any of the solutions listed in Table 2.1 can be
considered unique.

#### A free parameter

First of all, let us start with a generalization of the DSEs. In the
context of renormalization in the perturbative regime, a local action is
indispensable and the transversality condition on the gauge field, be it
Coulomb gauge or Landau gauge, needs to be taken “off-shell”. A crucial
difference to the “on-shell” formulation is that the tree-level Green
functions are slightly different. In particular, the ghost-gluon vertex
does not come with a transversal projector attached to its gluon leg.
Instead of @xmath , the local formulation yields @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consequently, in the local formulation not all Feynman graphs are
transverse in the gluon momenta. For instance, the @xmath gluon
propagator in Landau gauge is known to be comprised by a gluon loop, a
ghost loop and a tadpole term. Only the sum of these diagrams yields a
transverse gluon propagator. This subtlety slightly alters the DSEs
derived in section 2.6 . We do not repeat the derivation here, but
simply state the results,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.81a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.81b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

as opposed to Eqs. ( 2.45 ) and ( 2.48 ). Here, the proper ghost-gluon
vertices were again replaced by the tree-level ones. The ghost DSE stays
the same. In the gluon DSE ( 2.81a ), on the other hand, note the tiny
difference that the ghost-gluon vertices @xmath are the ones defined in
Eq. ( 2.80 ). Although the nonperturbative ghost loop on the r.h.s. of
Eq. ( 2.81a ) should be transverse with a proper ghost-gluon vertex, ¹³
¹³ 13 If the ghost loop dominates in the infrared, it must itself be
transverse. it is generally not transverse with the tree-level
ghost-gluon vertices ( 2.80 ). Transversality is lost due to the
approximation of the vertex. To control the longitudinal contributions,
contract Eq. ( 2.81a ) with the tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath would give no contribution if both left and right hand
side of ( 2.81a ) were transverse. The sensitivity of the solution with
respect to @xmath thus measures the violation of transversality and the
quality of the approximation used.

Before we use the tensor @xmath , let us calculate the inverse gluon
propagator in Eq. ( 2.81a ) explicitly with the ansatz ( 2.50 ) for the
ghost propagator @xmath , ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 The tensor integral may be expanded
into scalar integrals by means of the Passarino–Veltman algorithm [
PasVel79 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.83)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with the function @xmath given by Eq. ( 2.59a ). The Lorentz structure
of @xmath is most easily recognized by the last line in ( 2.83 ). It
reproduces a familiar result from perturbation theory ( @xmath ): the
ghost loop has longitudinal components. Furthermore, one can see that
quite generally the ghost loop is not transverse. Transversality is
maintained if and only if the infrared exponent @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

as seen directly in Eq. ( 2.83 ). For other values of @xmath ,
projections of the gluon DSE ( 2.81a ) with the tensor @xmath in Eq. (
2.82 ) will depend on the value of @xmath . In this case, the
computation of the DSEs can be repeated to give a condition @xmath ,
analogously to Eq. ( 2.61 ). The latter condition yields a solution
@xmath that is not unique in the sense that it depends on @xmath . This
dependence is due to the approximation of the ghost-gluon vertex and
must be spurious. In principle, @xmath can be regarded as a free
parameter. A good approximation will give a weak @xmath -dependence.

We now focus on @xmath where one can derive that [ Maa+04 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

determines the value of @xmath , spuriously dependent on @xmath . For
@xmath , the two solutions @xmath and @xmath from Table 2.1 are
recovered. In Fig. 2.7 , it is shown that other solutions for @xmath can
be found if @xmath . The important feature to notice here is that while
@xmath depends on @xmath , @xmath is @xmath -independent. This can be
seen immediately from ( 2.84 ) by noting that @xmath yields a transverse
ghost loop. Although favored in Refs. [ Maa+04 , Hub+07 ] for @xmath
-dimensional Landau gauge, the solution @xmath is quite sensitive to
approximations in the off-shell formulations, and hence might be
unphysical. For the solution @xmath , the approximations made are more
trustworthy and it allows any value of @xmath . Further arguments in
favor of @xmath will be given in section 3.5 , in the context of
well-defined infrared limits of the ghost-gluon vertex. Here, let us
finish the discussion by noting that it is @xmath that naturally yields
a linearly confining potential in the Coulomb gauge.

In the Landau gauge ( @xmath ), the solutions listed in Table 2.1 are
all sensitive to the value of @xmath and none of the solutions is
characteristic in this respect. The accepted value for the infrared
exponent, is @xmath , as reviewed in Ref. [ Fis06 ] .

#### Logarithmic degeneracy

The infrared power law ansätze made so far yielded integrals that can be
generically represented by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some suitable function @xmath . The solutions to the integral in
Eq. ( 2.86 ) with @xmath being a power law were discussed, and it is
clear how to find the exponent @xmath that depends on the dimension
@xmath of the integral and the function @xmath . The dimensionless
numbers @xmath can be computed with the methods given in Ref. [
SchLedRei06 ] . Each of the DSEs are of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Matching both sides of Eq. ( 2.87 ), we get the sum rule @xmath on the
one hand and the condition @xmath on the other hand. This determines
@xmath as well as @xmath .

In order to incorporate logarithms into the infrared ansätze such as
@xmath we note that simple powers can serve as generating functions of
the logarithm to some power @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

As long as the generators of the logarithm, i.e. the derivatives or the
@xmath -integrals, may be interchanged with the loop integration of
@xmath we can compute

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

by applying these generators to Eq. ( 2.86 ). E.g., for @xmath we simply
have to write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.90)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the limit @xmath , the logarithm dominates any constant and thus only
the above term remains. For any @xmath , the result yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equivalently to the case @xmath , one gets the infrared limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us turn to @xmath . From the prescription ( 2.88 ) one can derive
the formula for @xmath by repeated partial integration. To prove the
result thus obtained, it is easier to turn the integral form of Eq. (
2.88 ) into a differential equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a constant @xmath that does not depend on @xmath .

Proof :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.95)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Note in Eq. ( 2.94 ) that for @xmath only the term with @xmath is
relevant. The arbitrary integration constants @xmath can always be
chosen such that they are subleading in the infrared. The result ( 2.94
) can now be generalized to any @xmath . By induction, one can show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfies the differential equation ( 2.93 ). The infrared limit yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

In summary, we have shown that in the infrared limit for any @xmath the
logarithms in the integrals @xmath in Eq. ( 2.89 ) can be removed from
under the integral and placed in front of the integral, evaluated at the
external momentum @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, if an integral equation of the DSE type, as given in Eq. (
2.87 ), is solved by plain power laws in the infrared, an ansatz of the
kind @xmath with @xmath will also be a solution. To see that, note that
the logarithm will appear on both sides of Eq. ( 2.87 ) and the
determining equation @xmath for the infrared exponent @xmath is left
unchanged. In this sense, there is a degeneracy in the infrared power
law solutions that are insensitive to logarithms.

However, it is not clear how to rigorously generalize these results to
@xmath . There are methods to define fractional derivatives and
fractional integration [ Frac ] and a careful treatment might recover
the result ( 2.98 ) for arbitrary @xmath . This is something that would
be worth looking into. We conjecture here that in the infrared limit,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the functions defined in ( 2.51 ), basically the l.h.s.
of ( 2.99 ) without the logarithms. Hence, Eq. ( 2.99 ) states that in
the infrared limit the logarithms factor out. For the time being, it
shall suffice to corroborate this conjecture by a few modest numerical
investigations. In Fig. 2.8 , we have implemented the integrals

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the simple functions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for several values of @xmath and @xmath . In the left panel of Fig. 2.8
, the infrared limit indicated in Eq. ( 2.100 ) with @xmath following
from Eq. ( B.6a ) is found exactly. This supports the hypothesis ( 2.99
).

In Ref. [ Kon02 ] , the possibility of logarithmic corrections to the
power law solutions was discussed using the angular approximation. It is
easily verified that the angular approximation is unable to reproduce
reliable results for the class of two-point integrals we are dealing
with. Moreover, the hypothesis ( 2.99 ) needs a more refined treatment
than the angular approximation can provide. The denial of logarithmic
corrections in Ref. [ Kon02 ] is therefore likely to be due to the
angular approximation.

A further point is made in the right panel of Fig. 2.8 . If the power
law exponent @xmath in the integrand of Eq. ( 2.100 ) is such that the
integral is dimensionless, i.e. @xmath with @xmath , the results will be
a logarithm, rather than @xmath . If furthermore @xmath , the result is
@xmath . This can be seen in the two upper curves of the plot. The lower
curve with the choice @xmath renders the exponent of the logarithm zero.
The asymptotic result found numerically is the function @xmath . With
zero exponents of power laws incrementing the logarithm power, and with
zero logarithm power incrementing the @xmath power, it is intuitive to
expect this logic to continue to @xmath , @xmath and so on. Let us have
these general ideas be followed up with a specific example. Consider an
iteration of the DSEs in @xmath with @xmath as a starting point, i.e.
@xmath . The ghost loop then produces, after UV subtraction, a logarithm
in the IR, cf. Eq. ( 2.70 ). Consequently, the IR gluon propagator
yields @xmath . Plugged into the ghost DSE, the log sum rule ( 2.99 )
yields that @xmath . Every iteration increments the logarithm power of
the ghost propagator, so after the @xmath th iteration, @xmath . The
choice @xmath must therefore be excluded, see Eq. ( 2.71 ).

However, as long as such subtleties are avoided, the solutions for the
ghost and gluon propagators can be appended by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the conditions ( 2.54 ) and ( 2.61 ) from the power law analysis
and the log sum rule

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

from Eq. ( 2.99 ). Due to the factoring out of the logarithms in the
infrared limit, no changes are expected for the value of @xmath .
Neither are any qualitative changes expected if logarithms are present
in the infrared, for they are always subdominant to power laws.

To summarize this section, the power solutions found in sections 2.6 are
not necessarily unique. First of all, a free parameter can be dialled in
the off-shell formulation to yield different values of the infrared
exponents. Only the one solution, @xmath for @xmath (see Fig. 2.5 ), is
insensitive to this parameter. Secondly, the amendment of logarithms to
the power law solutions give one possibility to generalize the
solutions. Logarithms will be of particular interest in the discussion
of the ultraviolet behavior of the Green functions. That will be the
topic of chapter 4 .

## Chapter 3 Variational solution for the vacuum state

While in the previous chapter the stochastic vacuum state was
investigated to derive the infrared properties of the theory, this
chapter is devoted to determine the vacuum wave functional in the
temporal Coulomb gauge by variational methods. A Gaussian type of ansatz
wave functional is put forward to calculate the energy and minimize it
with respect to the parameters of the ansatz. The solutions for the
Green functions thus obtained turn out to approach the power law
solutions for @xmath of the previous chapter in the infrared. In the
ultraviolet, the propagators are those of free particles, up to
logarithmic corrections.

By virtue of the (time-independent) Yang–Mills Schrödinger equation,
additional information is available from the spectral properties of the
Hamiltonian, as opposed to the exclusive consideration of
Dyson–Schwinger equations. In this respect, the Hamiltonian approach is
superior to the Lagrangian approach, utilizing the principle of minimal
energy. In quantum field theory, variational methods have enjoyed
considerable attention [ Sch62a , Wangerooge87 ] . However, critical
remarks were issued by Feynman. In the 1987 Wangerooge conference,
Feynman claimed that variational methods were “no damn good at all” in
quantum field theory [ Wangerooge87 ] , essentially for the following
reason. The only wave functionals that can be used reasonably, are
Gaussians. Any corrections to the Gaussians can only be calculated
numerically, involving intolerable errors. The inaccuracies in the
ultraviolet sector spoil the reliability of infrared quantities,
especially in non-linear theories such as QCD where the UV and IR modes
mix. Therefore, if Gaussian wave functionals are not good enough, there
is no chance in finding reasonable results with the variational method,
according to Feynman. The calculations presented in this chapter are, of
course, overshadowed by the latter remarks. Nevertheless, on a
qualitative level, the results turn out immune to the criticism. First
of all, a generalization of Gaussian wave functionals is feasible and
will be exhibited in the following section. Secondly, the
Gribov–Zwanziger scenario infers that the gauge-fixed configuration
space itself governs the infrared, regardless of the ultraviolet
accuracy of the wave functional. The crucial infrared properties do not
follow from the variational minimization of the vacuum energy, but can
be extracted directly from the path integration inside the Gribov
horizon, along with the horizon condition. We are therefore confident
that the infrared power laws do not suffer from any other approximations
than those discussed in the previous chapter.

It is well-known from nuclear physics that the ground state energy is
quite insensitive to errors in the wave function. The accuracy of the
wave function is tested by the calculation of transition amplitudes, not
by the vacuum state itself. In the same sense, one may expect that the
Yang–Mills vacuum energy density is not too far off using the crude
approximation of a Gaussian vacuum wave functional. Other quantities,
such as the vertices, may be more sensitive to changes in the wave
functional. These assertions will be discussed in the course of this
chapter.

### 3.1 Gaussian types of wave functionals

Gaussian types of Coulomb gauge wave functionals are put forward in this
section. They were first proposed in Refs. [ ReiFeu04 , FeuRei04 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a variational kernel and @xmath normalizes the wave
functional, @xmath . [Note that henceforth, we refrain from using
bold-faced symbols for @xmath -vectors, unless necessary for clarity.]
The factor of the Faddeev–Popov determinant with the real exponent
@xmath allows for a further enhancement (if @xmath ) of the probability
density near the Gribov horizon. One specific choice, @xmath , resembles
the usage of a “radial wave function”, familiar from the calculation of
the hydrogen atom. In this case, the evaluation of expectation values
becomes straightforward because the generating functional of full Green
functions,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is actually a Gaussian path integral for @xmath . Before we write down
the result, let us try to understand the meaning of the parameter @xmath
.

A Dyson–Schwinger equation (DSE) for the gluon propagator can be written
down for the path integral in Eq. ( 3.1 ) in order to relate @xmath and
@xmath to the gluon propagator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Taking a derivative w.r.t. @xmath and setting sources to zero yields

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Setting @xmath in the above equation, the gluon propagator is seen to be
determined by the variational kernel @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath , we rewrite the first term in Eq. ( 3.4 ) by partial
integration,

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (3.6)
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

We now introduce an approximation for the evaluation of Green functions,
referred to as the loop expansion . Whereas its common definition
concerns an expansion in @xmath , we here use the term loop expansion
for ordering diagrams by the number of loops, integrating
nonperturbative ghost or gluon propagators. Applied to Eq. ( 3.6 ), it
can be realized that the first term comprises one loop, and the second
term comprises two loops. ¹ ¹ 1 Each functional trace “ @xmath ”, as
found in @xmath , gives rise to a loop. In the one-loop expansion, we
may write Eq. ( 3.4 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.7)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

We recognize in Eq. ( 3.7 ) the ghost loop, here denoted by @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since by the quantity @xmath the non-trivial metric of the gauge-fixed
variables is expressed, the momentum space quantity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

is also referred to as the curvature [ FeuRei04 ] , with the spatial
dimension @xmath . Introducing for the gluon propagator the function
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and employing the one-loop approximation, Eq. ( 3.7 ) can be found to
yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall from the last chapter that the DSEs, following directly from the
boundary conditions on the path integration within the Gribov horizon,
fully determine the Green functions of the theory. In the variational
approach, on the other hand, the Green functions have a parametric
dependence on the kernel @xmath and on the parameter @xmath . The DSE (
3.11 ) merely tells us how the gluon propagator is related to the
variational kernel @xmath . The equation that actually determines @xmath
is the Schrödinger equation, @xmath , that yields for the vacuum state a
variational equation of the Rayleigh-Ritz type,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Schrödinger equation is not strictly a DSE, regarding its origin.
Nevertheless, we will often refer to the Schrödinger equation as a DSE
since, after all, it has the same form of a non-linear integral
equation.

One infers from Eq. ( 3.11 ) that for the evaluation of the gluon
propagator to one-loop order, the Faddeev–Popov determinant in ( 3.1 )
can be replaced by a Gaussian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it suffices to use the following generating functional

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can verify that the gluon propagator yields Eq. ( 3.11 ).

It was shown in Ref. [ ReiFeu04 ] that for the calculation of
expectation values in the Schrödinger equation to one-loop order, the
Faddeev–Popov determinant can be replaced according to Eq. ( 3.13 ).
Thus, the “Gaussian type” of wave functionals ( 3.1 ) are indeed
Gaussian to the level of approximation. The functional form of Wick’s
theorem [ ZinnJustin ] thus becomes applicable and results in the
concise prescription ( 3.15 ) to evaluate expectation values. With
@xmath replaced by @xmath in Eq. ( 3.14 ), the Schrödinger equation
minimizes the energy with respect to the gluon propagator ( 3.10 ) and
the value of @xmath is therefore irrelevant [ ReiFeu04 ] . We will make
the choice @xmath to solve the Schrödinger equation following Ref. [
FeuRei04 ] . Let us point out here that the restriction to the Gribov
region is abandoned in the evaluation of the Gaussian path integrals,
see Eq. ( 3.14 ). It is therefore of particular interest to compare the
results to lattice calculations.

With a Gaussian wave functional at hand, the gauge fields can be
transformed into the particle representation and interpreted as
particles with energy modes @xmath . Since the function @xmath turns out
be a non-trivial dispersion relation, gluons are interpreted as
quasi-particles. This will be further discussed in chapter 5 .

### 3.2 Minimizing the energy density

The vacuum energy density of Yang–Mills theory with vanishing external
charges, @xmath , was calculated in the state ( 3.1 ) with @xmath to
two-loop order (in the energy) in Ref. [ FeuRei04 ] . Subsequently, the
Yang–Mills Schrödinger equation was used to determine the vacuum state
by minimizing the energy density w.r.t. the kernel @xmath . This leads
to the equation ² ² 2 In this section, all expectation values are taken
in the vacuum state ( 3.1 ) with @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is basically the only equation that follows from minimizing the
energy. Since it gives rise to a dispersion relation with a mass gap, we
refer to Eq. ( 3.16 ) as the gap equation . The gap equation has quite a
complex structure, involving the ghost propagator in particular, and we
have to resort to auxiliary equations in order to calculate the
expectation values. One of these equations is the ghost DSE derived in
chapter 2 and another one accounts for the factorization of the Coulomb
potential, see below. The entire calculation of Ref. [ FeuRei04 ] shall
not be repeated here, but only the essential steps are outlined and some
subtleties are pointed out.

For the expectation value @xmath with the Yang–Mills Hamiltonian @xmath
given by Eq. ( 1.107 ), to be calculable by the prescription ( 3.15 ),
the momentum operators @xmath are eliminated by action on the wave
functional @xmath . We introduce by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can then show that for the given wave functional @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and Wick’s theorem ( 3.15 ) becomes applicable. The vacuum energy @xmath
can be computed [ FeuRei04 ] and it yields the kinetic energy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

the magnetic potential

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.21)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and the Coulomb potential

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

These terms arise from the kinetic, magnetic, and Coulomb parts of the
Hamiltonian, listed in that order in Eq. ( 1.107 ). The overall volume
factor of @xmath is due to the translational invariance in the absence
of localized external charge distributions. In the above expressions,
two form factors were introduced. The ghost form factor @xmath measures
the deviation of the ghost propagator @xmath from tree-level, ³ ³ 3 Note
that this definition is different from Ref. [ FeuRei04 ] . Here, at
tree-level @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Coulomb form factor @xmath measures the deviation from the
factorization in the expectation value of the Coulomb operator @xmath
(cf. Eq. ( 2.75 )),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the definition ( 3.9 ), the curvature @xmath is found to define the
following integral,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gap equation can be derived from Eq. ( 3.16 ) using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

to yield in momentum space [ FeuRei04 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the abbreviations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.28a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.28b)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

In addition, the ghost from factor @xmath obeys the ghost DSE ( 2.48 ),

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.29)
  -- -- -- --------

and the Coulomb form factor obeys another integral equation that will be
discussed further in section 3.6 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equations ( 3.27 ), ( 3.29 ) and ( 3.30 ) are here collectively
called the Dyson–Schwinger equations (DSEs) of our approach to Coulomb
gauge Yang–Mills theory. The approximations used in deriving the DSEs
include the tree-level approximation for the ghost-gluon vertex and the
one-loop expansion in the gap equation.

### 3.3 Renormalization

Each one of the Dyson–Schwinger equations, the one for the ghost form
factor @xmath , the Coulomb form factor DSE for @xmath , the gap
equation for @xmath and also the curvature integral @xmath require
subtraction of the UV divergences. This can be seen by plugging in the
ultraviolet behavior of the form factors known from perturbation theory.
As discussed in more detail in chapter 4 , the ultraviolet asymptotic
propagators should attain tree-level up to logarithmic corrections. The
tree-level values for the ghost form factor as well as the Coulomb form
factor are simply unity. Whereas the latter are genuinely instantaneous
in our approach, the gluon propagator may be regarded as the equal-time
part of the tree-level propagator in Euclidean spacetime,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and a first guess ⁴ ⁴ 4 Recall that @xmath . for @xmath in the UV
therefore is @xmath , yielding the dispersion relation of a free
massless particle. By simple power counting in the ultraviolet, the
integrals in ( 3.29 ) and ( 3.30 ) are found to be logarithmically
divergent. The gap equation ( 3.27 ) and the curvature integral ( 3.25
), on the other hand, contain power divergences.

Renormalization, the concept of redefining the parameters of a theory
such that expectation values are free of infinities, can be introduced
multiplicatively in perturbation theory [ Collins ] . That is, the local
field operators are multiplied by renormalization constants such as to
remove the divergences occurring in the perturbative expansion. In the
Lagrangian language, multiplicative renormalization may be described by
appropriate counter terms in the Lagrangian that respect its symmetries.
The arbitrariness in defining the finite part of a divergent quantity
can be controlled by the renormalization group. Nonperturbatively, a
systematic concept of removing divergences is lacking. This also applies
to the present nonperturbative approach to Coulomb gauge YM theory. In
Ref. [ Epp+07 ] , counter terms to the Hamiltonian were introduced which
are seen—a posteriori—to remove the divergences in the DSEs. Below, we
will follow the renormalization procedure given in Ref. [ Epp+07 ] .
Thus, some additional parameters are introduced into the theory. It will
be seen that, at least for the asymptotic IR and UV behavior, the
solutions are independent of these parameters.

#### Renormalization of the Faddeev–Popov determinant

The curvature integral ( 3.25 ) is linearly divergent. From the identity
@xmath , see Eq. ( 3.13 ), valid to one-loop order, it is evident that
the divergences in @xmath can be traced back to the Faddeev–Popov
determinant. Eq. ( 3.13 ) suggests that the counter terms required to
renormalize the Faddeev–Popov determinant, or more precisely its
logarithm, have to be of the form @xmath . Since the log of the
Faddeev–Popov determinant can be regarded as part of the “action”, we
renormalize the Faddeev–Popov determinant as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

or by using the representation Eq. ( 3.13 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviously, the counter term @xmath has to be chosen to eliminate the
ultraviolet divergent part of the curvature @xmath . Thus the
renormalization condition reads in momentum space

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.34)
  -- -- -- --------

As usual, there is some freedom in choosing the finite constants of the
right hand side of Eq. ( 3.34 ). In principle, we could just eliminate
the ultraviolet divergent part of @xmath by appropriately choosing the
counter term @xmath . However, it is more convenient to choose @xmath to
be the curvature at some renormalization scale @xmath , resulting in the
renormalization condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in the finite renormalized curvature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to check that this quantity is indeed ultraviolet finite and
obviously it satisfies the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

By adopting the renormalization condition Eq. ( 3.35 ), the renormalized
quantity @xmath in Eq. ( 3.36 ) depends on the so far arbitrary scale
@xmath . By choosing the renormalization condition Eq. ( 3.37 ) this
renormalization scale becomes a parameter of our “model”, since it
defines the infrared content of the curvature @xmath kept in the
renormalization process. For instance, choosing @xmath , the whole
infrared divergent part of the curvature is chopped off. The numerical
calculations below use a finite @xmath .

In Ref. [ ReiEpp07 ] , a different renormalization condition was chosen,
keeping from the ultraviolet divergent quantity @xmath the finite part
@xmath . This amounts to setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

which results in the renormalized curvature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Only the divergent part of the curvature is subtracted, keeping fully
its finite part. Here, we have an extra parameter @xmath of the theory
and the renormalization scale @xmath is not related to the zero of the
renormalized quantity @xmath in Eq. ( 3.39 ). The latter method of
removing divergences may be looked upon as an alternative, the former (
3.36 ) will be used below. Both methods can be accounted for by the
specific choice of the counter term @xmath to the Faddeev–Popov
determinant.

#### Counter terms to the Hamiltonian

In order to eliminate the divergences in the gap equation, it turns out
the counter terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

should be added to the Hamiltonian. Here the coefficients @xmath and
@xmath depend on the momentum cutoff @xmath and have to be adjusted so
that the UV singularities in the gap equation disappear. Note that these
coefficients multiply ultralocal operators which are singular in quantum
field theory. For the wave functional at hand, the expectation value of
the counter term Eq. ( 3.40 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

shown in Ref. [ FeuRei04 ] , Eq. ( 3.41 ) can be written in momentum
space as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the variation of this expression with respect to @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath depends only on the ghost propagator but not on the
gluon energy @xmath , at least as long as @xmath is not yet the
self-consistent solution. Adding the counter terms from Eq. ( 3.43 ) to
the energy in the gap equation ( 3.26 ), one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### Renormalization of the gap equation

We now turn to the renormalization of the gap equation ( 3.45 ) which
already includes the counter terms. After the renormalization of the
Faddeev–Popov determinant, the curvature @xmath can be replaced by the
renormalized one @xmath , Eq. ( 3.36 ). Note that the Coulomb integral
@xmath does not depend on any constant part of the curvature, see Eq. (
3.28b ), so that @xmath could have been replaced right away by the
finite quantity @xmath . Replacing @xmath by @xmath and using the
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

the gap equation in Eq. ( 3.45 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integrals @xmath are the linearly @xmath and quadratically @xmath UV
divergent parts of @xmath in Eq. ( 3.28b ), see also Ref. [ FeuRei04 ] .
The integral @xmath in Eq. ( 3.28a ) is also quadratically divergent but
independent of the external momentum. We can therefore eliminate all
UV-divergences by choosing @xmath and @xmath . In principle, the
coefficients of the counter terms @xmath and @xmath have to be chosen to
eliminate the UV divergent parts of the quantities appearing in the gap
equation. This means that we should choose these infinite coefficients
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the UV divergent parts of @xmath are by dimensional arguments
independent of the external momentum @xmath . Technically it is more
convenient to choose the following alternative renormalization
conditions. As usual we have the freedom in choosing the renormalization
conditions up to finite constants. Given the fact that @xmath is
independent of the external momentum and the differences

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

are UV-finite, we can eliminate all UV-divergences by choosing the
renormalization conditions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an arbitrary renormalization scale, which could be
chosen to be the same scale @xmath of the renormalization of the
curvature, but given the fact that with the renormalization prescription
( 3.35 ), the scale @xmath becomes a physical parameter, the two
renormalization parameters @xmath and @xmath need not necessarily be the
same. With the renormalization conditions ( 3.51 ) the renormalized
(finite!) gap equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that the integrals @xmath are infrared finite and furthermore
that the renormalized curvature @xmath is infrared divergent, the
infrared limit of the renormalized gap equation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ’t Hooft loop, which yields a perimeter law in the confinement
phase, can be explicitly calculated using its representation found in
Ref. [ Rei02 ] . In the Gaussian vacuum, it is sensitive to the quantity
( 3.53 ) and it is shown in Refs. [ ReiEppSch06 , ReiEpp07 ] that only
the choice @xmath gives the perimeter law. With this choice the
renormalized gap equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### Renormalization of the ghost and Coulomb form factor

The Dyson–Schwinger equation for the ghost propagator is given by Eq. (
3.29 ) and bears a logarithmic divergence in the ultraviolet part of the
integral. By a simple subtraction at @xmath , this divergence is
removed. Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a finite equation. In principle, one can choose @xmath different from
@xmath . In view of the horizon condition, it is convenient to set
@xmath while keeping a finite @xmath (in particular for the sake of the
curvature).

The DSE for the Coulomb form factor is given by Eq. ( 3.30 ) and can be
subtracted at @xmath to yield the finite expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

We choose here @xmath . The coupled DSEs then contain the following
undetermined parameters: the renormalization scale @xmath of the
renormalization of the curvature and the renormalization constant @xmath
of the Coulomb form factor. The parameter @xmath may (or may not) be
taken care of by implementing the horizon condition.

### 3.4 Full numerical solutions

The renormalized and thus finite DSEs ( 3.54 , 3.55 , 3.56 ) are cast in
a form tractable for a numerical study. Solving such a coupled set of
integral equations is pursued by iteration. An educated guess for
initial form factors is plugged into the integrals and the results are
recorded by the Chebychev approximation to be processed further. For
asymptotic values of momentum, it is instructive for the numerics to
make use of the analytical results, cf. the methods used in Refs. [
AtkBlo98 , diss_Bloch , FisAlk02 , Maa05 ] . The set of nodes cover a
finite momentum region. In order to extrapolate this to the whole
infinite momentum range, the general algebraic forms obtained
analytically serve as ansätze. However, contrary to what has been
previously done in Dyson–Schwinger studies, the parameters of these
asymptotic forms are still determined numerically. E.g., in the infrared
it was shown analytically that power laws provide a solution. The
numerics will have the asymptotic form of the power laws ( 2.50 ) as an
input but determine the various exponents and coefficients as parameters
by nonlinear least-squares fitting. Thus, this numerical method provides
a check on the analytical results of Table 2.1 rather than imposing the
latter.

Previously, a numerical solution of the Coulomb gauge DSEs was found in
Ref. [ FeuRei04 ] . The infrared behavior agreed approximately with the
exponent @xmath of Table 2.1 . A heavy quark potential was obtained that
confines but does not rise linearly, as compared to the Wilson loop on
the lattice. Therefore, a string tension cannot be extracted from these
results. After analytical investigations of the infrared behavior of the
Coulomb gauge Green functions in Ref. [ SchLedRei06 ] , it became clear
that yet another solution, with @xmath should exist. Eventually,
improved numerical methods were able to indeed confirm @xmath and reveal
a strictly linearly rising potential in Ref. [ EppReiSch07 ] . These
results will be exhibited in this section.

The technical details of the numerical calculation are described in Ref.
[ EppReiSch07 ] . It shall suffice here to mention the essence of the
set-up. For convenience, the gauge coupling @xmath is set to unity. The
functions ⁵ ⁵ 5 We drop the bar on @xmath , still meaning @xmath in
Eq. ( 3.36 ). @xmath and @xmath are both described in the far infrared
by a power law @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are extracted by fitting
the solution. It is possible to gain more information on the
intermediate momentum regime by setting up an infrared expansion of the
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

and again determining its parameters by fitting. While both @xmath and
@xmath are infrared enhanced, we have @xmath . Recalling that the ’t
Hooft loop requires for confinement @xmath in Eq. ( 3.53 ), we realize
that @xmath .

In the ultraviolet, we use the asymptotic behavior of the form factors
found in Ref. [ FeuRei04 ] and make the corresponding ansätze for @xmath
,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.58a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.58b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.58c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.58d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

extracting the coefficients as well as the different scale parameters
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath using least-squares fitting. An ultraviolet
behavior different from Eq. ( 3.58 ) will be proposed in chapter 4 .

All numerical plots displayed in this section were calculated by
D. Epple [ EppReiSch07 ] . As seen from the left panel in Fig. 3.1 ,
both @xmath and @xmath are enhanced like @xmath in the infrared, as
predicted in the stochastic vacuum. The right panel of Fig. 3.1 shows
the function @xmath vanishing for @xmath , in accord with our choice of
the renormalization condition @xmath . Fig. 3.2 (left panel) shows the
infrared enhanced ghost form factor @xmath . Thus, the functions @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath are all enhanced as @xmath in the infrared. On the
right panel of Figure 3.2 , the heavy quark Coulomb potential @xmath ,
as given by Eq. ( 2.74 ), is shown. An exactly linearly rising behavior
(within an estimated error of less than one percent) is found, again in
agreement with the infrared analysis of chapter 2 . The linearly rising
potential allows us to fit our scale from the string tension. Lattice
calculations [ CucZwa03 , GreOle03 , LanMoy04 ] show, however, that the
Coulomb string tension @xmath is about a factor of @xmath larger than
the string tension @xmath extracted from the Wilson loop, in agreement
with the analytic result [ Zwa03b ] that the Coulomb string tension is
an upper bound to the Wilson loop string tension. Setting @xmath
therefore yields a small quantitative error. However, the qualitative
features of the results shown in Figs. 3.1 and 3.2 are reliable on the
one hand, and they successfully describe the physical nonperturbative
phenomenon of confinement on the other. Quarks are confined by a
linearly rising potential @xmath , and gluons are confined since the
dispersion relation @xmath diverges for @xmath , prohibiting the
propagation of gluons over large distances.

The numerical confirmation of the infrared behavior predicted by the
analytical calculations in the stochastic vacuum, see chapter 2 ,
deserves the following two comments. Firstly, among the full structure
of the gap equation ( 3.54 ), the infrared leading contributions were
obviously already accounted for by the stochastic vacuum. Fig. 3.1
clearly shows that the curvature @xmath , by which the gluon propagator
in the stochastic vacuum is expressed over the entire momentum range, is
the infrared asymptotic function of the (inverse) gluon propagator
@xmath . In retrospect, these findings may be understood as a
confirmation of the Gribov–Zwanziger scenario. The second comment is
more a mathematical one. Given the full structure of the DSEs, how can
an asymptotic solution be obtained analytically? We make power law
ansätze for the infrared behavior and, knowing that in the UV they are
not valid, we use them for integrating the propagators over the entire
momentum range. This method was first used in Landau gauge DSE studies
in Ref. [ AtkBlo98a ] and later led to the now accepted infrared
exponents by the calculations in Refs. [ LerSme02 , Zwa02 ] . From the
experience with the numerical evaluation of integrals, this procedure
seems acceptable, but a justification would be desirable. In Ref. [
Fis06 ] some arguments are given why infrared asymptotics may be
computed in the way mentioned above. A sketch of a proof was given in
the context of the “infrared integral approximation” in Ref. [
SchLedRei06 ] . It is also worth mentioning the useful reference [
Erdelyi ] in the context of asymptotic expansions. Here, we give a short
and rather obvious explanation why the method is correct. It follows
from the Riemann-Lebesgue lemma that convolution integrals @xmath of the
type

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

asymptotically approach the function @xmath obtained by replacing in the
integrand the infrared asymptotic functions @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath
),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This argument can be applied to the (renormalized) DSEs. Replacing the
scalar products from the Lorentz structure by identities such as @xmath
, all (one-loop) DSEs turn into a sum of convolution integrals of the
type @xmath given in Eq. ( 3.4 ).

Recently, there have been investigations of Coulomb gauge Green
functions on the lattice [ CucZwa02 , LanMoy04 , Qua+07 ] . In Fig. 3.3
, the lattice data for the ghost propagator and the inverse gluon
propagator are shown in comparison to the continuum solutions. The
qualitative infrared enhancement of the ghost propagator is reproduced
by the lattice calculations. At the same time, the gluon form factor
@xmath seems to be infrared enhanced as well. It is difficult to extract
reliable data for the infrared sector on the lattice. Yet, the lattice
data for the Coulomb gauge gluon propagator of Ref. [ CucZwa02 ] gives
@xmath , in agreement with the continuum result. In the ultraviolet the
striking feature of Fig. 3.3 is that the lattice data for the function
@xmath rise stronger than linearly. This might actually be an indication
that the ultraviolet properties of the continuum solutions need to be
improved. We will come back to that in section 4.3 .

Finally, let us mention that in @xmath dimensional Coulomb gauge YM
theory, numerical continuum results from the Coulomb gauge Hamiltonian
approach were recently obtained in Ref. [ FeuRei07 ] . Similarly to the
@xmath case, it is found that all form factors are infrared enhanced,
with infrared exponents that approximately agree with @xmath , the value
given in Table 2.1 for @xmath .

### 3.5 Vertices

The energy density that was minimized in the previous section to give
rise to the vacuum Green functions was shown to be rather insensitive to
the choice of the wave functional, according to the discussion in
section 3.1 . The three-gluon vertex we are turning to in this section
will show a strong dependence on the wave functional, in particular on
the exponent @xmath of the Faddeev–Popov determinant. Knowing the
infrared behavior of the three-gluon vertex, it will be possible to
further investigate the ghost-gluon vertex in the infrared.

#### Three-gluon vertex

As pointed out above, it is only the Faddeev–Popov determinant that
influences the infrared behavior of Yang–Mills theory. The solution
obtained for the infrared exponents of the propagators was found to be
independent of the three-gluon vertex, in particular, since it
contributes to neither the ghost self-energy term nor the ghost loop
contribution to the gluon self-energy. In the Coulomb gauge, we have
seen that any of the vacua @xmath given by Eq. ( 3.1 ) minimizes the
energy w.r.t. @xmath , evaluated to one-loop order in the DSE (two-loop
order in the diagrams for the energy). The question is how the
three-gluon vertex changes in the infrared for different values of
@xmath without resorting to the one-loop approximation.

The full three-gluon vertex is defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.61)
  -- -- -- --------

In the particular case of @xmath it is found that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

in a symmetric integration domain. Leaving aside a discussion whether
the Gribov region @xmath is symmetric about @xmath , we here extend the
integration domain to the whole gauge-fixed configuration space, for
practical purposes. Hence, the three-gluon vertex vanishes for @xmath [
FeuRei04 ] . Now consider the case @xmath . To one-loop order in the gap
equation we may employ the form ( 3.14 ) for the generating functional
@xmath . The three-gluon vertex then vanishes for any @xmath since the
weighting of path integration remains in a Gaussian form.

On the other hand, without the use of the one-loop approximation, @xmath
will give a non-zero three-gluon vertex, in contrast to Eq. ( 3.62 ), as
will be shown. Thus, the three-gluon vertex shows great sensitivity to
the choice of the vacuum wave functional @xmath , a behavior not
exhibited to one-loop order. Making the choice @xmath permits the
standard representation of the Faddeev–Popov determinant by ghosts. One
can then derive [ SchLedRei06 ] the Dyson–Schwinger equation for the
Coulomb gauge three-gluon vertex. It is depicted diagrammatically in
Fig. 3.4 . Its complete form comprises a diagram with the unknown
two-ghost-two-gluon vertex which is truncated here. For the following
calculation, the ghost-gluon vertex is used at tree-level. The DSE for
the proper three-gluon vertex then reads [ SchLedRei06 ]

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.63)
  -- -- -- --------

where the outgoing momenta @xmath obey the conservation law

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vertex given by Eq. ( 3.63 ) is projected onto the tensor subspace
spanned by the tensor components of the tree-level vertex. Due to Bose
symmetry, the coefficient functions of these six components are all the
same, but their signs alternate as the vertex without the color
structure is antisymmetric under gluon exchange. One finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            @xmath            (3.65)
                       @xmath            @xmath   
                       @xmath            @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Equating Eq. ( 3.63 ) with ( 3.65 ) and contracting with these six
tensors, yields a set of six linear equations for @xmath , the solution
of which reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.67)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The integral ( 3.66 ) depends only on the ghost propagator in this
truncation, and despite the infrared enhancement of the latter it is
convergent. The numerical calculation of the form factor @xmath at the
symmetric point, where @xmath , shows a strong infrared enhancement, see
Fig. 3.5 . For the ghost propagator we used the numerical results of
Ref. [ FeuRei04 ] where @xmath . A fit to the data in Fig. 3.5 yields an
infrared power law, @xmath . It is clear from the discussion on page 3.2
that this asymptotic power law can be obtained analytically. Replacing
the integrand in Eq. ( 3.66 ) by its infrared behavior and shifting
@xmath , one finds from the homogeneity that @xmath . Plugging in the
value @xmath gives an infrared exponent of @xmath which agrees (within
errors) with the numerical result in Fig. 3.5 . At large momenta the
vertex vanishes which complies with asymptotic freedom since in the
Gaussian vacuum there is no tree-level vertex.

The above results for the infrared behavior of the Coulomb gauge
three-gluon vertex can be generalized to any value of @xmath and any
dimension @xmath . Therefore, we can also make statements about the
Landau gauge where @xmath represents the dimension of Euclidean
spacetime. Noting that @xmath , see Eq. ( 2.54 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the analytical results for @xmath in Coulomb ( @xmath ) as well as
in Landau ( @xmath ) gauge, the exponents in Eq. ( 3.68 ) have the
numerical values shown in Table 3.1 .

The Landau gauge result agrees exactly with Ref. [ AlkFisLla04 ] .

Another interesting kinematic point is where one of the gluon momenta,
say @xmath , is set to zero while the others remain finite. A technical
remark: we switch here to the off-shell gauge condition. Thus, no
ambiguities are found when trying to evaluate transverse projectors at
zero momentum. Another technical problem is the following. Trying to
calculate the vertex with one momentum vanishing from Eq. ( 3.65 ) by
setting @xmath , the projections onto the tensor components fail because
the determinant of the coefficient matrix that defines the tensor
expansion vanishes in this case. ⁶ ⁶ 6 In this context, one might note
that the infrared limit of any tensor integral is non-trivial. Given an
integral

@xmath

we can construct a tensor basis from the external scales @xmath and
Lorentz invariant tensors. According to the Passarino–Veltman formalism
[ PasVel79 ] , the above integral can then be expanded in this basis,
which is nothing but solving a set of linear equations for the expansion
coefficients in this basis. If one sets up a tensor expansion for finite
@xmath and then tries to perform the infrared limit of a single external
momentum, say @xmath , the coefficient matrix becomes singular, and the
tensor expansion is not well-defined. Instead, one can set @xmath from
the beginning (if the integral exists here) and construct the tensor
basis spanning a vector space which is of a lower dimension than
beforehand. The expansion coefficients are then well-defined. It is
advisory to impose @xmath in the DSE ( 3.63 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can then realize that this integral exists. It can be expanded into
a tensor basis constructed by the only scale @xmath and Lorentz
invariant tensors, i.e. @xmath . However, the only component that
survives the transverse projections of the gluon legs of @xmath with
finite momenta, is obviously @xmath . Thus, we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the ellipsis represents irrelevant tensor components which shall
be discarded henceforth. In the asymptotic infrared, we use the power
laws ( 2.50 ) for the propagators and obtain from Eq. ( 3.70 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.72)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In view of the strong infrared divergence of the three-gluon vertex, one
has to check the ghost dominance in the propagator DSEs. The infrared
power law of the three-gluon vertex ( 3.68 ), expresses that the vertex
dressing replaces the infrared exponent of a gluon by that of a ghost
propagator, for any dimension @xmath . The infrared hierarchy of terms
in the gluon DSE remains untouched, since even with the dressing of the
three-gluon vertex, terms involving it remain subleading to the
ghost-loop in the infrared. E.g., the gluon loop, which has an infrared
exponent of @xmath with a tree-level three-gluon vertex, attains an
infrared power law with the exponent @xmath if the vertex is dressed.
Clearly, this term is still subleading w.r.t. the ghost loop which bears
an infrared exponent of @xmath . In the Landau gauge, the infrared
hierarchy was checked systematically by a skeleton expansion in Ref. [
AlkFisLla04 ] .

#### Ghost-gluon vertex

The ghost-gluon vertex is investigated here with focus on the
(off-shell) Landau gauge. The reason is that in this gauge the
corresponding DSE is available from Ref. [ Sch+05 ] . In the Coulomb
gauge, with the choice @xmath for the wave functional @xmath , the
derivation of the DSE should be straightforward, albeit tedious, and
technically equivalent to the three-gluon vertex.

Since neither the DSE studies [ Sch+05 ] nor the lattice calculations [
CucMenMih04 , Ste+05 , Maa07 ] show any infrared divergences, the
dressing function of the ghost-gluon vertex must be some finite
function. To investigate the consequences of a finite dressing function
of the ghost-gluon vertex, let us assume, for simplicity, that it is
given by a finite constant,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant @xmath can be determined by self-consistently solving the
DSE for the ghost-gluon vertex in the infrared gluon limit, see section
2.6 , where @xmath is the tree-level ghost-gluon vertex. Then, the
infrared analysis of the propagators can be performed in the same way as
above. The ghost self-energy and the ghost loop are both multiplied by
the constant @xmath . After evaluation of the integrals, this constant
appears on both sides of the equation @xmath , cf. Eq. ( 2.61 ), and
thus trivially cancels. Therefore, a constant dressing of the
ghost-gluon vertex is completely irrelevant for the infrared behavior of
the propagators.

The question that arises is if a non-constant dressing of the
ghost-gluon vertex might result in a change for the determining equation
( 2.61 ) of @xmath . The investigations in Ref. [ Sch+05 ] showed that
after one iteration step of the ghost-gluon vertex DSE, the vertex
remains approximately tree-level over the whole momentum range, i.e.
@xmath . Also, the results in Ref. [ Sch+05 ] confirmed that for
vanishing incoming ghost momentum @xmath , the ghost-vertex becomes
tree-level in the Landau gauge ⁷ ⁷ 7 This agrees with the corresponding
Slavnov–Taylor identity in the Landau gauge. , see Eq. ( 2.41 ).
Recalling the discussion in section 2.5 , this is expected to hold true
in the Coulomb gauge. If we discard the irrelevant component of the
vertex along the gluon momentum @xmath , @xmath also becomes tree-level
for vanishing outgoing ghost momentum @xmath [ LerSme02 ,
dipl_Schleifenbaum ] , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, the infrared limits of the ghost and gluon momenta are
generally not interchangeable In particular, zero gluon momentum yields
a dressing that is different from unity, although quite close to it, as
we will see. The following relation shall define @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Does @xmath or a non-constant @xmath affect the value for the infrared
exponent @xmath ? To see this, it is not necessary to get involved in a
numerical calculation but we can argue qualitatively instead. Consider
any loop integral that involves the ghost-gluon vertex. Wherever it may
appear in the loop diagram, the ghost-gluon vertex is always attached to
ghost propagators. The integrand will be strongly enhanced for those
loop momenta where the ghost propagator diverges, i.e. for @xmath .
Since the gluon propagator, on the other hand, is finite for all
momenta, any infrared singularities in the integrand of the loop
integral can actually be due to the ghost propagator only. The
ghost-gluon vertex does not introduce any additional singularities,
since its dressing function is finite. For the value of the integral,
the singularities in the integrand will give the dominant contribution.
The only value of the dressing function of the ghost-gluon vertex that
is relevant to the integral, is then the one where any of the ghost
momenta vanish. According to Eq. ( 3.74 ), the vertex is tree-level in
these limits. We can therefore infer that in any loop integral the
tree-level ghost-gluon vertex will yield the correct result. This
circumstance can thus be traced back to the horizon condition and the
transversality of the gluon propagator. In Ref. [ LerSme02 ] , infrared
divergent dressing functions of the ghost-gluon vertex were employed and
it was shown that @xmath does not vary much.

Nevertheless, the constant @xmath , defined by Eq. ( 3.75 ) is not
entirely meaningless since the introduction of a running coupling, see
chapter 4 below, makes use of it. One can actually analytically
calculate @xmath by means of the DSE for the ghost-gluon vertex [ Sch+05
] , see Fig. 3.6 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a graph with two full ghost and one full gluon
propagator in the loop,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.77)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and @xmath has two gluon and one ghost propagator in the loop, but
involves a proper reduced three-gluon vertex @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.78)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Comparing Eq. ( 3.76 ) and Eq. ( 2.39 ), the four-point function @xmath
used in section 2.5 can be expanded to yield the two graphs @xmath and
@xmath , as well as a proper four-point function omitted here. For
further details, see Ref. [ Sch+05 ] .

Since @xmath exists in the limit @xmath [ Sch+05 , CucMenMih04 , Ste+05
] , we set @xmath in the integrands which greatly simplifies the tensor
structure of Eqs. ( 3.77 ) and ( 3.78 ). Furthermore, the proper
ghost-gluon vertices that appear in the loop integrals are rendered
tree-level, as discussed above. We then get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Naively, we would expect from ghost dominance in the infrared that the
contribution ( 3.80 ) is subdominant since it incorporates only one and
not two ghost propagators, like ( 3.79 ). Using a tree-level three-gluon
vertex, we can calculate both integrals for @xmath in the infrared
integral approximation and indeed find that the graph ( 3.80 ) becomes
negligible. If the dressed three-gluon vertex ( 3.71 ) is included, the
graph ( 3.80 ) has a substantial contribution to this limit of the
ghost-gluon vertex. The calculation is then somewhat more involved and
deferred to appendix C , but one can extract from it the value of C
solving the infrared limit of the DSE ( 3.76 ) self-consistently. For
the various solutions of @xmath found in chapter 2.6 , the numerical
values of @xmath are shown in Table 3.2 . ⁸ ⁸ 8 Note that the results (
3.2 ) are independent of @xmath . The color trace that occurs in the
loop diagrams of Eq. ( 3.76 ) yields a factor of @xmath , see Eqs. (
3.77 ) and ( 3.78 ), but it cancels with the propagator coefficient term
@xmath .

It is quite remarkable that in the Coulomb gauge with the solution
@xmath , the two non-trivial graphs that appear in the DSE for the
ghost-gluon vertex show an exact mutual cancellation in the infrared
gluon limit,

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.81)
  -- -- -- --------

so that the corrections to tree-level vanish and @xmath . Therefore, the
interchangeability of limits is recovered in this case only and the
ghost-gluon vertex becomes tree-level in all infrared limits. ⁹ ⁹ 9 An
extension to ghost-antighost symmetric Landau gauge is straightforward
and is seen not to alter the results for @xmath . For other values of
@xmath and @xmath , the ghost-gluon vertex is not regular in the
infrared. It must be granted that the omission of the four-point
function in the vertex DSE spoils the argument. A skeleton expansion of
the omitted object would be an interesting project. The original
derivation of the Landau gauge solution for @xmath in Ref. [ LerSme02 ]
relied on the regularity of the ghost-gluon vertex in the infrared.
Their result @xmath for @xmath does not produce a regular ghost-gluon
vertex though, the infrared limits are not interchangeable. As long as
the omitted four-point function has no effect, this would contradict the
working hypothesis of Ref. [ LerSme02 ] .

### 3.6 Coulomb form factor

The success of finding a linear heavy quark potential @xmath in the
Coulomb gauge Hamiltonian approach relies on the approximation made for
the expectation value @xmath , see section 2.7 . The Coulomb form factor
@xmath was defined by Eq. ( 3.24 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

and here we try and assess the factorization @xmath , i.e. @xmath . To
this end, we employ the operator identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

which follows easily from @xmath . We refer to the interesting relation
( 3.83 ), first written down in Ref. [ MarSwi84 ] , as the Marrero-Swift
relation . Taking the expectation value of ( 3.83 ) in the Gaussian
vacuum and neglecting contributions of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging the ghost DSE ( 2.48 ) into Eq. ( 3.84 ), an integral equation
for @xmath is derived,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.85)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which agrees with the DSE ( 3.30 ) for @xmath displayed above. With a
power law ansatz for @xmath in the infrared,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

we now aim at a solution of the Coulomb form factor DSE ( 3.86 ). For
@xmath , one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eq. ( 3.88 ) we can see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

has to be fulfilled. The above relation from the Coulomb form factor DSE
can now be plugged into the coefficient rule ( 2.60 ) from the ghost DSE
to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now specify the spatial dimension @xmath . For @xmath , Eq. ( 3.91 )
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

The numerical solution to this equation gives @xmath as a function of
@xmath , as shown in Fig. 3.7 . One can see immediately that for any
value of @xmath , the ghost exponent @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, recalling the results for @xmath in Table 2.1 , there exists
no value of @xmath for which all three DSEs are satisfied.

It is instructive to focus on the case where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

since this leads directly to a linearly rising potential for static
quarks. Plugging this constraint into Eq. ( 3.92 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the numerical solution @xmath . Surprisingly, this result is
exactly agreed upon by lattice calculations [ LanMoy04 ] , where @xmath
was found. However, one should notice that the lattice calculations
carried out so far in Coulomb gauge and also in Landau gauge use too
small lattices to give reliable results in the infrared.

In @xmath dimensional Coulomb gauge, the calculations are equivalent.
From a simultaneous treatment of the ghost DSE and the gluon DSE we find
from the stochastic vacuum results in section 2.6 a unique solution for
the ghost exponent [ Zwa02 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that with angular approximation the result is @xmath . In a recent
publication [ FeuRei07 ] , the value ( 3.96 ) for @xmath was confirmed
numerically. On the other hand, if we consider only the ghost DSE and
the equation for the Coulomb form factor for @xmath , one gets by
enforcement of the condition Eq. ( 3.91 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

The numerical solution is shown in Fig. 3.8 . If we require the
potential to be linearly rising, the solution has to obey @xmath . Eq. (
3.97 ) then leads to the numerical value of @xmath . Lattice results do
not agree with this value [ diss_Moyaerts ] , although they do for
@xmath dimensions.

It is interesting to note that, leaving the DSE for @xmath aside, a
restriction on the infrared exponents ( 3.93 ) arises from
self-consistency of the equations for @xmath and @xmath only. This
restriction also concerns the infrared behavior of @xmath via the sum
rule ( 2.54 ). Consider a fixed wave functional with a kernel @xmath
that yields @xmath by its infrared behavior. In principle, it should be
possible to calculate @xmath and @xmath for such a wave functional.
However, due to the restriction ( 3.93 ), no solution can be found. We
therefore conclude that the Eq. ( 3.93 ) must be due to the
approximations made in the DSEs for @xmath and @xmath . The relaxation
of the horizon condition allows for a self-consistent solution of all
DSEs where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are infrared finite. This
will be shown in section 3.7 . However, we consider the infrared
enhancement, of @xmath in particular, as the driving mechanism in the
Gribov–Zwanziger confinement scenario. Therefore, we infer from the
above discussion that the DSE for @xmath , as it stands in Eq. ( 3.86 ),
along with the resulting restriction ( 3.93 ) on @xmath , must be
ignored.

Let us reconsider the Marrero-Swift relation ( 3.83 ) with focus on the
neglect of @xmath . In the infrared limit, the ghost propagator becomes
independent of the gauge coupling @xmath , as seen in the stochastic
vacuum,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.98)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in Eq. ( 3.98 ) the notation reads @xmath . Using the above
relation and taking a derivative @xmath of the ghost DSE ( 2.48 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

Neglecting @xmath , one must run into contradictions. In the expectation
value of the Marrero-Swift relation ( 3.83 ), the neglected terms can be
carried along for the stochastic vacuum to give

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.100)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

There are two extra terms that were omitted in Eq. ( 3.84 ), having the
mathematical structure of a covariance . This covariance also occurs in
the Gaussian vacuum. Since with Eq. ( 3.98 ) we have @xmath , the
covariance cancels the Coulomb propagator @xmath on the r.h.s. of Eq. (
3.100 ) in favor of a ghost propagator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The derivation of the Coulomb form factor DSE ( 3.86 ) would therefore
fail if the approximation @xmath was relaxed. This does not mean that
the DSE ( 3.86 ) is wrong within the chosen approximation scheme.
Applying Wick’s theorem to derive an integral equation for @xmath in the
one-loop approximation also leads to Eq. ( 3.86 ). However, the above
considerations do show that, for the asymptotic infrared, the DSE ( 3.86
) for @xmath describes a higher-order effect. On the level of
approximations used, we find from Eqs. ( 3.84 ) and ( 3.98 ) that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.102)
  -- -- -- ---------

Plugging this into the Coulomb form factor DSE ( 3.30 ) yields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which explicitly contradicts the ghost DSE ( 3.29 ), note the plus sign.
This contradiction is the analogon of Eq. ( 3.99 ) for @xmath .

In conclusion, the quality of the approximation scheme must be improved
in order to satisfy the DSE for the Coulomb form factor. Vertex
corrections, which effectively increment the loop order, would be an
interesting starting point in that direction.

### 3.7 Subcritical solutions

Although it was argued above that in the chosen approximation scheme,
the DSE ( 3.86 ) for the Coulomb form factor @xmath should be ignored,
we here relax the horizon condition to still find a solution to all
DSEs. The renormalization parameter @xmath distinguishes the subcritical
solutions for @xmath and the critical ones for @xmath . The subcritical
form factors @xmath and @xmath , the gap function @xmath , and the
curvature @xmath are all infrared finite functions, as the numerical
calculation shows [ Epp+07 ] . In Fig. 3.9 , the functions @xmath and
@xmath are shown for @xmath and @xmath . The functions @xmath and @xmath
are shown in a common plot in Fig. 3.10 , for several values of @xmath .
These functions solve their respective DSEs self-consistently. The DSE (
3.86 ) for @xmath is solved as well for subcritical @xmath . Lowering
the value of @xmath , the solutions are seen to break down. The smallest
possible value for which all DSEs are solved self-consistently with
positive @xmath and @xmath was found to be @xmath . In the numerical
calculations, the other renormalization parameters were chosen such that
@xmath and @xmath . With the subcritical solutions so obtained, one may
calculate the heavy quark potential @xmath , as shown in Fig. 3.10 . For
intermediate quark separation @xmath , the potential @xmath is
approximately linear; fitting the slope to the lattice string tension,
@xmath is found to be in the range of hadronic phenomenology. However,
for @xmath , the heavy quark potential becomes questionable since
permanent confinement is lost for the subcritical solutions. In
addition, the running coupling @xmath vanishes in the infrared, as seen
in the forthcoming chapter. Altogether, the implications of the
subcritical solutions for the infrared physics are not compatible with
Coulomb confinement. This indicates that the horizon condition must not
be abandoned. Despite the inconsistency in the DSE for @xmath , which is
due to higher-order effects, we favor the solutions with critical @xmath
, i.e. with the horizon condition implemented where the functions @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath are infrared enhanced.

## Chapter 4 Running coupling and ultraviolet behavior

A quantitatively correct treatment of QCD, with the possibility to
describe phenomenological effects, needs to take into account accurately
its scale @xmath . In the absence of flavor charges, @xmath , this is
the only scale of the theory. The value of @xmath can be related to the
perturbative expansion of the (Gell–Mann–Low) beta function,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

that describes the dependence of the renormalized gauge coupling @xmath
on the renormalization scale @xmath . Solving the differential equation
( 4.1 ) with neglect of @xmath , the gauge coupling is seen to diverge
at the scale

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This breakdown of perturbation theory occurs at a finite @xmath , if
@xmath , giving rise to dimensional transmutation of the dimensionless
gauge coupling to the dimensionful energy scale @xmath . The @xmath
coefficient of the beta function ( 4.1 ), @xmath , is a gauge invariant
quantity that is calculated in perturbation theory to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Higher order coefficients of the beta function were obtained in
cumbersome calculations [ TarVlaZha80 , RitVerLar97 ] and serve for an
improved matching of @xmath to experiment.

High-energy experiments are able to provide us with the scale @xmath
immanent in QCD. ¹ ¹ 1 Estimates can also be obtained directly by
lattice simulations [ ProRacSim06 ] . A physical process that involves
measurable quantities, e.g. the mass of the @xmath boson, needs to be
described by theoretical calculations which are then compared to the
experimental data. The corresponding scattering matrix is computed by
means of perturbative QCD, preferably in a covariant gauge, in a certain
chosen renormalization scheme. As a result, the running coupling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be extracted for the momentum @xmath of the given process. For the
mass @xmath of the Z boson, it is found that @xmath in the @xmath scheme
and by the extrapolation of the perturbative @xmath into the infrared, ²
² 2 Various conventions exist for the definition of the @xmath function
and its coefficients of the perturbative expansion. The barred symbols
in Eq. ( 4.5 ) are related to those of Eq. ( 4.1 ) by @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

one finds @xmath MeV [ PDG04 ] . They do, however, depend on the
renormalization prescription, hence the subscript on @xmath , as an
artefact of perturbation theory. A change in the renormalization
prescription can in fact be compensated for by a finite renormalization
group transformation. It is the truncation of the perturbative series
that makes the running coupling scheme dependent [ CelGon79 ] .

The variational solutions presented in the previous chapter only loosely
account for the ultraviolet properties of the theory and it will be
shown that the @xmath function turns out to be slightly incorrect. The
first few coefficients of the beta function, in particular @xmath ,
record inaccuracies of the solutions and any observable is immensely
sensitive to such errors, as can be seen directly in Eq. ( 4.2 ). If the
nonperturbative variational solutions are to give quantitatively
sensible results, they have to reproduce @xmath with high accuracy. In
this chapter, we first recall the crucial properties of the YM coupling
constant and then define a nonperturbative running coupling to come by
some information on how the Green functions are to behave in the
ultraviolet.

### 4.1 Anti-screening of color charges

An effect specific to the non-abelian nature of YM theory is the
anti-screening of color charges. The interaction of two color charges on
a short distance can be treated by perturbation theory. The perturbative
corrections increase the magnitude of the (renormalized) color charges,
i.e. the potential is “anti-screened”, contrary to the abelian theory.
Anti-screening is a crucial property of YM theory and intimately
connected to asymptotic freedom.

One may find the potential between two color charges by setting up a
basis of states @xmath in the absence of external charges, then turning
on @xmath , that is @xmath , and calculating the correction to the
potential energy @xmath to second order in @xmath , ³ ³ 3 The
Faddeev–Popov determinants @xmath are omitted since they do not
contribute in the lowest-order perturbation in @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The screening vacuum polarization is of course still present as the
manifestly negative contribution @xmath in ( 4.6 ). Its calculation in a
perturbative expansion in the bare gauge coupling @xmath to order @xmath
is familiar from the vacuum polarization in the abelian theory [ Peskin
] . To let two point-like charges, @xmath as in ( 2.72 ), approach each
other from an infinite separation to @xmath , the energy @xmath is
needed. The momentum space potential @xmath comprises the screening
contribution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the cut-off @xmath regularizes the UV divergence and the quadratic
Casimir yields here for @xmath the value @xmath . The screening effect
is, however, over-compensated by the contribution @xmath . To see that,
expand the non-abelian Coulomb operator around its abelian part,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and then take the expectation value, see e.g. Ref. [ book_Lee ] , where
the third term in ( 4.8 ) strengthens the potential,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that in the abelian theory only the first term in the perturbative
expansion ( 4.8 ) exists, and thus @xmath . The anti-screening
correction in Eq. ( 4.9 ) is genuinely non-abelian. In Fig. 4.1 , the
neatly separated screening and anti-screening contributions are shown
diagrammatically. The net effect of the @xmath contributions increases
the potential between static @xmath color charges,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as first demonstrated by Khriplovich for @xmath [ Khr70 ] .

The net anti-screening correction to the static quark potential can be
used to define the renormalized coupling @xmath , with the ambiguity in
subtracting the divergence inherent in the renormalization scale @xmath
. From the so-defined @xmath , the @xmath function may be calculated via
Eq. ( 4.1 ), reproducing its Nobel-prize awarded perturbative expansion
(with the interpretation of asymptotic freedom [ GroWil73 , Pol73 ] ),
as shown in Refs. [ Gri77 , Dre81 ] .

If we wish to extract correctly from the color Coulomb potential the
@xmath function for the variational solutions of chapter 3 , the form
factors are to behave appropriately in the ultraviolet. What exactly
“appropriately” means will become clear in the course of this chapter.
For starters, consider the Coulomb potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the part of the energy in the variational state that depends on the
separation of the charges, see Eq. ( 2.74 ). The self-energies, which
only regulate infrared divergences, are omitted. To lowest order in the
bare gauge coupling @xmath , @xmath . The @xmath term of Eq. ( 4.11 )
can be found by expanding the DSEs for @xmath ( 3.29 ) and for @xmath (
3.30 ) up to @xmath , using the lowest-order expression @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath and @xmath have the identical perturbative @xmath
expansion. Plugging these into Eq. ( 4.11 ), yields three times the same
@xmath term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

cf. the factor of @xmath in the expansion of the non-abelian Coulomb
operator ( 4.8 ). Regularized by a UV cut-off @xmath , the integral in
Eq. ( 4.14 ) to @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

in agreement with Eq. ( 4.9 ). Note, however, that only the
anti-screening contribution @xmath is thus accounted for. Determining
the state @xmath by the variational principle in the absence of color
charges and deriving the color Coulomb potential @xmath as a
perturbation around the vacuum, necessitates that the screening
contribution @xmath is carried along in the full second-order
perturbative expression as in Eq. ( 4.6 ).

The renormalized coupling @xmath is defined so as to render the
expression for @xmath finite, order by order in perturbation theory.
Decomposing an infinite quantity into a finite and an infinite part
always leaves an ambiguity that is controlled by the renormalization
scale @xmath . Using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the definition of the renormalized, @xmath -dependent @xmath , the
expression @xmath in Eq. ( 4.15 ) turns out finite up to @xmath if the
renormalization constant is chosen as ⁴ ⁴ 4 Swapping @xmath for @xmath
does not matter to the order considered.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath function, as defined by Eq. ( 4.1 ), can now be calculated
from Eqs. ( 4.16 ) and ( 4.17 ) to lowest order,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result does not agree with the canonical value of @xmath , see
Eq. ( 4.3 ), but it is clear why: only the contributions of longitudinal
gluons were considered to order @xmath , the screening contribution from
transversal gluons was omitted. For the same reason, the perturbative
renormalization group calculation of the color Coulomb potential [
CucZwa01 ] relates @xmath to the running coupling @xmath by @xmath with
@xmath . In the next sections, we aim to use a nonperturbative
definition of the running coupling.

### 4.2 Nonperturbative running coupling

Since the variational Coulomb gauge solution from chapter 3 is
nonperturbative, we seek here a nonperturbative definition of the
running coupling in order to match @xmath to our solutions. In the
Coulomb gauge, there are two possibilities for its definition, either
via the color Coulomb potential, or by means of the ghost-gluon vertex [
FisZwa05 ] . The nonrenormalization of the ghost-gluon vertex has proven
above to be a useful common property of both the Coulomb and Landau
gauge. Here, it is first discussed how the Landau gauge ghost-gluon
vertex may define a nonperturbative running coupling and afterwards we
turn to the Coulomb gauge.

#### Landau gauge running coupling from ghost-gluon vertex

The local off-shell formulation of Landau gauge YM theory allows for
multiplicative renormalization of the fields by the introduction of
renormalization constants @xmath . Some of these are related to one
another by the fact that @xmath , the renormalization constant of the
gauge coupling, can be defined by any of the interaction terms in the YM
Lagrangian, namely the ghost-gluon vertex, the quark-gluon vertex, the
three- and the four-gluon vertex. The equality of the gauge coupling for
all these interactions is expressed by the Slavnov–Taylor identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the renormalization constant of the three-gluon vertex,
@xmath the one of the ghost-gluon vertex, while @xmath and @xmath
renormalize gluon and ghost fields,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

An unambiguous definition of the @xmath ’s requires renormalization
prescriptions. We define the theory at the scale @xmath by setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nonrenormalization of the ghost-gluon vertex in Landau gauge infers
that @xmath is a finite number, independent of @xmath . Therefore the
quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

is finite, due to @xmath , and @xmath -independent, since the l.h.s. in
@xmath -independent. One may set @xmath but any other finite number will
also do in an appropriate renormalization prescription, recall section
2.5 . It is left arbitrary here. In the perturbative momentum
subtraction scheme, the values @xmath define the renormalized quantities
on the r.h.s. of Eq. ( 4.22 ). Nonperturbative Green functions might not
allow for such a simple subtraction scheme. We therefore generalize it [
SmeHauAlk98 ] by setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Other schemes can be accomplished by performing a finite
renormalization, see below.

In Eq. ( 4.22 ), one may choose @xmath freely. Leaving @xmath once
unspecified and setting it once to @xmath leads with ( 4.21 ) to a
nonperturbative definition of the running coupling [ SmeHauAlk98 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the factors on the r.h.s. are @xmath -dependent, the running
coupling @xmath on the l.h.s. is renormalization scale- and scheme
independent. Note that the finite value @xmath drops out. Applying a
finite renormalization such as @xmath , @xmath in order to discuss the
case @xmath , the running coupling can be expressed by the transformed
quantities,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have set @xmath . Note that these simple scalings are not
renormalization group transformations in the usual sense since they do
not depend on the scale @xmath . It will be shown explicitly below that
the (asymptotic) behavior of the running coupling is ignorant to such
scalings.

A different point of view is frequently found in the literature, see
e.g. Ref. [ AtkBlo98 ] . One may always absorb finite transformations by
a transformation in @xmath such that @xmath is left unchanged (usually
chosen to be unity). The running coupling ( 4.24 ) then stays
form-invariant. Here, we prefer to leave @xmath unchanged and allow for
a change in @xmath and use Eq. ( 4.25 ) as the running coupling.

#### Coulomb gauge running coupling from ghost-gluon vertex

A running coupling in Coulomb gauge may be defined in analogy to the
Landau gauge from the ghost-gluon vertex. The multiplicative
renormalization, however, is not as well-understood in the Coulomb
gauge. From within a class of interpolating gauges where multiplicative
renormalization was discussed in Ref. [ BauZwa99 ] , the Coulomb gauge
limit may be taken, breaking the path for a definition similar to Eq. (
4.25 ) in the Landau gauge [ FisZwa05 ] . We adopt this definition here.

Using the notation @xmath for the ghost form factor ( 3.23 ) and @xmath
for the equal-time gluon propagator ( 3.5 ), both renormalized
multiplicatively,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , we find from the ghost-gluon vertex analogously to Eq. (
4.22 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Allowing for a change in the renormalization prescription, @xmath , one
may either absorb it by a change in @xmath , or (as above) redefine
@xmath . Accordingly to ( 4.25 ), the latter choice leads directly to
the running coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath is here @xmath and all interactions are instantaneous.
⁵ ⁵ 5 For equal times, the tree-level gluon propagator is @xmath , see
Eq. ( 3.31 ). Therefore, the definition ( 4.29 ) is larger than in
Landau gauge ( 4.25 ) by a factor of @xmath . The running coupling (
4.29 ) was given in Ref. [ FisZwa05 ] with a prefactor of @xmath ,
chosen as to recover the Landau gauge infrared limit from within the
interpolating gauge. According to the discussion above, this factor
needs to be interpreted as @xmath .

#### Coulomb gauge running coupling from the color Coulomb potential

Another renormalization group invariant that qualifies to define a
nonperturbative running coupling is the instantaneous color Coulomb
potential @xmath . It was shown in Ref. [ Zwa98 ] that the product
@xmath is a renormalization group invariant and in Ref. [ CucZwa01 ] how
the quantity @xmath actually relates to @xmath . We may accordingly
define the running coupling in Coulomb gauge also by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor of @xmath accounts for the fact that @xmath only comprises
the anti-screening contribution and over-emphasizes this effect. While
in the ultraviolet the definition ( 4.30 ) is expected to agree with the
definition ( 4.29 ) of the running coupling from the ghost-gluon vertex,
the infrared behavior turns out to disagree drastically. In view of the
confining long-range part of @xmath , the running coupling in Eq. ( 4.30
) diverges for @xmath , a clear instance of infrared slavery. On the
other hand, the definition ( 4.29 ) will yield a running coupling that
freezes in the infrared, see below.

### 4.3 Ultraviolet behavior of Green functions

Given relations that express the running coupling in terms of the Green
functions nonperturbatively, one may extract information on these Green
functions in the UV domain, where the running coupling is known from
perturbation theory. Solving the @xmath expansion of the @xmath function
( 4.1 ) as a differential equation for @xmath yields for large @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ultraviolet behavior of the nonperturbative propagators has to be
such that the nonperturbative running couplings defined in section 4.2
approach the function ( 4.31 ). Further information can be extracted by
solving the ghost Dyson–Schwinger equation self-consistently with an
ansatz for the ultraviolet behavior. This ansatz requires an educated
guess.

Despite asymptotic freedom, the Green functions do not asymptotically
become tree-level in the ultraviolet. Weinberg’s theorem states that
there can be logarithmic corrections [ Wei60 ] , and an ansatz for the
gluon and ghost propagators for @xmath might therefore read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.32a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.32b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The exponents of the logarithms are specified by the renormalization
group in relation to the anomalous dimensions of the gluon and the ghost
field [ GroWil73 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.33a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.33b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the Landau gauge, this relation is given by [ GroWil73 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.34b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Oftentimes, the logarithmic exponents @xmath and @xmath in ( 4.32 ) are
referred to as anomalous dimensions of the gluon and the ghost, although
strictly speaking they are only the lowest order coefficients of the
anomalous dimensions @xmath and @xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.33 ) and
divided by @xmath .

We now try to reproduce the well-established results ( 4.34 ) from our
nonperturbative study of Dyson–Schwinger equations in Landau gauge. In
the same procedure, we may then go on to determine the UV behavior of
Coulomb gauge propagators.

#### Landau gauge anomalous dimensions

Consider the ( @xmath ) Landau gauge ghost DSE multiplicatively
renormalized in the scheme ( 4.21 ), where @xmath , @xmath and the
ghost-gluon vertex is evaluated at some momentum configuration to define
a value of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

A renormalization prescription that does not agree with ( 4.23 ) is
accounted for by a change in @xmath . In order to study the ghost DSE (
4.35 ) in the asymptotic ultraviolet limit, the following ansätze are
made:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.36a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.36b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

These satisfy the renormalization prescriptions ( 4.21 ) for @xmath and
behave like the proposed ultraviolet behavior ( 4.32 ) for @xmath , with
coefficients @xmath and @xmath . Rewrite the ghost DSE ( 4.35 ) by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integral @xmath can then be asymptotically evaluated for
@xmath with a dimensionally regularized UV divergence, ⁶ ⁶ 6 One can
integrate for @xmath and @xmath and expand in @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Only one term is dominant which turns out to be the one
found by the “angular approximation”. We restrict the calculation to
@xmath . Furthermore, the expansion of the incomplete gamma function

@xmath

is used.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (4.38)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Terms that vanish for @xmath were discarded. Matching this result to the
l.h.s. of the ghost DSE ( 4.37 ) leads to a sum rule of the anomalous
dimensions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The infinite part of the renormalization constant @xmath is identified
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where setting the finite part to zero puts QCD into a nonperturbative
phase. ⁷ ⁷ 7 It was discussed in Ref. [ Zwa03a ] that the horizon
condition does not allow @xmath for @xmath and hence contradicts
perturbation theory.

We may now plug the asymptotic forms ( 4.36 ) into the running coupling
( 4.25 ) to obtain with Eq. ( 4.40 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the finite value of @xmath specific to the renormalization
scheme drops out. The above UV limit expression for the nonperturbative
@xmath can be compared to the perturbative expression ( 4.31 ) to yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

in agreement with the perturbative result for @xmath in Eq. ( 4.34 ).

#### Coulomb gauge anomalous dimensions

Since the above UV analysis of the nonperturbative ghost Dyson–Schwinger
equation successfully yielded the correct anomalous dimensions for the
Landau gauge, we use the same method to extract the anomalous dimensions
for the gluon and ghost fields in the Coulomb gauge.

The multiplicatively renormalized ghost DSE reads in terms of @xmath and
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the ansätze

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

give for @xmath the values @xmath and @xmath , resp., whereas the @xmath
behavior is determined by the coefficients @xmath and @xmath and the
exponents @xmath , @xmath , similarly to the Landau gauge. Setting the
renormalization constant @xmath to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

enforces the horizon condition (cf. Eq. 4.41 ), and one may calculate
the integral in Eq. ( 4.45 ) for @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.47)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have matched the exponents by means of the sum rule

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the coefficients are found to to obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these results, the Coulomb gauge running coupling ( 4.29 ) gives
for the ultraviolet limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in comparison to its known gauge invariant behavior ( 4.31 ) this
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the canonical value ( 4.3 ) for @xmath and by virtue of the sum
rule ( 4.48 ), the logarithmic exponents of ghost and gluon propagators
can thus be found to yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The lowest order anomalous dimensions (cf. Eq. 4.34 ) @xmath and @xmath
agree with the purely perturbative calculation [ WatRei07a , privWeb ,
Zwa98 ] . Therefore, a full numerical nonperturbative solution is
expected to yield the ultraviolet behavior specified by ( 4.45 ) with
the logarithmic exponents ( 4.52 ).

Recalling the numerical solution from chapter 3 , the values for @xmath
and @xmath , see Eq. ( 3.58 ), were

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the sum rule ( 4.48 ) is satisfied by the above values. In the
calculation that led to ( 4.52 ), we required @xmath to be the canonical
value. We may turn the argument around, assume the numerical solutions (
4.53 ) and calculate @xmath from the UV behavior of the resulting
running coupling, cf. Eq. ( 4.51 ). This procedure yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The disagreement of @xmath with @xmath is small, but in view of the
exponential dependence of the QCD scale on @xmath , a slightly erroneous
result for @xmath will make a sensible assignment of @xmath hopeless.
The failure to find the correct @xmath is clearly due to the
approximations made. The Gaussian wave functionals used eliminate the
gluon loop in the gap equation since there exists no tree-level
three-gluon vertex. From purely perturbative calculations it is known
that the gluon loop is essential for the gluon self-energy to preserve
gauge invariance and produce the correct @xmath . A nonperturbative
calculation therefore requires a truncation that involves the gluon loop
as well. However, DSE studies in Landau gauge showed that the dressing
of the three-gluon vertex in the gluon loop must be highly non-trivial [
SmeHauAlk98 , AtkBlo98 ] , and to achieve results with the canonical
@xmath value a momentum dependent renormalization constant @xmath is
proposed [ FisAlkRei02 ] . In the Hamiltonian approach with a wave
functional, the extraction of the right @xmath was pursued from the
Coulomb interaction using perturbative UV tails for the form factors [
Bro98 , BroKog99 ] . It is not clear at present how to manipulate the
wave functional such that the nonperturbative UV behavior ( 4.45 ) with
correct values for @xmath and @xmath is reproduced from analyzing the
gap equation in the Coulomb gauge Hamiltonian approach.

The agreement of the result ( 4.54 ) with Refs. [ SzcSwa02 , FeuRei04 ]
is coincidental. There, after factoring out @xmath from the ghost form
factor, the @xmath function was defined as the (logarithmic) derivative
of the tree-level term in the ghost equation, being @xmath . However,
this term is actually @xmath , see Eq. ( 4.44 ). What was proposed as
the @xmath function was actually

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. twice the anomalous dimension of the ghost form factor. With the
specific value of @xmath , these objects are indeed identical, since
@xmath .

An alternative way to calculate the @xmath function from the
nonperturbative variational solutions in the Coulomb gauge is to extract
information from the heavy quark potential @xmath . Since the
nonperturbative running coupling can also be defined via @xmath , see
Eq. ( 4.30 ), the Coulomb form factor @xmath must yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Making an ansatz for the Coulomb form factor @xmath in the ultraviolet,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

therefore provides a sum rule for the logarithmic exponents @xmath and
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the UV ansatz ( 4.57 ) for the form factor @xmath can be
plugged into its DSE ( 3.30 ) to yield after UV analysis ⁸ ⁸ 8 In the
same manner as for the infrared analysis in section 3.6 , the asymptotic
evaluation of the DSE for @xmath gives no additional condition on the
(power or logarithmic) exponents. This is due to the fact the product
@xmath behaves like @xmath in the infrared and like @xmath in the
ultraviolet, as a consequence of the ghost-gluon vertex’
nonrenormalization.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

By comparison of the above relation to the identity ( 4.49 ) from the UV
analysis of the ghost DSE, we infer that @xmath and with the sum rules (
4.58 ) and ( 4.48 ) this yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

One may now use Eq. ( 4.51 ) from the ghost-gluon vertex to calculate
@xmath as a function of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The occurrence of the anti-screening contribution @xmath is familiar
from the consideration of the instantaneous potential, see section 4.1 .
Apparently, the non-instantaneous part needs to be taken into account,
possibly in the manner proposed in Ref. [ CucZwa01 ] .

Apart from the technical difficulties to arrive at the correct value for
@xmath automatically, the above considerations showed that it is
possible to extract a certain ultraviolet behavior of the Coulomb gauge
Green functions, having imposed the known value for @xmath . It may
therefore be expected that, once approximations can be relaxed, the
ultraviolet behavior according to Eqs. ( 4.45 ) and ( 4.52 ), i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

will be found numerically. Lattice calculations [ LanMoy04 ] claimed a
counter-intuitive UV power law @xmath . The data displayed in Fig. 3.3
also indicate an UV enhancement of @xmath . However, a stronger than
linear rising of @xmath might as well be an indication of the
logarithmic correction in ( 4.62 ). The lattice calculations in [ Qua+07
] agree with such a statement. This should be investigated further.

### 4.4 Infrared fixed point

In this section we investigate the infrared behavior of the Coulomb
gauge running coupling as defined by Eq. ( 4.29 ). Due to the
nonrenormalization property of the ghost-gluon vertex, the running
coupling attains a finite value in the infrared. The corresponding
@xmath function then has a fixed point in the infrared. This can be
readily seen by noting that the sum rule ( 2.54 ) for infrared exponents
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the Coulomb gauge where @xmath . Hence, with the infrared power laws
( 2.50 ) with coefficients @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , we
find for the infrared limit of the (equal-time) running coupling @xmath
in Eq. ( 4.29 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have made use of Eq. ( 2.60 ) which relates the infrared
coefficients @xmath and @xmath to the function @xmath defined by Eq. (
2.59b ). ⁹ ⁹ 9 A factor of @xmath needs to be reintroduced here, it was
set to unity in the infrared analysis of chapter 2 . For the preferred
solution with @xmath , we evaluate @xmath to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 4.2 , the running coupling as given in Eq. ( 4.29 ) is shown
with the full numerical solutions for @xmath and @xmath given in chapter
3 . The numerical value of @xmath is in excellent agreement with Eq. (
4.65 ). ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In Ref. [ EppReiSch07 ] , the definition of the running
coupling from Ref. [ FisZwa05 ] with a factor of @xmath in Eq. ( 4.29 )
was used without adjustment of @xmath . Therefore, the value of @xmath
was found to be higher by that factor, i.e. @xmath .

The other critical solutions for various spatial dimensions @xmath and
the respective solutions for @xmath yield different values for the
infrared limit of the running coupling. To study the dependence on the
dimension @xmath , we use here the Landau gauge running coupling @xmath
with @xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.25 ). The infrared limit yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

cf.  Eq. ( 4.64 ). For the three solution branches @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath shown in Fig. 2.5 , the value of @xmath is shown in Fig. 4.3 as a
function of the dimension @xmath . It is seen that for large @xmath ,
@xmath rises exponentially. For @xmath , which corresponds to the Landau
gauge @xmath dimensional YM theory, the solutions @xmath and @xmath
yield @xmath whereas for @xmath the infrared limit @xmath approaches a
finite value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The root @xmath does not show any qualitative change for @xmath where
all Landau gauge degrees of freedom are frozen. The solutions @xmath and
@xmath , on the other hand, do show a qualitative change at @xmath .
Granted the approximations made, the latter solutions with @xmath for
@xmath indicate what one may expect: the @xmath dimensional Landau gauge
calls for a separate treatment.

Returning to the @xmath Coulomb gauge, it is reassuring to see that the
running coupling in Fig. 4.2 is a monotonic function. Otherwise the
@xmath function would have spurious zeros (a problem that occurs in the
Landau gauge [ FisAlk02 ] ). The infrared finite value of the running
coupling infers that the @xmath function has an infrared fixed point for
@xmath . ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The infrared divergent running coupling ( 4.30 ) from
the heavy quark potential would not exhibit this infrared fixed point.
In Fig. 4.4 , several cases of the @xmath function are sketched. The
subcritical solutions (section 3.7 ), as opposed to the critical
solutions, do not have a sum rule of infrared exponents since all form
factors are infrared finite. The running coupling @xmath should have an
ultraviolet behavior similar to the one shown in Fig. 4.2 since the form
factor are qualitatively the same in the UV. However, in the infrared
one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is the running coupling from the ghost-gluon vertex vanishes in the
infrared for the subcritical solution. This behavior is unacceptable for
a theory that is strongly coupled in the infrared. In contrary to the
@xmath dimensional theory, the @xmath dimensional case requires a
non-vanishing coupling strength for the infrared degrees of freedom.
Moreover, if we hold onto asymptotic freedom, the additional requirement
( 4.68 ) yields a multi-valued @xmath function. The interpretation of
@xmath as a running coupling is then questionable since the zeros of the
@xmath function are not necessarily fixed points [ privSme ] . ¹² ¹² 12
The running coupling ( 4.30 ) extracted from the Coulomb potential would
yield an infrared finite limit for the subcritical solution and might
serve as a more sensible definition in this case. Aside from the
discussion in section 3.7 , this indicates that the subcritical
solutions are unphysical.

#### Vertex corrections

There exists the possibility of nonperturbative corrections to the
running coupling. This might be interesting even for the extraction of
@xmath by comparison to experiment [ PDG04 ] . It was suggested in Ref.
[ CucMenMih04 ] to multiply the running coupling with a contraction of
the ghost-gluon vertex in a certain momentum configuration. The infrared
limit of the thus corrected running coupling is denoted by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The value @xmath , defined by Eq. ( 3.75 ), describes the dressing of
the vertex in the infrared limit where first the gluon momentum is
approached to zero and afterwards the ghost momentum is taken to be
zero. With the help of the result obtained in table 3.2 for the number
@xmath , the corrections to @xmath can be be specified. They are shown
in table 4.1 for the various solutions of @xmath in question, in
comparison to the uncorrected values @xmath . Note that the solution
@xmath for @xmath is particular in the sense that it is not corrected by
the vertex contribution since @xmath .

In concluding this chapter, we give a brief outlook on future
investigations with the nonperturbative running coupling in the Coulomb
gauge. With an improved ultraviolet behavior of the Green functions, see
section 4.3 , it will be possible to adjust the scale in the Hamiltonian
approach to YM theory. This may be pursued by comparison to experimental
scattering amplitudes from deep inelastic scattering. The
nonperturbative feature of the variational solutions makes it then
possible to quantify other interesting objects numerically, such as,
e.g., the Coulomb string tension, or correlators of the high-temperature
phase of QCD.

## Chapter 5 Inclusion of external charges

In the Coulomb gauge, the Green functions were investigated in the
infrared limit in chapter 2 and for the entire momentum range with
variational methods in chapter 3 . These vacuum calculations include
only the interaction of gluons and ghosts, the coupling to the quark
sector is suppressed by setting @xmath . The translationally invariant
Green functions so obtained were discussed in the previous chapters, and
it was shown that the heavy quark potential is obtained by a
perturbation in @xmath . Although the crucial feature of linear
confinement is already given by the Green functions of the pure glue
theory, the back-reaction of the external charges on the wave functional
is lacking. One may expect that by extending the ansatz for the wave
functional in the presence of a quark-antiquark pair, for instance, the
energy can be lowered further by the formation of a flux tube connecting
these external charges. In this section, various approaches are
discussed by which the back-reaction of the external charges on the
gauge field sector can be studied.

### 5.1 Gluons in a quasi-particle representation

The vacuum wave functional used in chapter 3 is of Gaussian type. In
analogy to the quantum harmonic oscillator where the Gaussian ground
state is annihilated by a linear combination of the coordinate and
momentum operators, the variational YM vacuum state @xmath suggests the
introduction of an annihilation operator that yields @xmath . Its
hermitian conjugate @xmath may then be considered the creation operator
of a gluonic excitation at point @xmath . By means of these gluonic
excitations, an orthonormal basis of particle excitations can be
constructed [ privRei ] . In a normal order expansion of the Yang–Mills
Hamiltonian, the term @xmath occurs so that @xmath represents part of
the energy of a gluonic excitation with momentum @xmath . Since in the
infrared, the dispersion relation departs substantially from the
behavior @xmath of a free particle, these particle excitations are
regarded as quasi-particles, incorporating nonperturbative effects.

Before we define the quasi-particle basis, recall that the choice @xmath
for the wave functional in Eq. ( 3.1 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

formally eliminates the Faddeev–Popov determinant @xmath from
expectation values. The Coulomb gauge scalar product @xmath that
comprises @xmath after gauge fixing can be related to a scalar product
@xmath with a flat measure,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

if we identify

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

With these manipulations, expectation values can be calculated
straightforwardly by means of Wick’s theorem. Note that the expectation
values considered are not taken in the auxiliary Gaussian state @xmath
but actually in the state ( 5.1 ). The Gaussian @xmath is suitable to
define an annihilation operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

that yields ¹ ¹ 1 Strictly speaking, only the auxiliary vacuum @xmath
and not the true vacuum @xmath is annihilated by the operator @xmath .
Employing the replacement @xmath in the one-loop approximation, see
Eq. ( 3.13 ), a definition of the operator @xmath by means of @xmath
that annihilates @xmath could be pursued.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Above, the function @xmath is defined as the inverse square root of the
variational kernel @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and has the same dimension as the field operator @xmath . Adopting the
canonical commutation relations ² ² 2 Here, we write the @xmath
explicitly in order to emphasize that all fields are transverse. The
commutation relations ( 1.89 ) that involve the field dependent operator
@xmath are not considered here.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

the hermitian conjugate of Eq. ( 5.4 ) obeys

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and creates gluonic excitations by acting on the vacuum,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be shown to be orthogonal. Normalization of the states ( 5.9 )
by an appropriate choice of @xmath may be issued, if needed, in a finite
volume @xmath .

### 5.2 Coherent states

With the set of gluonic excitations formulated in the previous section,
we have a basis of the Hilbert space at our disposal in which a state
can be constructed taking the presence of external color charges into
account. This state, @xmath , is here chosen as a coherent superposition
of the excited states ( 5.9 ), where a localized function controls the
excitation of gluons in between the external color charges. This
function, @xmath , may be determined by the variational principle,
minimizing the expectation value of @xmath with the external charges
@xmath contained in @xmath .

Coherent states were first introduced by Schrödinger [ Sch26 ] in 1926
and further established by Glauber [ Gla63b ] in 1963 who laid the
keystone for developments in quantum optics and thus gained the 2005
physics Nobel prize (along with Hall and Häntsch). It will be
instructive here to briefly discuss the simple case of the
three-dimensional harmonic oscillator and thus expose the main features
of the coherent state. The Hamiltonian reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

are linear combinations of @xmath and @xmath that diagonalize @xmath for
@xmath . Due to @xmath , we have @xmath and the orthonormal states
@xmath can be shown to yield the equidistant spectrum @xmath with @xmath
. The vacuum state @xmath for @xmath has minimal energy @xmath and is
annihilated by ( 5.11 ), @xmath . The solution to the latter
differential equation yields the vacuum wave function in coordinate
space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now define the coherent state @xmath by acting with a unitary
operator @xmath on the vacuum state @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coherent states so defined are normalized if @xmath is, but they are
not orthogonal. The continuous index @xmath makes the set of coherent
states over-complete in the given Hilbert space with a countable basis.
Further properties of the coherent state are listed below:

1.  eigenstate of annihilation operator

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.14a)
      -- -------- -- ---------

2.  closure relation ³ ³ 3 The integral is taken over the complex planes
    of all components of @xmath . By inserting the closure relation into
    @xmath , the factor @xmath is cancelled by the integration of the
    polar angles in the complex planes.

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.14b)
      -- -------- -- ---------

3.  minimal uncertainty

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.14c)
      -- -------- -- ---------

4.  Poissonian distribution

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.14d)
      -- -------- -- ---------

5.  shifted vacuum wave function

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.14e)
      -- -------- -- ---------

To see the property e) first note that the operator @xmath in Eq. ( 5.13
) can be expressed by coordinate and momentum operators @xmath and
@xmath using Eq. ( 5.11 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

having abbreviated

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The well-known Campbell-Baker-Hausdorff formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which infers @xmath for @xmath a @xmath -number, helps to rewrite the
coherent state ( 5.13 ) and interpret it by a shifted vacuum wave
function,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we have used @xmath and assumed analyticity of @xmath . That is,
the wave function of the coherent state is, up to a @xmath -dependent
phase, the vacuum wave function, evaluated at @xmath . This proves Eq. (
5.14e ). Equivalently, using @xmath , we find for the momentum space
wave function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expectation values in the coherent state can thus be easily related to
vacuum expectation values,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For an operator @xmath that depends on both @xmath and @xmath , an
equivalent relation is derived. The most general form shall be referred
to as the shift rule :

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (5.21)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The utility of the above identities can be presented in a simple
example. Consider the three-dimensional harmonic oscillator ( 5.10 ) and
construct coherent states as defined above, Eq. ( 5.13 ). Now think of
the particles as charged and an external electric field @xmath being
switched on, @xmath . A prime in this chapter shall always indicate that
external fields are present. Let @xmath be split into a vector @xmath
parallel to @xmath and one perpendicular to it (accordingly for @xmath
). The energy @xmath in the coherent state is readily calculated using
the shift rule ( 5.21 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (5.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Minimizing @xmath clearly gives @xmath and @xmath . The wave function
@xmath is therefore shifted to @xmath . This happens to be the exact
vacuum wave function of @xmath , as seen directly by quadratic
completion,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ground state energy (actually the entire spectrum) is shifted to
@xmath .

In Yang–Mills theory, a less trivial situation is encountered. The
Hamiltonian @xmath is not diagonalized exactly, but by means of the
variational principle a quasi-particle basis can be set up. A coherent
state constructed in this basis is used to calculate the expectation
value of @xmath , and minimize the latter. We now discuss a comparable
quantum mechanic example. Let the anharmonic oscillator be defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

may be a helpful quantum mechanic example. We also fail to diagonalize
this Hamiltonian, but a Gaussian ansatz as in Eq. ( 5.12 ) with @xmath
as a variational parameter aids to find an approximate ground state. Its
width @xmath can be shown to yield for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

the minimal energy ⁴ ⁴ 4 A lowest-order expansion for small @xmath
agrees with Ref. [ BenWu69 ] for the one-dimensional case. Particular
care is required concerning the Riemann sheets when taking the @xmath
limit.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

As can be seen in Fig. 5.1 , the Gaussian ground state wave functional
becomes narrower for increasing the coefficient @xmath of the quartic
potential, while the energy increases. Note that for @xmath , the
results for the harmonic oscillator are recovered. For a comparison to
field theory, we discuss the variational solution to the @xmath theory
in the Hamiltonian approach in appendix D .

Similarly to the variational approach to YM theory, we have found an
approximate Gaussian ground state and can create quanta by the creation
operator in Eq. ( 5.11 ) with the Gaussian width @xmath given by Eq. (
5.25 ). Now switch on an external electric field,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and calculate the energy in the coherent state. The result gives the
ground state energy @xmath , see Eq. ( 5.26 ), and a correction
dependent on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For @xmath , the energy @xmath is equal to @xmath , as expected.
Minimizing @xmath w.r.t. @xmath yields some value @xmath . The result
will depend on the parameter @xmath of the quartic potential and the
electric force @xmath . Without giving the result explicitly, we can see
from Eq. ( 5.28 ) that for all values of @xmath and @xmath there exists
a @xmath such that @xmath , i.e. the energy is lowered in the coherent
state.

We now turn back to the original task, writing down a coherent state in
the quasi-particle basis of Yang–Mills theory. The over-complete set of
states, here given by Eq. ( 5.9 ), incorporates already the nontrivial
effects of the Hamiltonian @xmath ( 1.107 ) without external charges,
similar to the treatment of the quartic quantum mechanic potential
above. Using these states, the coherent state for Yang–Mills theory is
introduced here by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the field @xmath controls the excitations of gluons. By means of
Eq. ( 5.4 ), one can rewrite @xmath in terms of field operators,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the abbreviations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.32a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.32b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

were used. The expectation value of the Hamiltonian with charges, @xmath
, in the state ( 5.29 ) will be calculated in the next section.
Optimistically, we may hope that in analogy to the quantum mechanical
example, a nontrivial solution for a coherent state exists that lowers
the energy.

We provide here the definition of the coherent state energy,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is important to clarify which state it refers to as a Coulomb gauge
expectation value of @xmath (not @xmath ). Carefully treating operator
ordering, the energy ( 5.33 ) can be rewritten as a Coulomb gauge
expectation value,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is seen that by calculating @xmath via the auxiliary expectation
value ( 5.33 ) with a flat measure, the Coulomb gauge expectation value
of the Hamiltonian @xmath is taken in the state

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.35)
  -- -- -- --------

cf. Eq. ( 5.29 ). The corresponding wave functional is obtained by
acting with @xmath on the vacuum wave functional @xmath . With @xmath
given by Eq. ( 5.30 ), a Campbell-Baker-Hausdorff formula is needed to
find @xmath . From Eq. ( 5.17 ), it can be derived that for @xmath and
@xmath @xmath -numbers,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this relation, and the one-loop Gaussian approximation for the
Faddeev–Popov determinant ( 3.13 ), we find after some algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.3 Energy of Yang–Mills theory in the coherent state

In this section, the calculation of the energy @xmath in the coherent
state is presented. First of all, let us clarify how this energy is
defined. The coherent state ( 5.35 ) is used to calculate the
expectation value of the Yang–Mills Hamiltonian ( 1.107 ) in the
presence of external charges @xmath . Without external charges, the
Hamiltonian reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the definitions of the kinetic part,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

the magnetic potential part,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Coulomb part @xmath of the Hamiltonian which involves a
contribution coming from dynamical gluonic charges,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the presence of external charges, the total charge distribution
@xmath adds extra terms to the Coulomb part @xmath , so that the
Hamiltonian under consideration reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The energy in the presence of external charges in the coherent state
@xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where this expectation value involves after Coulomb gauge fixing the
Faddeev–Popov determinant @xmath . For the calculation of @xmath , it
will be extremely helpful to employ the shift rule as it was written
down in Eq. ( 5.21 ) for the quantum mechanic oscillator. Here, we can
find the equivalent “shifting effect” of the operator @xmath , given in
Eq. ( 5.30 ), on the operator @xmath (the use of the tilde was explained
in Eq. ( 5.3 )),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the calculations below, we always use the transformations ( 5.3 ),
ending up with the flat scalar product @xmath . For brevity, the
notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

is used. Furthermore, recall the matrix notation in coordinate space
from chapter 1 . It will sometimes be convenient in this chapter as
well. The spatial dimension @xmath is left unspecified.

The energy @xmath can be expressed by the results from chapter 3 if we
set @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the vacuum energy displayed below Eq. ( 3.19 ) and
@xmath is the Coulomb potential ( 2.73 ) in the vacuum state. In Eq. (
5.48 ), there are no contributions coming from @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.49)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We will see that in the coherent state the mixed term @xmath does have a
contribution to the energy. Let us emphasize that it is instructive to
stick to the coordinate space representation of the Green functions. The
transformation to momentum space is helpful in the vacuum where thus an
overall infinite factor @xmath can be extracted from the energy, due to
translational invariance. The coherent state, on the other hand,
accounts for localized external color charges and translational
invariance is lost. Therefore, an overall volume factor cannot be
expected and the Fourier transformation provides no simplification
whatsoever.

Let us turn to the calculation of the kinetic energy in the coherent
state. The kinetic part @xmath in Eq. ( 5.39 ) comprises the operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

that may be understood as a function of @xmath and @xmath . Applying the
shift rule ( 5.46 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.51)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

With the explicit form ( 5.3 ) of the Gaussian vacuum wave functional
@xmath , we use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

to define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the obvious notation @xmath . The kinetic energy in the coherent
state thus yields schematically

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we calculate, following Ref. [ FeuRei04 ] , with a quadratic
completion. To this end, define the curvature @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.55)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

With the definition of the ghost propagator @xmath with a coherent
background field,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

the curvature ( 5.55 ) can be expressed by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implicitly establishes a definition of the proper ghost-gluon
vertex @xmath in the coherent state; the latter will in actual
calculations be rendered tree-level, as before. Now, the second term in
Eq. ( 5.54 ) can be written using a partial integration as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (5.58)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the one-loop approximation, one can realize by expansion of the
Faddeev–Popov operators that the third term in Eq. ( 5.54 ), @xmath , is
simply obtained by writing the first two terms as a modulo square. With
@xmath as in Eq. ( 5.53 ), one thus finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is ready to write down the result for the kinetic energy,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

By setting the coherent field to zero, @xmath , the vacuum result ( 3.20
) is recovered.

We now proceed to the Coulomb part @xmath of the Hamiltonian where Eq. (
5.41 ) amounts to the Coulomb interaction of gluonic charges,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the expectation value of such operators, relation ( 5.52 ) can be
used. Noting that @xmath is a modulo square, the imaginary terms can be
explicitly eliminated to find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.62)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath as given in Eq. ( 5.53 ). To @xmath -loop order in the
energy, there are no contractions with the operator @xmath . On the
assumption that @xmath is symmetric in color and coordinate space
separately (just like @xmath ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-vanishing contractions in Eq. ( 5.62 ) then are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A careful treatment of all indices gives ⁵ ⁵ 5 The vacuum result ( 3.22
) can be recovered for @xmath by using @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we assigned

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expectation value of the dynamical charge @xmath in the coherent
state is in view of Eq. ( 5.63 )

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.66)
  -- -- -- --------

Hence, the mixed terms @xmath in the Coulomb energy yield without
contractions of the Coulomb operator @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Coulomb energy of solely external charges obviously yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The magnetic potential energy in the coherent state is yet to be
calculated. With the Hamiltonian given by Eq. ( 5.40 ), we find that the
vacuum energy @xmath as given in Eq. ( 3.21 ) is found in addition to
terms involving the coherent field,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.69)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

All but the last term, call it @xmath , are quite trivially obtained
using the shift rule ( 5.47 ). Since it is divergent, let us look at it
more carefully. It comes from the quartic part of @xmath after applying
the shift rule and contracting two gauge fields @xmath , leaving two
coherent fields @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.70)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using the symmetry of the vacuum gluon propagator, we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.71)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using a Fourier transform for @xmath and @xmath , we recover the
proposed expression in the last line of Eq. ( 5.69 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.72)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

has been employed. We note here, however, that @xmath is not necessarily
a well-defined quantity. Actually, if we consider that the gluon will
essentially behave like a free particle for high momentum, @xmath ,
there is an ultraviolet divergence of degree @xmath , i.e. quadratic for
@xmath . We therefore have an undefined expression in the coherent state
magnetic potential ( 5.69 ) which calls for renormalization.

#### Renormalization

The renormalization of the vacuum Green functions as discussed in
chapter 3 , suffices to render the shift @xmath of the coherent state
energy from the vacuum energy finite, as will be shown now. The
ultraviolet divergence in the magnetic potential energy ( 5.69 ) comes
as no surprise, for the magnetic potential operator ( 5.40 ) is a highly
local object. We now try to single out the divergent object from the
magnetic energy ( 5.69 ). To this end, we first realize that it is
contained in the quadratic term in the (terminating) Taylor series of
@xmath about @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.74)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Such a term with a second derivative inside a Gaussian expectation value
can be rewritten as, see Eq. ( E.6 ) in the appendix,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.75)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Note that @xmath is not given by only @xmath in Eq. ( 5.72 ) but also
includes the other term in Eq. ( 5.69 ) that is quadratic in @xmath .

In view of the gap equation, we know that @xmath was chosen to minimize
the vacuum energy, @xmath . Therefore, the divergent expression @xmath
in Eq. ( 5.75 ) can be expressed in terms of the kinetic vacuum energy
@xmath and the Coulomb vacuum energy @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above expression is now finite if we replace the bare form factors
by the renormalized ones.

To arrive at the finite expression for @xmath , one needs to evaluate

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.77a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.77b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.77c)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The implicit @xmath dependence of the form factors @xmath and of the
vacuum Coulomb propagator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

is omitted in the computation of Eq. ( 5.76 ); it would bring about
two-loop terms in the equations of motion. With the relations ( 5.77 ),
Eq. ( 5.76 ) can be shown to give

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The magnetic potential energy in the coherent state thus finally yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.80)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is given by Eq. ( 3.21 ) and @xmath by Eq. ( 5.3 ). The
shift @xmath is indeed finite for the variational solution of the
coherent field (any divergence will be suppressed, for @xmath is an
option).

#### Solution for the imaginary part of the coherent field

The energy @xmath in the coherent state sums up the magnetic energy (
5.80 ), the kinetic energy ( 5.60 ), and the Coulomb energy
contributions ( 5.3 ), ( 5.67 ) and ( 5.68 ). The real and imaginary
parts of the coherent field @xmath are to be determined by the
variational principle,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the Yang–Mills Hamiltonian has cubic and quartic terms in the
fields, we cannot algebraically solve these equations. However, the
energy expression is quadratic in the imaginary part of @xmath . The
relevant terms can be written in matrix notation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

This defines the matrix @xmath as well as @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.83)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The quadratic form ( 5.82 ) attains its minimal value @xmath for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to write down the coherent state energy @xmath minimal for the
imaginary part of the coherent field, replace the fields @xmath by the
expression ( 5.85 ). This yields the complete energy expression

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the abbreviation @xmath given as the inverse of the matrix @xmath
in Eq. ( 5.83 ).

#### Estimate for translationally invariant form factors

The expression ( 5.3 ) for the energy in the coherent state is quite
large and it might be useful to make crude approximations to get an idea
about its main characteristics. In Eq. ( 5.3 ), the kernel @xmath is
fixed by the variational calculation in the absence of external charges,
see chapter 3 . The other Green functions, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
are dependent on the location of the charges and thus have lost their
translational invariance. Moreover, neither the Lorentz nor the color
structure can be expected to be trivial. Therefore, a minimization of
the energy @xmath is a very costly calculation, not even vaguely
comparable to the challenge in solving the integral equations in the
vacuum.

A possible simplification is achieved by rendering the Green functions
insensitive to the presence of quarks. Setting @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , we can simplify the expression ( 5.3 ) for @xmath quite
significantly,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.87)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The imaginary part of @xmath is already chosen so that @xmath is
minimal, this gives the last term quadratic in @xmath . The term in the
second line of Eq. ( 5.87 ) is exactly cancelled by the term in @xmath
that came from the expectation value @xmath , so that the energy shift
@xmath yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.88)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The prominent terms are the very first and the very last ones,
resembling the energy of the anharmonic oscillator ( 5.28 ) in an
external electric field. ⁶ ⁶ 6 Studying the infrared limit, the third,
fourth and fifth terms can be neglected since @xmath for @xmath .
Approximating @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.89)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and furthermore replacing the matrix @xmath by its mean diagonal
elements,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression ( 5.91 ) attains for @xmath its minimal value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

By dimensional analysis we find in the infrared limit of quark
separation @xmath , noting that @xmath with Coulomb string tension
@xmath , we get in general dimensions @xmath and hence for @xmath and
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

a completely senseless result. First of all, confinement is lost since
Eq. ( 5.93 ) overwhelms the confining potential for large @xmath . But
even worse, the energy @xmath is negative which contradicts the positive
definiteness of the YM Hamiltonian.

What has been done wrong? With various ansätze, such as for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

the energy in the form ( 5.87 ) was minimized and the erroneous large
@xmath behavior ( 5.93 ) was confirmed. Therefore, the approximations
done after Eq. ( 5.87 ) cannot be blamed, the awkward result ( 5.93 )
must come from the use of vacuum Green functions. In a sensible
approach, the Green functions must take into account the presence of
external charges.

The proper way to go about this has to involve solving a set of
Dyson–Schwinger equations without translational invariance. One of these
equations follows from the variational principle, @xmath . The ghost
propagator @xmath can be determined by the DSE

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the self-energy @xmath is obtained by using the propagator @xmath
in the definition of @xmath in Eq. ( 2.31 ). A relation for the inverse
ghost propagator, such as Eq. ( 5.95 ), might not be so useful. Instead,
the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

seems more applicable for solving the set of integral equations.

It was not attempted to solve the DSEs in the variational coherent
state. Immense computer power would be necessary and such a project is
at best problematical. In the upcoming section, the effect of the
coherent field on the confining property of the heavy quark potential
will be discussed with alternative methods.

### 5.4 The gluon chain

Having learned from first approximations that the Green function need to
be sensitive to the presence of external charges in order to arrive at a
sensible result, we try to make estimates for such Green functions in
this section. The quest for the correct wave functional has been
long-standing. After Dirac’s description of the abelian case [ Dir55 ] ,
the generalization to YM theories proved to be difficult [ HaaJoh97 ] .
There have been various attempts of formulating flux tube models (see
e.g. Ref. [ IsgPat84 ] ), calculations in the Hamiltonian approach to
QCD [ SzcKru06 ] , and also lattice calculations [ Hei+07 ] that
elaborate on the subject of the ground state in the presence of heavy
quarks. One of the most intuitive notions might be the gluon chain model
[ Tho79 , GreTho02 , Gre02 ] , and we will come back to it below.

An advantage of the variational approach is that any ansatz for the wave
functional will do. A too wild guess will be rejected if it leads to a
rise in the energy. If the ansatz is somewhat sensible, however, and a
decrease in the energy can be detected, this wave functional is to be
favored over the vacuum wave functional. A description of the back
reaction of the presence of external charges on the vacuum wave
functional is then found. With this reasoning, we here try to find a
coherent field @xmath that leads to a lowering of the infrared Coulomb
propagator. At very high quark separation, the Coulomb energy @xmath can
be expected to give a dominant contribution. We will now focus on the
calculation of the respective expectation value in the coherent field.

Note that the Coulomb propagator @xmath corresponds to the vacuum
counterpart @xmath with the coherent field @xmath as a background field,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

We find a series in the coherent field where each term is treated using
the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Acting on the Coulomb operator @xmath , the variational derivative
generates a sum of terms,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can check that the combinatorial factors cancel the @xmath from the
expansion of the exponential function in Eq. ( 5.97 ), and one obtains ⁷
⁷ 7 A proof is given by showing @xmath by induction, which is trivial,
and plugging it into @xmath which leads with @xmath directly to the
second line in Eq. ( 5.100 ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.100)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

with the abbreviation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the tree-level ghost-gluon vertex @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 2.20
). In the last line of Eq. ( 5.100 ), the approximation of factorizing
the Coulomb expectation value was employed (for a discussion, see
section 3.6 ). We have thus expressed the Coulomb propagator @xmath in
the coherent field by vacuum expectation values, i.e. the vacuum ghost
propagator @xmath and the vacuum Coulomb propagator @xmath ( 5.78 ), and
the coherent field itself via @xmath in Eq. ( 5.101 ).

The Coulomb potential @xmath in the coherent field is defined for a
given charge distribution @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

cf. the vacuum Coulomb potential @xmath in Eq. ( 2.73 ). With two
point-like heavy charges located at the origin and at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

one may think of the expectation value in Eq. ( 5.102 ) as shown in Fig.
5.2 . As the charges are separated by a large distance @xmath , it can
be energetically more favorable to excite a gluon in between the
charges. This notion basically corresponds to the gluon chain model
proposed in Refs. [ Tho79 , GreTho02 , Gre02 ] . These gluons possibly
screen the potential and thus account for a lowering of the Coulomb
string tension @xmath to the string tension @xmath from the gauge
invariant Wilson loop. Moreover, with excited gluons along the flux
tube, the thickness of the string (lacking for the one-gluon exchange)
may be generated. The coherent state is suitable to check whether this
mechanism is realized in the framework of the variational approach.

The guiding properties for choosing an ansatz for the coherent field are
transversality and symmetry . Firstly, let us exploit transversality.
The coherent field @xmath , here the real part @xmath , is always
projected transversally, i.e. it occurs only in the form @xmath .
Without loss of generality, we can therefore set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and determine the field @xmath instead.

Secondly, we can assume that the symmetry of the charge distribution is
mirrored in the field @xmath . While in the absence of charges, the
Green functions are translationally invariant, a charge distribution
@xmath will remove this invariance, yet leaving us with some weaker
symmetry. Assume for instance, one of the charges is located at the
origin of our coordinate system, and the second charge is smeared on the
surface of a concentric sphere with radius @xmath , ⁸ ⁸ 8 The bold type
notation for vectors is reinstated for the remainder of this chapter.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The exchange energy is the same as for the charge distribution Eq.  (
5.103 ), and the choice ( 5.105 ) may therefore equally be used for the
purpose of these investigations. We refer to the setting ( 5.105 ) as
the sphere picture and Eq. ( 5.103 ) as the string picture . For the
charge contribution of the sphere picture ( 5.105 ), the coherent field
@xmath can be expected to be point symmetric,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that is, for any rotation @xmath about an axis that contains the origin
@xmath , it behaves according to Eq. ( 5.106 ). Expanding @xmath in
spherical coordinates, this means that the coefficients merely depend on
the distance @xmath from the origin, The field @xmath defined in Eq. (
5.104 ) inherits this property from @xmath via Eq. ( 5.32 ) and suggests
an expansion into spherical coordinates. On the other hand, if we use
the string picture, see Eq. ( 5.103 ), only a cylindrical symmetry may
be expected, i.e. the rotations @xmath are restricted to those about the
symmetry axis along @xmath . It is then useful to decompose @xmath in
the cylindrical basis @xmath with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now consider the gluon chain integral ( 5.100 ). ⁹ ⁹ 9 A transformation
to momentum space would be, on the one hand, convenient since the
infrared asymptotic vacuum Green functions from chapter 2 can be used.
However, a subtlety is accompanied by the Fourier transformation. The
real part of the coherent field in coordinate space, @xmath , transfers
to @xmath and only by knowledge of the parity properties of @xmath can
we tell whether the above momentum space quantity is real, purely
imaginary, or complex. Plugging in the definition of the field @xmath
into the matrices @xmath , any integral involving @xmath is of the form
¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Recall that a caret denotes an object in the adjoint
representation. Here: @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The above object corresponds to one ”chain link” and the entire gluon
chain is a convolution of chain links we intend to re-sum.

We may choose the first integrations as the one where the charge sitting
at the origin is attached to the ghost line. This corresponds to setting
@xmath in Eq. ( 5.108 ). The distance @xmath between the charges being
considered very large, the infrared asymptotic forms of the vacuum ghost
propagator may be used. From the momentum space expression (see table
2.1 ), we find the dimensionally regularized ( @xmath ) coordinate space
ghost propagator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and taking the derivative as in Eq. ( 5.108 ) gives for @xmath and
@xmath ,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.110)
  -- -- -- ---------

Plugging this into the chain link ( 5.108 ), we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The vector @xmath is expanded in the cylindrical basis @xmath , see
Eq. ( 5.107 ), and we expand @xmath and @xmath accordingly. The outer
product in Eq. ( 5.111 ) then reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath -integration eliminates both the @xmath - and the @xmath
-component of @xmath in Eq. ( 5.111 ). To prove this, note that both
@xmath and the product @xmath that occurs in the denominator are even
functions in @xmath . The components @xmath and @xmath contribute with
the outer product ( 5.112 ) a factor of @xmath , odd in @xmath , and
hence must vanish. We are left with @xmath , the only function that will
contribute to the corrections to the Coulomb propagator.

In order to estimate the effect of the infrared ( @xmath ) behavior of
@xmath , we switch to the sphere picture. This is achieved by letting
@xmath which infers @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . On the assumption
that a non-vanishing @xmath component can be realized in the sphere
picture, use the ansatz

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By virtue of the homogeneity of the functions in the chain link integral
( 5.111 ), one can show that for @xmath , the infrared strength of the
Coulomb propagation is weakened by each chain link in the series in Fig.
5.2 . This means that for @xmath , the only linearly rising term would
be the very first one of the expansion, the vacuum Coulomb propagator
@xmath . On the other hand, if @xmath , the infrared strength is
enhanced by each chain link integral, meaning that for some minimal
number of chain links, the integral would be divergent. Such a choice
will be avoided by the variational principle. If (and only if) @xmath ,
each chain link produces a constant factor and all terms of the
expansion contribute to a linearly rising potential. The numerical value
of this factor can be computed by means of the two-point integral ( B )
in the appendix which applies to Eq. ( 5.111 ) by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The string picture will require a more involved calculation but the
statement aimed at here is only on a qualitative level. It shall only be
noted that with the choice @xmath , the chain link integrals in ¹¹ ¹¹ 11
The coordinate space ghost propagator can only be defined as a
distribution. Therefore, we act with a derivative from the right on it
which is always present in the gluon chain (see Fig. 5.2 ).

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

yield a calculable constant @xmath , here not given explicitly. It is
only important to remark that @xmath is a matrix made of real numbers.
¹² ¹² 12 It is not as straightforward to keep track of the complex phase
in momentum space. Integrating the gluon chain ( 5.100 ) “from left to
right”, every chain link produces a factor of @xmath in the infrared
limit,

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The excitation of a single gluon at first sight seems to lower the
Coulomb interaction if @xmath (which depends on the self-consistent
solution for @xmath ).

So far, the color structure has been suppressed. Recall that @xmath is a
color matrix in the adjoint representation. The Coulomb energy @xmath in
Eq. ( 5.4 ) is sensitive only to the diagonal element @xmath . The
diagonal elements vanish for @xmath . Therefore, the excitation of a
single gluon does not contribute to the Coulomb energy. The gluons have
to come in pairs. If we turn now to @xmath , two chain links are seen to
produce a factor

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which is manifestly negative. These contributions therefore lower the
Coulomb interaction, due to the color structure. We will now proceed to
re-sum the entire series ( 5.4 ) for @xmath .

There are two geometric series in @xmath occurring in the gluon chain (
5.4 ). The value of the series can be computed by noting that with
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which leads to the following result for odd and even powers of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence, a geometric series in the matrix @xmath can be expressed by a
geometric series in the number @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.119)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The series converges if

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the elements of @xmath are found in view of Eq. ( 5.117 ), ¹³ ¹³ 13
This matrix is the inverse to @xmath , as one may expect.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Coulomb potential in the coherent field @xmath , see Eq. ( 5.4 ),
depends on the matrix element @xmath . Defining a string tension @xmath
by the infrared limit of the Coulomb potential @xmath in the coherent
field,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we get from Eq. ( 5.121 ) that ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 This result is sensitive to the
approximations made above. At this stage, only qualitative statements
can be made.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The variables @xmath and @xmath are entangled by the convergence
condition ( 5.120 ). With spherical coordinates in color space, @xmath
and @xmath , Eq. ( 5.123 ) can be expressed in terms of independent
variables @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is thus seen that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

i.e. the Coulomb string tension is indeed lowered by the excitation of
gluons. This very notion was proposed in the gluon chain model and it
follows here from an ansatz for the wave functional of @xmath YM theory
with heavy quarks. The upper bound, @xmath is reached only if @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath .

Depending on the coherent field @xmath , the string tension @xmath could
in principle be lowered just above zero. In this case, @xmath has no
component along the color vector @xmath , i.e. @xmath , and its length
is maximal, i.e. @xmath . Thus, we find @xmath . However, one may expect
that this leads to a rise in the magnetic potential energy. Adding more
and more gluons into the Coulomb interaction must increase this part of
the energy since it is ultralocal in the coherent field, see Eq. ( 5.80
). At a given mean number of excited gluons (the peak of the Poisson
distribution), a saturation of the energy must occur. Realizing this
effect computationally may be difficult, though. If the magnetic
potential energy indeed saturated the number of gluons for large
separations @xmath , it would have to also rise linearly in @xmath ,
otherwise it would be negligible in the asymptotic infrared.

### 5.5 Squeezed states

Although the estimate of the Coulomb propagator in the coherent state in
the previous section indicated a lowering of the string tension, it is
not clear whether a full self-consistent solution will exhibit the same
feature. A possible alternative description of the back reaction of the
gluonic sector on the external charges may be motivated, again, from the
quantum mechanic harmonic oscillator. In three dimensions, the charged
oscillator can be studied in an external uniform magnetic field @xmath
which couples to the angular momentum. To this end, the Hamiltonian (
5.10 ) is supplemented by the substitution

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The new Hamiltonian @xmath contains the Larmor frequency @xmath linearly
in the paramagnetic term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and quadratically in the diamagnetic term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The coupling of the angular momentum operator @xmath to the external
magnetic field @xmath in @xmath ( 5.127 ) is reminiscent of the coupling
of the dynamical charge @xmath of YM theory to the external charge
@xmath in the Coulomb interaction @xmath . This similarity is
acknowledged by noting that @xmath is an outer product of coordinate and
momentum operators, albeit in color space, just like the angular
momentum @xmath . For the calculation of the energy in the coherent
state, this has important consequences, as will be seen.

Before we focus on the coherent state, let us give the exact ground
state solution of the rather simple Hamiltonian @xmath . The primed
quantities always include the effect of the external field. Thus, we can
interpret

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as one harmonic oscillator of frequency @xmath (and width @xmath ) in
the @xmath -direction, and two oscillators perpendicular to it with
frequency @xmath (and width @xmath ). Using the annihilation operators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , the Hamiltonian @xmath can be re-expressed, but the
paramagnetic part @xmath is still not diagonal. By means of a Bogoliubov
transformation,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the complete Hamiltonian is diagonal,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the orthogonal basis of the states @xmath . The exact ground state of
@xmath therefore has the energy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

i.e. it is higher than without the external field ( @xmath ). The
interesting part is that the exact ground state @xmath is Gaussian,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.134)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.135)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

but the width @xmath in the directions perpendicular to the external
field @xmath is changed, as compared to the width @xmath of the Gaussian
in the direction parallel to @xmath . By switching on the external field
@xmath , the ground state wave function is squeezed by a factor smaller
than @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in perpendicular directions.

The effect of squeezing cannot be expected from a coherent state which
merely shifts the vacuum wave functional. We now construct a coherent
state in the eigenbasis of @xmath , and determine the parameters @xmath
by minimizing @xmath . This is equivalent to the approach in YM theory,
see section 5.3 . The minimal value @xmath can then be compared to
@xmath in Eq. ( 5.133 ).

Define the coherent state by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and calculate the coherent state energy @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.138a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.138b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.138c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Note that the coupling of the angular momentum to the magnetic field
brings about a term @xmath linear in @xmath . This also occurs in the
energy expression ( 5.3 ) of YM theory where the coupling of @xmath to
@xmath is responsible for such a term. By quadratic completion, it is
easily found that for @xmath the energy @xmath is minimal. In this case,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.139)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Minimizing this expression w.r.t. @xmath , one finds that @xmath and
thus @xmath . Therefore, the trivial solution @xmath is energetically
most favorable. In the first line of Eq. ( 5.139 ) one might hope for a
non-trivial solution due to the minus sign. Such a situation occurs also
in YM theory. However, this negative term is exactly cancelled by the
diamagnetic energy ( 5.138c ) with @xmath . Since the coherent state
with @xmath still gives a higher energy than the exact ground state
energy ( 5.133 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

it must be inferred that the coherent state cannot mimic the squeezing
of a Gaussian wave function.

Of course, the comparison of the coherent state to the quantum
mechanical harmonic oscillator and the Yang–Mills theory is by no means
supposed to indicate a complete analogy. For instance, quartic and cubic
terms may allow for a nontrivial shifted ground state—the coherent
state—to be energetically more favorable. Also, the coupling of the
”outer product” @xmath to the external field in YM theory is mediated by
the Coulomb operator @xmath which is dependent on the field operator
@xmath itself. Such a situation is not encountered for the harmonic
oscillator and we have seen in the previous section that the expectation
value of @xmath in the coherent state may alone provide part of the
desired effect. Despite these differences of the oscillator coupled to a
magnetic field on the one hand and the gluonic vacuum with external
charges on the other, it might be a useful idea to consider squeezed
states as an alternative to coherent states. This is a possible future
investigation. An introduction to squeezed states can be found in the
literature on quantum optics [ Gerry ] .

## Summary and outlook

The gauge principle, which is the main ingredient in the very definition
of the gauge field sector, recurs in all aspects of Yang–Mills theory.
Starting with the quantization procedure, discussed in chapter 1 , gauge
invariance requires a careful treatment which is particularly difficult
for nonabelian gauge groups. The generator of (time-independent) gauge
transformations is the Gauss law operator. In the canonical quantization
approach, it is not possible to promote the Gauss law to an operator
identity. We have shown that by means of fixing the gauge completely on
the classical level and imposing quantization conditions within the
Dirac bracket formalism, the Gauss law does hold on the quantum level.
The gauge-fixed Hamiltonian operator thus derived determines an
unambiguous time evolution of the quantum system. It agrees with the
Christ-Lee Hamiltonian [ ChrLee80 ] where a projection on gauge
invariant states is employed. This agreement is notably reassuring in
the sense that there is no ambiguity in the choice of the quantization
procedure. For Yang–Mills theory in the temporal Coulomb gauge, it makes
no difference whether Dirac quantization ( first quantize, then
constrain ) or constrained quantization ( first constrain, then quantize
) is used. In the light of the gravitational force, the method of
quantization is to date a controversial issue.

In the temporal Coulomb gauge-fixed configuration space of Yang–Mills
theory, the uniqueness of the gauge fixing condition demands the
restriction to a compact region, the fundamental modular region. In the
Gribov–Zwanziger scenario, this infers the enhancement of boundary
effects in that region. We have investigated in chapter 2 the
consequences for the Green functions in the temporal Coulomb gauge in
@xmath spatial dimensions of @xmath -dimensional Minkowski spacetime.
The Landau gauge results for @xmath -dimensional Euclidean spacetime can
be obtained by shifting @xmath . In the temporal Coulomb gauge, the
stochastic vacuum ( @xmath ) is sufficient to account for the infrared
asymptotics of the theory. The horizon condition, which enhances the
ghost propagator in the infrared, is along with the nonrenormalization
of the ghost-gluon vertex the most important feature for the infrared
behavior of propagators in the temporal Coulomb or the Landau gauge.
Using power law ansätze for these propagators, the set of
Dyson–Schwinger equations was solved with a tree-level ghost-gluon
vertex. A single infrared exponent @xmath can be extracted to specify
the infrared power laws of both the ghost and gluon propagators, for a
given dimension @xmath . In the @xmath dimensional Coulomb gauge, the
result @xmath is shown to yield a heavy quark potential which rises
linearly. Quark confinement is thus, qualitatively speaking, a
consequence of the horizon condition. It was argued that this result, is
not necessarily unique. First of all, there is one further solution for
@xmath , @xmath , which leads to a Coulomb potential @xmath that rises
less than linearly [ FeuRei04 ] . With the Coulomb potential being an
upper bound to the gauge invariant quark potential @xmath , the latter
solution would indicate that @xmath also rises less than linearly,
contradicting the lattice results. In this sense, it is more likely that
the solution @xmath is realized. Moreover, the off-shell gauge condition
introduces an additional parameter @xmath into the infrared analysis, on
which the solution for @xmath generally depends, due to the
approximation of the ghost-gluon vertex. It was found that all solutions
but the one for @xmath and @xmath depend on the value of @xmath . This
infers that the latter solution is less sensitive to the approximations
made. Its corresponding continuous branch of solutions @xmath as a
function of the dimension @xmath exists for all @xmath , even for very
high dimensions where the other solutions cease to exist (see Fig. 2.6
). The infrared power laws were furthermore extended by an ansatz that
incorporates powers of logarithms in the infrared. It was found that
values for these exponents exist for which the set of integral equations
is also solved in the asymptotic infrared. The power law exponents,
however, remain unchanged. Hence, there is a degeneracy in the
asymptotic power law solutions, also for @xmath and @xmath .
Qualitatively, the logarithmic corrections do not change the power law
behavior and thus also not the confining property of the Coulomb
potential.

A full solution for the propagators of Yang–Mills theory in the temporal
Coulomb gauge is expected to show both, the infrared behavior that
infers confinement and the ultraviolet behavior that agrees with
perturbation theory. The variational solution to the Yang–Mills
Schrödinger equation, discussed in chapter 3 , provides such a solution
approximatively. The Gaussian types of wave functionals were shown to
reproduce exactly the infrared behavior ( @xmath ) anticipated in the
previous chapter. Thus, numerical results with a linearly confining
potential were obtained [ EppReiSch07 ] . While the propagators are
insensitive to the details of the wave functional, it was found that the
three-gluon vertex is extremely dependent on it. For one wave functional
considered, it is equally zero, whereas for another it shows a strong
infrared enhancement. However, in the Dyson–Schwinger equations of the
propagators the dressing of the three-gluon vertex was found to have no
effect in the infrared [ SchLedRei06 ] . The ghost-gluon vertex was
studied in the infrared gluon limit from its corresponding
Dyson–Schwinger equation. It was shown that generally the infrared
limits of the vertex’ momenta are not interchangeable, except for the
solution @xmath and @xmath . Again, the regularity of the vertex
indicates that this solution may be favored. Chapter 3 is furthermore
concerned with the assessment of the approximation of the Coulomb form
factor. It was shown that the horizon condition needs to be relaxed in
order to arrive at a solution that satisfies the Coulomb form factor
DSE. The infrared analysis of the ghost DSE and the Coulomb form factor
DSE proves that a simultaneous solution with infrared divergent form
factors is impossible. The so-called ”subcritical solution” [ Epp+07 ]
where the form factors are infrared finite solves all DSEs but does not
provide the expected infrared behavior of the quark potential. If a
critical solution exists, then the Coulomb form factor DSE, as it
stands, will be violated. Higher-order effects must then be included. An
approach that includes higher-order effects may be to calculate the gap
equation in the form of Eq. ( E.14 ) up to two loops (avoiding a
three-loop expression for the energy density). This may be tedious but
possible.

The ultraviolet tails of the variational solutions for the Coulomb gauge
Green functions have the correct power law behavior but the anomalous
dimensions, related to the powers of logarithms, turn out incorrect.
This might be an effect of the simple Gaussian shape of the wave
functional. In chapter 4 , the ultraviolet gluon energy @xmath and ghost
form factor @xmath were motivated. This followed from a nonperturbative
definition of the running coupling by the ghost-gluon vertex. In a
calculation carried out in both Landau and Coulomb gauge, the ghost DSE
was analyzed in the asymptotic ultraviolet using appropriate ansätze.
From the requirement that the nonperturbative running coupling coincide
with the ultraviolet limit of perturbation theory, it can be deduced
what the anomalous dimensions are to leading order. The way to reproduce
these anomalous dimensions must be to extend the Gaussian wave
functional. At the very least, the gluon loop must be included. A
non-trivial dressing of the three-gluon vertex, similar to Landau gauge
studies, is most probably necessary. This is a possible future
investigation.

Moreover, chapter 4 dealt with the infrared limit of the running
coupling which can be calculated analytically. In all gauges that
interpolate between the Landau and the Coulomb gauge, this value is the
same, but changes discontinuously in the Coulomb gauge limit [
SchLedRei06 ] . Vertex corrections to the infrared limit of the running
coupling were also calculated, showing that the only solution that has
no vertex correction is the one where @xmath and @xmath .

The final chapter 5 uses a quasi-particle representation of gluonic
excitations to incorporate the back reaction of the presence of external
charges on the gluon sector. To this end, coherent states are motivated
from quantum mechanical examples. The calculation of the Yang–Mills
energy in the coherent state produces a vast expression that depends on
a localized background field. It was possible to remove divergences from
this expression by usage of the gap equation. Even after the explicit
variational solution for the imaginary part of the background field, the
energy expression requires some approximation to be processed further. A
first approximation, rendering the Green function insensitive to the
presence of external charges, yielded senseless results. Subsequently,
the Coulomb potential was estimated in the asymptotic infrared by an ad
hoc ansatz for the background field. It was possible to expand,
calculate, and resum this expectation value and indeed show that the
string tension can be lowered by such an ansatz. The determination of
the exact factor by which the string tension is lowered, requires
further investigation. Another quantum mechanical example was put
forward to motivate that squeezed states may serve equally well for the
incorporation of external charges.

## Appendix A Conventions and notation

### a.1 Units, metric and group conventions

Throughout this thesis, natural units are used,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , Eq. ( A.1 ) infers that @xmath fm corresponds to @xmath .
The Minkowski metric is here defined by the metric tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Antihermitian generators of group transformation in @xmath are
normalized as follows. For the fundamental representation, we choose

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and for the adjoint representation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

It follows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

### a.2 Notation

In momentum space integration, the phase space factor @xmath is absorbed
by the definition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

in analogy to @xmath . In the case of multiple integrations, the
abbreviation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is frequently used.

Matrices in coordinate and intrinsic space, for instance @xmath , have
the components @xmath . The functional trace “ @xmath ” is then defined
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Functional determinants can be related to the functional traces ( A.8 )
by the identity @xmath .

The Fourier transformation of a function @xmath , operating on
spacetime, defines by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

the function @xmath operating on momentum space. Although these are
different functions, the tilde is often omitted. For a function of two
variables, we may define a Fourier transform by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In translationally invariant systems, @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

such that the propagator-like object @xmath is directly related to
@xmath via Eq. ( A.9 ). Whereas in coordinate space, a matrix in
coordinate and intrinsic space is denoted by a single symbol, for
instance @xmath , the Fourier transformed object is usually a function
of a single momentum scale and has no color structure, cf. Eq. ( 2.11 ).

Higher @xmath -point functions are defined equivalently. A vertex
function with translational invariance, @xmath , leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and momentum is conserved by the delta function. Choosing the momentum
routing sets the signs in the exponent of the definition of the Fourier
transform.

Functional derivatives can be shown to yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the sign in the exponent is opposite of that in Eq. ( A.9 ).

## Appendix B Two-point integrals

Here we sketch the evaluation of nonperturbative Euclidean loop
integrals in asymptotic limits. According to the discussion on page 3.2
, we can replace the integrands by their asymptotic forms and encounter
the two-point integrals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

These can be shown to be homogeneous functions of the momentum @xmath .
By a scaling of the integration variable, @xmath , one readily finds
that since the two-point integral can only depend on the scale, it
should obey @xmath and the exponent of the power law can be determined
to be @xmath . After applying the usual trick of introducing Feynman
parameters,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Euler beta function, we can shift the integration
variable, @xmath . The integrand then depends on @xmath only and we can
integrate it out. For @xmath we need the following standard integrals [
Peskin ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Integrals with an odd number of vectors @xmath in the numerator vanish
by symmetry. For our purposes, we have @xmath . The two-point integrals
can be straightforwardly computed using the identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the Euler beta function. One then finds the results

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.6b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.6c)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.6d)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The above formulae are valid for those values of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath only for which the integrals converge. At @xmath , a pole is
integrable as long as @xmath . On the other hand, the infrared
convergence at @xmath depends on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can relate this inequality to the requirement that the arguments of
the first gamma functions in the numerators of Eqs. ( B.6 ) be positive.
The ultraviolet convergence is contained in the third gamma function of
the numerators. For convergence, the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

has to be satisfied. Obviously, odd values of @xmath , compared to even
values, work “in favor” of convergence both in the infrared and in the
ultraviolet, due to the angular integration. In sums of UV divergent
two-point integrals, the angular integration eliminates the divergence
in some cases. For instance, the Brown-Pennington projection of the
gluon propagator in Landau gauge [ BroPen88a ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

eliminates the unphysical quadratic divergences proportional to the
metric tensor, by virtue of @xmath in Eq. ( 2.82 ). We demonstrate that
this elimination can be due to the angular integration for the
Brown-Pennington projection of the off-shell ghost loop ( 2.81a ) for
@xmath and the ultraviolet ghost propagator ( 3.58c ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For @xmath , the linear divergence of the ghost loop vanishes.

Another cancellation of UV divergences is encountered when implementing
the horizon condition in the ghost DSE ( 2.49 ). The proposition claimed
in section 2.6 is that although the ghost self-energy @xmath is UV
divergent, the naive usage of the formulae ( B.6 ) yields the correct
result for the finite difference @xmath . The proof is here restricted
to two-point integrals @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath does not
converge in the UV. Let @xmath . With the Feynman parameter trick ( B.2
), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath is regulated by the UV cut-off @xmath . Employ the
mean-value theorem,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

to realize that @xmath can be written as @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for the values @xmath of the exponent @xmath . In order to determine
@xmath explicitly, write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

With help of the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can now compute @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Plugging this result back into the definition of @xmath in Eq. ( B.11 ),
one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The regular part of @xmath would have been found correctly by direct
usage of Eq. ( B.6a ), despite the UV divergence.

Finally, another result of a two-point sort of integral is provided that
comes into play in the gluon chain in chapter 5.4 . It reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in @xmath dimensions @xmath can be understood as the projection of
@xmath to the hypersurface perpendicular to @xmath . The Feynman trick (
B.2 ) yields after the shift @xmath (which does not affect the numerator
in Eq. ( B.22 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is the enclosed angle of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , its
integration gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas the remnant angular integrals simple yield surface of the unit
sphere with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, Eq. ( B.23 ) is calculated by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

## Appendix C Infrared limit of the ghost-gluon vertex

The rather technical project of determining the infrared limit of the
ghost-gluon vertex to yield the solution shown in Table 3.2 , is
presented here. We use the truncated vertex DSE as shown in Fig. 3.6 .
To illustrate how to keep track of color group and vertex factors, first
note that the triangle diagrams comprise a trace of generators, @xmath ,
as well as three vertex factors of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -- -- -------
           (C.1)
  -- -- -- -------

due to Eq. ( A.5 ). We now consider the infrared gluon limit of the
first loop diagram ( 3.79 ). With the identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can express this diagram in the infrared limit of the remnant ghost
momentum @xmath by two-point integrals,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we have used Eq. ( 2.60 ). The factor of @xmath appears in Eq. ( C.3
) since the infrared limit is taken as in Eq. ( 3.75 ). A factor of
@xmath stemming from the color trace ( C.1 ) is left explicit.
Considering the second loop integral of the ghost-gluon vertex DSE, the
result ( 3.71 ) for the three-gluon vertex in the infrared limit is
plugged into the expression ( 3.78 ) to find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.5)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 3.72 ) and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The factor of @xmath in Eq. ( C.5 ) is the prefactor of the ghost
triangle in the three-gluon vertex DSE, see Fig. 3.4 . Altogether, the
infrared gluon limit of the ghost-gluon vertex, defined by Eq. ( 3.75 )
yields,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and one can find @xmath to obey

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.8)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

As can be checked, this leads to the numerical values of @xmath given by
table 3.2 for the various solutions of @xmath . A cancellation of the
two loop diagrams, see Eq. ( 3.81 ), must yield @xmath in Eq. ( C.7 ).
In this case

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and among the solution @xmath and @xmath that solve @xmath , see Fig.
2.5 , Eq. C.9 uniquely yields @xmath with @xmath .

One might object that the Bose symmetry of the ghost triangle
contribution to the three-gluon vertex is broken, for only the upper
vertex is dressed while the others are at tree-level (see Fig. 3.4 ). In
the derivation of the DSE, the channel to start the calculation in is an
arbitrary choice. Therefore, one might as well find the upper vertex
dressed. If we repeat the calculation, the DSE for the ghost-gluon
vertex now reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

cf. Eq. ( C.7 ), and the solution can be found to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Again, the limit @xmath and @xmath yields the result @xmath .
Apparently, it makes no difference which one of the vertices is at
tree-level.

## Appendix D Hamiltonian approach to @xmath theory

The @xmath theory is a popular toy model to illustrate some aspect of a
physical field theory in a simpler context. Unfortunately, the @xmath
theory in @xmath dimensions suffers from the triviality problem which
states that after renormalization, the coupling parameter is equally
zero and a free field theory is considered [ Fro82 ] . This problem can
be circumvented by choosing a negative coupling parameter which is at
the prize of losing the boundedness of the spectrum. In this appendix,
we will use the @xmath theory in order to show how the variational
principle can be applied, in accordance to chapter 3 .

With the classical Lagrangian density

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the conjugate momenta

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can define the classical Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The equal-time canonical quantization relations, @xmath , lead to the
representation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

of the momentum operator, where @xmath is a @xmath -vector and the time
is fixed in the Schrödinger picture. Thus, the quantum theory is defined
by the Hamiltonian ( D.3 ) in terms of the field operators.

The time-independent Schrödinger equation @xmath , along with the
semi-definiteness of @xmath for @xmath infers that the vacuum wave
functional @xmath can be determined by a variational principle

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As an ansatz, we choose a Gaussian wave functional

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the short-hand notation keeps the coordinate dependence as an
index and the integration is implicit by means of the sum convention.
The kernel @xmath is determined by the variational principle ( D.5 ).

Expectation values are computed by

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (D.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

where the generating functional @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Above, after a quadratic completion, the expression in the curly
brackets is @xmath by virtue of the normalization of the wave functional
via @xmath .

The vacuum energy @xmath is now calculated term by term, as a functional
of @xmath . First of all, the mass term yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The above term is basically the trace of the propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to understand better the meaning of the quantity @xmath , use
the explicit notation and relate it to its Fourier transform,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the volume of coordinate space. The first variational
derivative in the calculation ( D.9 ) brings down a source term @xmath
from the exponential so that the second variational derivative acts not
only on the exponential but also on the latter source term @xmath .
Setting sources to zero at the end of the calculation generally
eliminates some terms. Some combinatorics is necessary to deal with the
quartic term in the energy, we just write down the result:

  -- -- -- --------
           (D.12)
  -- -- -- --------

The kinetic energy is found to give

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the propagator ( D.10 ) was used.

Furthermore, the spatial derivative terms of the Hamiltonian ( D.3 )
yield explicitly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Summing up all contributions, the energy is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it is minimized w.r.t. the kernel @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to the ”gap equation”:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term ”gap equation” is sensible since even if the mass parameter
@xmath was zero to begin with, there would be a mass dynamically
generated by the last term in Eq. ( D.17 ). Hence, it describes the
lowest allowed energy level of the spectrum, i.e. a mass gap. That term
stems from the quartic term in the Hamiltonian and is also present in
the YM Hamiltonian. It is a divergent constant subtracted in our
approach. In the @xmath theory, Eq. ( D.17 ) must be solved iteratively
and renormalization becomes necessary. For further reading, see
e.g. Ref. [ PabTar88 ] . If such a term is of any significance for YM
theory, then it will have an effect only on the intermediate regime of
@xmath . The infrared dominant curvature term from gauge fixing is of
course absent in the @xmath version ( D.17 ) of the gap equation.

## Appendix E Identities for Gaussian expectation values

The Gaussian expectation values

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the normalized wave functional,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be shown to yield some useful identities. Take a variational
derivative of Eq. ( E.2 ) w.r.t. @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

to find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For expectation values ( E.1 ) of operators @xmath , a variational
derivative thus gives

  -- -- -- -------
           (E.5)
  -- -- -- -------

i.e.  a covariance. Using Wick’s theorem, a few manipulations yield the
identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath , this leads directly to Eq. ( 5.75 ).

A little more effort is required for expectation values of operators
@xmath that involve the momentum operator @xmath . The equivalent of
Eq. ( E.5 ) is then

  -- -- -- -------
           (E.7)
  -- -- -- -------

whereby @xmath denotes the anticommutator ( @xmath ), or the commutator
( @xmath ), respectively. The anticommutator in Eq. ( E.7 ) can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

using @xmath with @xmath . With knowledge of the wave functional,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

the last two terms in Eq. ( E.8 ) result in

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (E.10)
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

The anticommutator in the last line can be rewritten as a commutator,
according to the following identity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which holds for Gaussian expectation values, such as ( E.1 ).

Proof: Inside the expectation value, the field operator @xmath can be
expressed by a momentum operator @xmath , see Eq. E.9 . Thus,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (E.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging Eq. ( E.13 ) into the expression ( E.10 ) and the latter with (
E.8 ) into Eq. ( E.7 ), some cancellations occur and we end up with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (E.14)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Such an identity was also derived in Ref. [ privRei ] .