# 1 Introduction

Let @xmath be an undirected graph. An independent set @xmath in @xmath
is a subset of @xmath such that @xmath implies @xmath . Now, take @xmath
to be the graph in Figure 1 , where the half-edges are used to indicate
that @xmath and @xmath are adjacent and that @xmath and @xmath are
adjacent.

We are interested in the independent sets of @xmath and start by listing
them. We begin with the smallest set, the empty set @xmath , which of
course is an independent set in any graph. Then, the singleton sets
@xmath , @xmath , …, @xmath are all independent. Finally, for each of
the vertices @xmath and @xmath we can choose from two vertices of @xmath
and @xmath to form a total of @xmath independent sets of cardinality 2.
We note that the alternating sum over all independent sets @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

It turns out that this happens a lot for graphs similar to @xmath . Let
the vertex set of @xmath be @xmath for @xmath and @xmath and let there
be an edge between @xmath and @xmath if @xmath and @xmath or if @xmath
and @xmath . Finally, let there be edges between each pair of vertices
@xmath and @xmath . With this construction, we have @xmath . It is
conjectured [ 9 ] that when @xmath is odd and 3 is not a divisor of
@xmath , then the sum @xmath over all independent sets @xmath of @xmath
equals 1 and that if @xmath is odd and @xmath does divide @xmath , then
this sum equals -2.

A hard particle model in statistical mechanics is defined on an
underlying graph. A configuration of the model is a set of particles
placed on the vertices of this graph such that no two particles are
adjacent. One imagines that the particles have a certain size, or shape,
that extends to their neighbouring vertices in the graph. Furthermore,
the particles may not overlap, as they are considered hard . On a square
grid, one talks about the hard square model, because of the shape of the
particles. On a hexagonal grid, the particles are triangles as each
vertex have three neighbours. The correspondence between configurations
of hard particle models and independent sets on the underlying graph is
clear.

The remarkable properties of the hard particle model on square grid
graphs with cylindrical identifications were first observed by Fendley,
Schoutens and van Eerten in [ 4 ] . They also studied the hard square
model with doubly periodic boundary. Such identifications have the
advantage that they make the graph vertex-transitive, i.e, the graph
looks the same from every vertex. In this way the influence from the
boundary is removed and these graphs are in that sense closer to the
infinite square grid than the graphs obtained by simply taking an @xmath
by @xmath subgraph of this grid. Fendley et al. conjectured that for the
toroidal identifications, the roots of the characteristic polynomial of
the associated transfer matrix were all roots of unity. Furthermore,
they conjectured that when @xmath and @xmath were taken to be relatively
prime, the alternating sum @xmath vanished. These conjectures were
proven in 2006 by Jonsson [ 9 ] in a purely combinatorial way.

To determine the partition function of these models at activity -1 has a
direct correspondence in determining the Euler characteristic of the
independence complex of the underlying graph. The matchings used in [ 9
] were however not suitable for further topological analysis of the
independence complex. Bousquet-Mélou, Linusson and Nevo [ 3 ] studied a
different region of the square grid which turned out to be more easily
handled using Morse matchings. They also determined the homotopy type of
the independence complex on a parallelogram in the square grid and
related these findings to certain eigenvalues of the transfer matrix for
the hard square model on @xmath .

In this paper, we investigate the independence complexes for the square
and hexagonal grids with cylindrical identifications. We obtain some
results for small sizes by explicitly calculating the homology groups
using a computer software package called Polymake [ 10 ] . We also
construct Morse matchings for some classes of complexes with small
circumference. The results obtained are enough to make certain
conjectures on the homology groups. In particular, for odd @xmath ,
there seems to be a symmetry in the square grid case and we conjecture
that for @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, it is also clear that the homology does not behave nicely in
many cases, even for odd @xmath , which clearly reduces the
applicability of this approach.

The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we present some basic
notions and results from algebraic topology, discrete Morse theory and
hard particle models. We use a particular type of Morse matching to
determine the homology of some independence complexes related to the
hard square and hard triangle models in Section 3 . In Section 4 , we
introduce a different matching on the face poset of these independence
complexes, which, while not being a Morse matching, still turns out to
give some information on the alternating sum of the independence
complexes of @xmath . Finally, in Section 5 we review an idea from [ 3 ]
which exploits the knowledge of the partition function of a hard square
model on a different region in order to try and obtain parts of the
spectrum of the transfer matrix for @xmath .

## 2 Preliminaries

In this section we define simplicial complexes, and in particular
independence complexes on grid graphs. We also review the basic results
from discrete Morse theory and give a framework for constructing Morse
matchings on independence complexes. Finally, we talk about the
connection between hard particle models from statistical mechanics and
independence complexes on grid graphs. For a detailed introduction to
algebraic topology, simplicial complexes and homology, see for example [
13 ] by Munkres. A classic reference for models in statistical mechanics
is [ 2 ] .

Throughout the paper we will use the following notation for addition and
deletion of a single element @xmath to or from a set @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To be precise about our base cases, we define the Fibonacci numbers
@xmath in the following way.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.1 Simplicial Complexes

Let @xmath and @xmath be two topological spaces. If there is a
continuous map @xmath , with a continuous inverse, then @xmath and
@xmath are said to be homeomorphic , denoted by @xmath .

Two continuous maps @xmath and @xmath are called homotopic if there is a
continuous map @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . The spaces @xmath
and @xmath are said to be homotopy equivalent , denoted by @xmath , if
there are maps @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is homotopic to the
identity map on @xmath and @xmath is homotopic to the identity map on
@xmath . A space @xmath that is homotopy equivalent to a point is called
contractible . This will be denoted by @xmath .

An (abstract) simplicial complex @xmath , is a collection of subsets
over a ground set @xmath such that if @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .
The elements of @xmath are called faces , and the maximal faces are
called facets . The dimension of a face @xmath is defined to be @xmath .

The reduced Euler characteristic @xmath of a simplicial complex @xmath
is the following sum.

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

Given a simplicial complex @xmath , the homology group @xmath of @xmath
in dimension @xmath , over a ring @xmath , is defined by @xmath . Here,
the groups @xmath and @xmath are the groups of @xmath -chains and @xmath
-boundaries, respectively. The rank of @xmath is called the @xmath th
Betti number and is denoted by @xmath . The following relation to the
Euler characteristic, which can alternatively be taken as its
definition, is called the Euler-Poincaré formula .

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

Here, @xmath is defined to be @xmath if the complex @xmath and @xmath
otherwise. Homotopy equivalent spaces have isomorphic homology groups so
@xmath is a topological invariant.

For a topological space @xmath , we let @xmath denote the boundary of
@xmath and @xmath the interior of @xmath . The @xmath -dimensional
simplex @xmath is the full simplicial complex on a @xmath -point ground
set, i.e, @xmath , with @xmath . The @xmath -dimensional ball @xmath is
the subspace of the @xmath -dimensional Euclidean space @xmath given by
@xmath . The @xmath -dimensional sphere @xmath is similarly given by
@xmath . That is, @xmath . Apparently, we have @xmath and @xmath , where
the simplicial complex @xmath can be described by @xmath , for some
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex. The cone over @xmath , denoted by
@xmath , is the simplicial complex over the ground set of @xmath
together with a new vertex @xmath , the cone point.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The cone over any simplicial complex is contractible.

The suspension over @xmath , denoted by @xmath , is the following
simplicial complex over the ground set of @xmath together with two new
vertices @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For any simplicial complex @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

### 2.2 Independence Complexes of Regular Grids

Regular grids are tilings of the 2-dimensional plane by regular convex
polygons. There exist three types of regular tilings, triangular, square
and hexagonal. In this paper we have considered the square and the
hexagonal grid. These are depicted in Figure 2 .

Let @xmath be the graph induced by the boundary of the square grid.
Then, @xmath is isomorphic to an infinite graph on the vertex set @xmath
, with edges between @xmath and @xmath if @xmath and @xmath or if @xmath
and @xmath . From now on, we will assume that @xmath is defined in this
way. Let @xmath be the graph induced from @xmath by the vertex set
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the set @xmath . By identifying sides of
@xmath , we can obtain graphs embeddable on different 2-dimensional
topological surfaces. Specifically, let @xmath be @xmath , with vertices
@xmath and @xmath identified, for @xmath . Furthermore, let @xmath as
the graph @xmath , with the vertices @xmath and @xmath as well as the
vertices @xmath and @xmath identified, for @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The graph @xmath is obviously embeddable on a cylinder
(but not on the plane), while @xmath is embeddable on a torus (but not
on a cylinder).

Let @xmath be the graph induced by the boundary of the hexagonal grid.
Similarly to the case of @xmath , we can find an appropriate
representation of the graph @xmath with vertex set @xmath . This graph
has edges between @xmath and @xmath if @xmath and @xmath or if @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . For positive integers @xmath and @xmath let @xmath
be the subgraph of @xmath shown in Figure 3 @xmath . We can straighten
this graph and draw it on the square grid, as is shown in @xmath . We
will use this brick wall -like appearance in this paper.

If we identify the left and right boundaries of the graph in Figure 3
@xmath , we get a graph @xmath with the topology of a cylinder. Figure 3
@xmath shows an alternative way of drawing this cylinder, using half
edges on the left and right boundaries to indicate the identifications.
We will use the vertex set @xmath to represent these graphs, with the
vertices numbered as in Figure 3 @xmath . We will also briefly look at
the hexagonal grid with toroidal identifications. In this case, we will
use the representation in Figure 3 @xmath , identifying the left and
right boundaries as well as the top and bottom ones. We denote the graph
obtained by these identifications by @xmath . Note that this graph is
different from the one we would obtain by doing the top to bottom
identifications in Figure 3 @xmath .

We will be studying simplicial complexes related to these regular grids.
Let @xmath be a finite, simple and undirected graph. An independent set
@xmath in @xmath is a subset of the vertex set @xmath such that if
@xmath then @xmath . That is, no pair of neighbours may be in @xmath at
the same time.

Define the independence complex @xmath as the simplicial complex on the
ground set @xmath with @xmath if and only if @xmath is an independent
set in @xmath . Similarly, let @xmath be the flag complex of @xmath .
This is the simplicial complex on the ground set @xmath with @xmath if
and only if @xmath induces a complete subgraph in @xmath . It is obvious
from the definitions that @xmath , where @xmath denotes the complement
graph of @xmath with respect to the complete graph on @xmath , i.e,
@xmath .

In general, computing @xmath is believed to be hard, since the facets of
@xmath are the maximal independent sets of @xmath . Any such facet of
maximal dimension therefore gives a solution to the maximum independent
set problem , which is a well known NP -complete problem [ 11 ] . Dual
to this is the NP -complete maximum clique problem of finding a complete
subgraph (or clique ) in @xmath of maximal size. These cliques are given
by the highest dimensional facets of @xmath .

### 2.3 Discrete Morse Theory

Discrete Morse theory was introduced in [ 5 ] by Robin Forman. It
relates the homotopy type of a simplicial complex to that of a
CW-complex with (ideally) simpler structure. See [ 6 ] for a hands-on
introduction to this subject.

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex. We define the face poset @xmath on
@xmath as the set of faces in @xmath ordered by inclusion. The
underlying graph of the Hasse diagram of @xmath , or simply the
underlying graph of @xmath , is the directed graph with the faces of
@xmath as vertices and the cover relations of @xmath as edges, directed
from the smaller faces to the larger faces. Let @xmath be a matching on
the underlying graph of @xmath . We will also say that @xmath is a
matching on the complex @xmath . The graph induced by @xmath is the
graph obtained from the underlying graph of the Hasse diagram by
reversing the direction of the edges which are in @xmath .

###### Definition 1

A Morse matching @xmath on a simplicial complex @xmath is a (partial)
matching of the Hasse diagram of @xmath such that the graph induced by
@xmath is acyclic.

The main theorem of Morse theory relates the homotopy type of a
simplicial complex to that of a certain CW-complex related to the
unmatched faces of a Morse matching. These unmatched faces are sometimes
referred to as the critical cells of the matching. For our purposes, the
following definition of a finite CW-complex will suffice.

###### Definition 2

A finite CW-complex (or cell complex) @xmath is a collection of cells
such that for each cell @xmath

-   There is a homeomorphism from @xmath to @xmath for some @xmath .

-   @xmath is the union of cells @xmath in @xmath .

The main theorem of discrete Morse theory can be stated as follows,
using the notion of a Morse matching.

###### Theorem 2.1

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex with a Morse matching @xmath . Assume
that for each @xmath , there are @xmath unmatched p-simplices. Then
@xmath is homotopy equivalent to a CW-complex with exactly @xmath cells
of each dimension @xmath , for each @xmath , and @xmath cells of
dimension @xmath .

###### Corollary 2.2

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex with a Morse matching @xmath such
that @xmath for all but one @xmath . Then, for this particular @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, @xmath is homotopy equivalent to a wedge of @xmath @xmath
-dimensional spheres.

###### Corollary 2.3

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex with a perfect Morse matching @xmath
. Then, @xmath is contractible.

In this paper, we will apply discrete Morse theory to independence
complexes. The acyclic matchings that we will use are all instances of
the following general construction. By describing them in this
framework, we can easily determine their acyclicity. The construction is
similar to the matching trees of [ 3 ] . Throughout this paper, we will
however use the term matching tree to refer to our construction.

###### Example 1

The following example shows the basic idea behind the matching trees. In
Figure 4 , we construct a matching on the complex @xmath . First we
partition the set of faces in to two disjoint sets, based on whether the
vertex @xmath is in the face or not. We indicate this by writing @xmath
to the left of the root in the tree. To the right of the root we place
the graph @xmath which indicates that all faces of the complex are still
unmatched. In the left subtree we have forced @xmath not to appear in
any face. We illustrate this by placing an empty particle on @xmath in
the graph to the right of the root of this subtree. In the right subtree
we have instead forced @xmath to be present in every face. This is
illustrated by a filled particle on @xmath and empty particles on its
neighbours @xmath and @xmath . In both subtrees, this effectively
reduces the problem to the construction of a matching on two smaller
graphs, induced from @xmath by the complement of the fixed vertices. In
the next step, the vertex @xmath in the left graph, and @xmath in the
right graph both have degree 1. We use these vertices to create the
matchings @xmath and @xmath in the respective subtree. Let @xmath and
@xmath , and define the matchings as follows.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The unmatched faces @xmath remaining after removing the faces matched by
@xmath must have @xmath and @xmath . This further reduces the graph. In
the right subtree, it completely fixes one single graph. In the left
subtree, there is still a vertex @xmath on which we can match. Matching
@xmath with @xmath removes all the faces from this subtree, which we
indicate by writing @xmath to the right of the last node.

In Proposition 2.6 , we will see that the union of the matchings made in
this type of construction forms an acyclic matching on the original
complex. We can therefore apply Theorem 2.1 , and due to the remaining
1-dimensional face in the right subtree, which is the only critical
cell, we conclude that @xmath is homotopy equivalent to a 1-dimensional
sphere.

###### Definition 3 (Matching tree)

Let @xmath be a finite, rooted tree in which each internal node has
either one or two children. To each internal node (which includes the
root) @xmath , we associate a vertex @xmath .

We say that @xmath is a matching tree if the set of vertices @xmath
fulfil the following two conditions. For any node @xmath , let @xmath be
the path from the root @xmath to @xmath . Then,

-   all @xmath are distinct, and

-   @xmath forms an independent set in @xmath ,

where @xmath denotes the set of nodes with one child.

The vertices @xmath are called the pivots in [ 3 ] . They are the
vertices that we wrote to the left of the nodes in Figure 4 . Given the
complex @xmath and the tree @xmath , we determine a matching on @xmath
as follows. To each node @xmath , we associate a content @xmath , which
is a subset of the complex @xmath . This is the set that was illustrated
by the graphs to the right of the nodes in Figure 4 . For the root
@xmath , we let @xmath , and for the other nodes the content will be
determined recursively.

If @xmath has two children, then we call @xmath a split node , and we
let the content of the root of the left subtree of @xmath be the set of
faces @xmath and the content of the root of the right subtree of @xmath
be the faces @xmath .

If @xmath has only one child, then we call @xmath a match node . We
define the partial matching @xmath associated to the match node and the
set of matched faces @xmath as follows.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will see below that the set @xmath forms a partial matching on @xmath
. For match nodes, we let the content of the child of @xmath be @xmath .

###### Definition 4

Let @xmath be a graph and @xmath . We say that a position @xmath is free
in @xmath if @xmath and @xmath is an independent set in @xmath .

The following lemma provides all the structure we need on the sets
@xmath to show acyclicity for our matchings.

###### Lemma 2.4

Let @xmath be a matching tree and let @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath is
free in @xmath , then @xmath Conversely, if @xmath and @xmath , then
@xmath .

###### Proof

Both parts of the lemma obviously hold true for the root node. We will
show that if either part fails for some @xmath , where @xmath is taken
to be the first node on the path from the root to @xmath for which this
is the case, then the other part must fail at an earlier node @xmath ,
closer to the root. If we apply this argument twice, we reach a node
@xmath which is strictly between the root and @xmath and for which the
same part of the lemma fails. This contradicts our choice of @xmath ,
and the lemma follows.

Assume that @xmath and that @xmath is free in @xmath . The reason for
@xmath not to be in @xmath could be that there was a split node which
had @xmath in one subtree and @xmath in the other. This can not happen,
however, since the two faces only differ in @xmath and along the path
from the root, all pivots must be distinct.

The only remaining possibility is then that @xmath was matched in an
earlier node @xmath . Now, if @xmath is free in @xmath , then it is also
free in @xmath , and by our assumption, @xmath would have been matched
at @xmath as well. So, we can assume that @xmath , and then also @xmath
. The second part of the lemma therefore fails at @xmath .

For the second part, assume that @xmath and @xmath , but that @xmath .
Again, @xmath could not have been removed by an earlier split node since
it only differs in @xmath from @xmath .

So assume that @xmath was matched in an earlier node @xmath . If @xmath
, then @xmath and by induction, @xmath would have been matched with
@xmath at @xmath . Therefore, @xmath is free in @xmath . By the
restriction that the pivots of the match nodes form an independent set
in @xmath , we have that @xmath is free in @xmath as well. The first
part of the lemma therefore fails at @xmath . ∎

Using Lemma 2.4 , it is easy to see that in fact, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, for each match node @xmath , @xmath is a partial matching on
the subgraph of the underlying graph of @xmath induced by the set @xmath
. It is acyclic, as the only way to “move down” in the directed graph
induced by @xmath is by removing @xmath .

It therefore makes sense to define the matching @xmath determined by the
tree @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

We will now show that @xmath is acyclic, so that Theorem 2.1 is
applicable. The critical cells will be those in the set @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the set of leaves in @xmath . Our proof will use the
following lemma, which appears in [ 8 ] .

###### Lemma 2.5 (Cluster Lemma)

Let @xmath be a simplicial complex and @xmath be a poset map, where
@xmath is an arbitrary poset. For @xmath , let @xmath be an acyclic
matching on @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, @xmath is an acyclic matching on @xmath .

The following proposition justifies our definition of a matching tree,
showing that any tree gives an acyclic matching on the corresponding
independence complex. The proof is entirely guided by the Cluster lemma
(Lemma 2.5 ).

###### Proposition 2.6

Let @xmath be a graph and @xmath a matching tree defined on the
independence complex @xmath . Then, the matching @xmath given by @xmath
on @xmath is acyclic.

###### Proof

We start by defining a total order on the nodes of the tree @xmath .
First, if @xmath is an ancestor of @xmath , then let @xmath . Then, if
@xmath and @xmath are two subtrees of a node @xmath , with @xmath being
the subtree where @xmath for any @xmath , let @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath .

Let @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to check that the @xmath are pairwise disjoint and that
@xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, each face of @xmath is
either in @xmath for some @xmath or in @xmath for some @xmath . Thus,
@xmath is a uniquely defined map. It remains to verify that it is indeed
a poset map.

Let @xmath , with @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are in different
subtrees of some node @xmath , then @xmath must be in the left, as we
know that @xmath is in all faces of the right subtree, but in none of
the left. Thus, @xmath .

If instead @xmath and @xmath are on the same path from the root to some
leaf, then we will assume that @xmath is closer to the root than @xmath
. Let @xmath be the pivot at @xmath . If @xmath , then Lemma 2.4 says
that @xmath should have been matched in the node @xmath , so we have a
contradiction. Therefore, @xmath . But then @xmath , and @xmath was
matched with @xmath . This implies that @xmath is free in @xmath , and
Lemma 2.4 again shows that @xmath should have been matched in @xmath .
We have a contradiction. Therefore @xmath must be equal to or lie
further from the root than @xmath , which means that @xmath .

Finally, for each @xmath , we have that @xmath is a perfect, acyclic
matching of @xmath . We can therefore use Lemma 2.5 to conclude that
@xmath is acyclic on the entire @xmath . ∎

We finally note that our construction disallows some strategies for
choosing split and match nodes which would have resulted in acyclic
matchings. This is due to the constraint that the match nodes in each
path from the root must form an independent set. This condition is not
strictly necessary, but for the purposes of this article, this
construction will suffice.

### 2.4 Hard particle models

A particular type of model in two-dimensional statistical mechanics is
the hard particle model . In such a model, given a regular grid like the
ones described in Section 2.2 , a configuration is a set of particles
placed on the sites of the grid so that no two particles are adjacent.
The name is explained by replacing each particle with a polygon, using
the neighbours of the original particle as the vertices of the polygon.
This polygon is assumed to be “hard”, meaning that no two polygons may
overlap in a configuration. When the grid is the square grid, the
polygons are squares, and the model referred to as the hard square model
. For the hexagonal grid, the polygons are triangles, and one has the
hard triangle model . For a thorough introduction to models in
statistical mechanics, see [ 2 ] , in which can also be found the
solution to the hard particle model on a triangular grid. This solution
was first presented by Baxter in [ 1 ] in 1980.

To a model, one can associate a partition function @xmath . This is the
generating function of the configurations with respect to the number of
particles of a configuration.

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the sum is taken over all allowed configurations of the model. The
variable @xmath of @xmath is called the activity and controls the
behaviour of the model.

A commonly used framework for deriving the partition function is the
transfer matrix method . See [ 14 , Chapter 4.7] for an introduction to
this method. Here, we illustrate the idea by giving a transfer matrix
for the rectangle @xmath . More examples are given in Section 5 .

Let @xmath denote the set of independent sets on the line @xmath . Since
@xmath , @xmath , and the recursive relation @xmath holds, we have
@xmath , the Fibonacci numbers. Let @xmath be the @xmath matrix where
the individual matrix elements are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The matrix @xmath is called a transfer matrix of the model. It describes
the effect of adding an additional row. We will only be studying models
at activity -1 so we leave out the variable @xmath and write @xmath .
The generating function of @xmath with respect to @xmath can now be
written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In addition, by simply taking the trace of the @xmath th power of the
matrix @xmath , we can also express the partition function @xmath of a
cylinder.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or as a generating function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The characteristic polynomial @xmath of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The roots of the characteristic polynomial can also be found by taking
the poles of the generating function @xmath .

It was observed by Fendley, Schoutens and van Eerten [ 4 ] that the hard
square model (on a torus) exhibit some interesting properties when the
activity is chosen to be @xmath . Among other things, they conjectured
that all the roots of the characteristic polynomial are roots of unity.
These conjectures were rigorously proven by Jonsson [ 9 ] by means of
applying an ingeniously designed series of matchings on the set of
configurations. Doing this, Jonsson discovered an underlying structure
of a particular type of rhombus tilings of the plane which he used to
settle the conjectures. An attempt to mimic the idea of Jonsson is
carried out in Section 4 , albeit with limited results.

The following conjecture for the hard particle model on a cylinder in
the square grid at activity -1 can be found in [ 9 ] . The conjecture is
based on results for @xmath .

###### Conjecture 1

For odd @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From ( 2 ) and ( 6 ) we see that, at @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, the partition function at activity @xmath is (up to a negative
sign) equal to the reduced Euler characteristic of the independence
complex of the underlying graph. For this reason, we will sometimes
refer to @xmath as the alternating sum of the corresponding independence
complex. In the next section, we investigate if this connection to
topology can be taken further than just to the reduced Euler
characteristic.

## 3 Explicit results

In this section we present the explicitly calculated homology groups of
some independence complexes on graphs related to the square and the
hexagonal grid. First, we do some small cases on the square grid by
hand, for a fixed circumference @xmath . Then, we present some larger
cases, where we have used a computer to calculate the homology groups.
The calculations were made using the software package Polymake [ 10 ]
version 2.2 by Michael Joswig and Ewgenij Gawrilow with many
contributors.

### 3.1 Results for small circumference

For some cases with small @xmath , we can find suitable matching trees
and work out the homotopy type. We do this here for the square grid when
@xmath and for the hexagonal grid when @xmath or @xmath . For the case
@xmath , we are only able to determine the alternating sum. This result
is given in Proposition 3.7 . We note that for the square grid, these
results are consistent with Conjecture 1 .

When @xmath there can be no particles on the grid since every vertex in
the grid is a neighbour to itself. Therefore @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.1

Let @xmath . Then, @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof

Note that @xmath . The construction in Example 1 in Section 2 is easily
extended to arbitrary @xmath . The only unmatched configuration has
@xmath particles when @xmath is even and @xmath particles when @xmath is
odd. ∎

###### Proposition 3.2

Let @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

Let @xmath . We construct an acyclic matching on @xmath as follows. If
we start by splitting on @xmath , we are left with @xmath in the left
subtree, and after a matching, a graph isomorphic to @xmath in the right
subtree. Figure 5 shows the matching tree construction for @xmath . Note
that the last remaining graph in the left subtree is isomorphic to
@xmath and that we have added two particles on the path from the root to
this node.

When @xmath , we can construct a matching leaving two configurations
with one particle each, when @xmath , we find a perfect matching, and
when @xmath , we are left with one configuration, having two particles.
The proposition follows by adding the configurations from the two
subtrees, and using Proposition 2.6 and Corollary 2.2 . ∎

###### Proposition 3.3

Let @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

Let @xmath . Figure 6 shows how to construct a matching tree for the
graph @xmath . Note that the left subtree gives a recursive relation of
length 2. When @xmath is even, there will be one configuration with
@xmath particles left at the end of this subtree. When @xmath is odd, we
have a perfect matching. In the right subtree, there remains a graph
which is isomorphic to @xmath . When @xmath , this subtree has one
configuration with one particle. Thus, the entire tree leaves @xmath
configurations with @xmath particles.

Now, we build the matching tree for @xmath as follows. We first split on
@xmath . The left subtree will be the one previously constructed for
@xmath with @xmath remaining configurations. In the right subtree, we
can match on @xmath , leaving us with a graph isomorphic to @xmath , and
@xmath remaining configurations.

We then use Proposition 2.6 to show that we have an acyclic matching
with @xmath unmatched configurations, each with @xmath particles.
Corollary 2.2 finally gives us the homotopy type. ∎

###### Proposition 3.4

Let @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

We give a sketch of the matching tree for @xmath . First, we split on
both @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, @xmath and @xmath can be perfectly matched. If @xmath is even,
then after matching @xmath , one configuration with @xmath particles
remain, and there is a perfect matching for @xmath otherwise. For @xmath
, we have one configuration with @xmath particles left if @xmath is odd
and a perfect matching otherwise. ∎

###### Proposition 3.5

Let @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

It can be seen in Figure 7 that the graph @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath
, the path on @xmath vertices. The result immediately follows. ∎

###### Proposition 3.6

Let @xmath . Then, the simplicial complex @xmath is homotopy equivalent
to a wedge of @xmath @xmath -dimensional spheres.

###### Proof

The Morse matching for @xmath is given by the matching tree in Figure 8
. We start by splitting on vertex @xmath . If there is a particle on
@xmath , then we can find a perfect matching on all remaining
configurations by matching on @xmath . If @xmath is empty, we split on
vertex @xmath . The remaining graph in the right subtree is shown in the
lower right corner of the figure. We see that it is isomorphic to @xmath
, and that we have added one particle on the way to this node. In the
left subtree, we eventually reach a node where the remaining graph is
the one in the lower left corner. This graph is isomorphic to @xmath and
the two match nodes on the way to this node adds two particles.

The base cases when @xmath and @xmath are constructed by hand. We can
construct a matching on @xmath so that two configurations remain, both
with two particles. On @xmath we can similarly construct a matching
which leaves three configurations, each with three particles. Using
these matchings and Proposition 2.6 , we finally construct an acyclic
matching on @xmath which leaves @xmath unmatched configurations each
with @xmath particles. ∎

As we will see in the next section when we determine some homology
groups using computer calculations, the complex @xmath has non-zero
homology in two dimensions. Therefore, we can not in general hope to
apply Corollary 2.2 to the complexes @xmath . However, Table 5 suggests
that the alternating sum may be simple. We are able to find a matching
tree which shows that this alternating sum is identical to that of
@xmath which was determined in Proposition 3.6 . This results is given
in the following proposition.

###### Proposition 3.7

Let @xmath . Then, @xmath

###### Proof

We give a sketch of the matching tree construction used to prove
Proposition 3.7 . We start by splitting on the vertices @xmath in Figure
9 . The first thing to note is that if particles are present on two
consecutive @xmath and @xmath (modulo 4), then we can match everything
in this subtree. The upper right configuration shows this case, when for
all faces @xmath in this subtree, @xmath . Here, we match on @xmath . A
similar situation occurs when only one @xmath is present.

Therefore, we have either the case @xmath (or the complement), or no
@xmath is in @xmath . The lower left configuration shows the first case,
where we proceed by matching on @xmath and @xmath . In this case, which
occurs twice, we end up with the graph @xmath and 4 particles fixed in
each configuration.

The lower right configuration shows the case when none of the @xmath are
in @xmath . We then match on @xmath . In the second case, we reach the
graph @xmath after fixing 7 particles. We see here that the critical
cells will be spread out over several dimensions. We therefore focus on
the alternating sum, disregarding the homotopy type in this case. From
the previous argument, we have the recursion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and base cases are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is isomorphic to an 8-cycle. The proposition follows by
solving this recursion. ∎

### 3.2 The matching @xmath

In the rest of this section we will present the homology groups of some
independence complexes which have been computer generated. To reduce the
size of the complexes and the time of the calculations, we first apply a
particular Morse matching to each complex. We start by introducing this
matching, and the manipulations made on the complex, before giving our
results in Section 3.3 and Section 3.4

Let @xmath be a simple, undirected graph. Let @xmath be an independent
set in @xmath , which we will call the odd vertices . We will assume a
fixed, but arbitrary total order @xmath on @xmath .

The matching @xmath on the Hasse diagram of @xmath is defined as
follows. The edge @xmath is in @xmath if @xmath , where @xmath is the
smallest element (with respect to @xmath ) in @xmath for which @xmath is
an independent set. According to Proposition 2.6 , the matching @xmath
is acyclic, and therefore a Morse matching. According to Theorem 2.1 ,
we then know that @xmath is homotopy equivalent to some cell-complex,
with cells in the dimensions given by the sizes of the unmatched faces
in @xmath . We call this set of unmatched faces @xmath and note that we
can express it as

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath denotes the neighbourhood of @xmath in @xmath . Of course,
in general, @xmath does not form a simplicial complex. From @xmath we
see that the total order @xmath does not affect @xmath . Now, given a
set @xmath , and thereby a set @xmath , we define two simplicial
complexes @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will now prove a theorem that relates the homotopy type of the
original independence complex to that of @xmath . First, however, we
will give a topological lemma. In [ 12 ] it was stated for the case when
@xmath is a simplex. This slightly more general version is needed for
the proof of our theorem.

###### Lemma 3.8

Let @xmath be simplicial complexes and assume that @xmath is
contractible. Then, @xmath .

###### Proof

The concept of a mapping cone is described in [ 7 , Chapter 0] . In our
case, the mapping cone is the simplicial complex @xmath ), i.e, we raise
a cone in @xmath over the subcomplex @xmath . Note that @xmath and that
@xmath . Now, since both @xmath and @xmath are contractible, we have
@xmath which finishes the proof. ∎

We are now ready to state and prove the following theorem, which allows
us to simplify our calculations of the homology groups.

###### Theorem 3.9

Let @xmath be an independent set and assume that @xmath is contractible.
Then,

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

###### Proof

The set @xmath is given by @xmath . Another way to express this is to
say that @xmath if and only if @xmath , From the latter definition we
can immediately see that if @xmath and @xmath , then we have @xmath .
Let @xmath . The previous argument shows that @xmath is a simplicial
complex. Figure 10 illustrates the relationship between @xmath and the
simplicial complexes @xmath and @xmath .

Since @xmath gives a perfect matching on @xmath , we can collapse @xmath
to a point in @xmath . But this is the same as identifying @xmath with a
point in @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using Lemma 3.8 , we now see that @xmath . ∎

The reason for using @xmath instead of @xmath is two-fold. First, we
have used a matching to reduce the size of the complex, and thereby,
hopefully, reduced the time to compute its homology. Secondly, in many
cases a description of the complex @xmath is easier to obtain and more
compact than a description of the original complex.

### 3.3 Graphs on the square grid

Let @xmath and assume that @xmath is even. In this case we choose the
independent set @xmath . Then, @xmath and thus contractible. The complex
@xmath can be generated from the set @xmath in the following way. For
each @xmath we have a maximal face @xmath . We see that for the maximal
faces @xmath , either @xmath or @xmath , depending on whether the
corresponding @xmath is on the (non-identified) boundary of the cylinder
or not.

###### Example 2

Let @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Then, the six maximal faces of @xmath
are as shown in Figure 11 and the complex itself can be realised as in
Figure 12 . We can see that it is homotopy equivalent to a wedge of
three @xmath -dimensional spheres. Therefore, we conclude from Theorem
3.9 that @xmath .

For odd @xmath , we let @xmath . The complex @xmath is still
contractible but the maximal faces of @xmath are less regular.

Table 1 and Table 2 show the calculated homology groups for the complex
@xmath for small @xmath and @xmath . An entry @xmath in the table should
be read as @xmath . Missing entries are cases where Polymake ran for too
long, or more often, ran out of memory. The homology vanishes in all
dimensions that are not listed. Note that for @xmath , the homology
groups in these tables can be derived, for arbitrary @xmath , from the
results in Section 3.1 . For odd @xmath , we observe an interesting
symmetry, which we pose as a conjecture.

###### Conjecture 2

For all @xmath and @xmath , the following holds.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Table 3 is taken from [ 9 ] and shows the values of @xmath for small
@xmath and @xmath , calculated using transfer matrices. The cases when
@xmath is odd are left out as they all satisfy Conjecture 1 . In these
cases, it was also observed, and conjectured to hold in general, that
all the roots of the characteristic polynomials were roots of unity. In
particular, this implies that the rows of Table 3 are periodic.

Both for even and odd @xmath , we find cases where there is non-zero
homology in more than one dimension. This means that in these cases
there is no easy way to determine the alternating sums via Morse
matchings and the homotopy type. In the odd @xmath -case, the bad
example shows up for the graph @xmath , where @xmath . It is therefore
still possible that the independence complexes in the other odd @xmath
-cases, where @xmath is conjectured to be @xmath , are simple.

### 3.4 Graphs on the hexagonal grid

Take any finite subgraph @xmath of the hexagonal grid @xmath . As in the
case of the square grid with even @xmath , there is a natural notion of
even and odd vertices given by the parity of the vertices. Let @xmath be
the graph @xmath , possibly with some identifications made on vertices
of the same parity and let @xmath be the set of odd vertices in @xmath ,
where the parity is inherited from @xmath . Then, @xmath is a simplex of
dimension @xmath and thus contractible. The complex @xmath is determined
in the same way as was done for the square grid with even @xmath . For
each @xmath we have a maximal face @xmath .

Table 4 shows the homology of the complex @xmath for small @xmath and
@xmath . As before, an entry @xmath means that @xmath and that the
homology vanishes in all other dimensions. As noted in the square grid
case, the entries for @xmath could be derived, for arbitrary @xmath from
Proposition 3.6 . We note with interest that there seems to be a
relation between the dimensions in which homology appears for @xmath and
@xmath , but the data is quite limited. Table 5 shows some of the first
values of the alternating sum @xmath . They have been generated using
transfer matrices. We have not found any nice factorisation of these
polynomials and they seem to have mostly roots which are not roots of
unity.

In the case of the hexagonal lattice, we have also calculated the
homology for the toroidal case, i.e, for the complex @xmath . Table 6
shows the homology for small cases. Table 7 lists @xmath for some small
values of @xmath and @xmath calculated using the transfer matrices. For
@xmath , the characteristic polynomials @xmath of these matrices factor
reasonably well After removing powers of @xmath , the polynomials are
given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

For larger values of @xmath , the polynomials do not factor as nicely,
and seem to have mostly roots which are not roots of unity.

## 4 A second matching

In this section we introduce an alternative matching on the face poset
of the complex @xmath . While in Section 3 , the matching presented was
always acyclic, we will make no such claims here. This means that we can
not rely on the discrete Morse theory for our results. Still, we will be
able to derive results on the alternating sum @xmath . A similar idea
was used with great success on the hard square model on a torus in [ 9 ]
.

Let @xmath be any matching on the underlying graph of @xmath . Then, for
all @xmath , we have @xmath and therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we let @xmath denote the set of unmatched faces in @xmath . Thus,
we can calculate @xmath using only the faces in the set @xmath .

In order to describe our matching we need to introduce some notation and
terminology. Let @xmath be a face in @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be ordered by the second component of the @xmath . For @xmath
, we define the interval @xmath of @xmath at @xmath to be the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the addition is modulo @xmath in the second component, and the
indices @xmath and @xmath are identified. Let @xmath be the set of all
intervals. We call the sequence @xmath the signature of @xmath and we
identify signatures which are identical up to cyclic rotations. We
distinguish between even and odd intervals by the parity of their sizes
and between even and odd positions in an interval @xmath by saying that
the element @xmath is in an even (odd) position if @xmath is an even
(odd) interval, and extending this notion of parity to the rest of the
interval. Let @xmath , where @xmath is the set of particles in odd
position, and @xmath the set of particles in even position.

###### Example 3

Let @xmath be the configuration in Figure 13 . Here @xmath and the
intervals @xmath are given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In the interval @xmath , the positions @xmath and @xmath are odd, while
in @xmath , the odd positions are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
The signature of @xmath is @xmath which is the same as @xmath or @xmath
.

We start by defining a closure operator @xmath on the poset @xmath . The
idea is to use the equivalence relation defined by @xmath if and only if
@xmath to group faces in equivalence classes. By constructing matchings
on the non-singleton classes of @xmath we can then restrict our study to
a particular collection of singleton classes. As before, let @xmath .
The face @xmath is defined as follows.

-   @xmath .

-   For each @xmath , if @xmath is in an even position and if @xmath is
    free in @xmath , then @xmath .

Let @xmath be the equivalence relation described above and let @xmath be
the equivalence class of @xmath with respect to @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the face from Example 3 . Then, @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.1

Let @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be a free and even position in an interval @xmath .
    Then, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

-    Assume that @xmath . Let @xmath . Then, @xmath , @xmath , and
    @xmath .

###### Proof

The first part follows from the observation that adding the element
@xmath to @xmath divides the interval @xmath into one even interval,
with last position in @xmath , and one interval of the same parity as
@xmath , given by the position @xmath .

The second part holds since gluing an even interval with its following
interval (which is necessarily different due to the lower bound
condition on @xmath ) creates an interval of the same parity as the
latter one. The parity of the positions in the new interval are the same
as in the old intervals and the vacated position @xmath is free and even
in @xmath , which shows that @xmath . ∎

We partition the faces @xmath into three sets @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, depending on the signature and the size of @xmath .

-   @xmath is the set of @xmath for which @xmath and for which there is
    at least one odd interval in @xmath .

-   @xmath is the set of @xmath for which @xmath and all the intervals
    in @xmath are even.

-   @xmath is the set of @xmath for which @xmath is a singleton.

Note that Lemma 4.1 implies that if @xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath
, @xmath .

We can use Lemma 4.1 to describe the sets @xmath more explicitly. The
idea is to use the first part to move from @xmath to @xmath . In the
process, we add only even intervals. Then, we can use the second part to
move from @xmath to any @xmath by doing the reverse operation of gluing
an even interval with its following interval.

###### Corollary 4.2

Assume that @xmath . Then, @xmath if and only if @xmath can be obtained
from @xmath by removing a subset of @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.3

Assume that @xmath . Then, @xmath if and only if @xmath can be obtained
from @xmath by removing a proper subset of @xmath .

We can therefore describe the structure of the equivalence classes in
the following way.

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

Using the description of @xmath in ( 9 ), we can show that the
equivalence classes in @xmath and @xmath behave well. These results are
given in Lemma 4.4 and Lemma 4.5 .

###### Lemma 4.4

Let @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

Since @xmath , we know that @xmath is non-empty. In particular, we can
choose an @xmath and match @xmath with @xmath for each @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 4.5

Let @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

Note that for all @xmath , we have @xmath . According to ( 9 ), the set
@xmath consists of the faces @xmath where @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Lemma 4.5 needs a bit more work to use than Lemma 4.4 . In order to find
the sum of @xmath over all @xmath , we must use Lemma 4.5 on each
equivalence class in @xmath . Luckily, there is an easy way to describe
all equivalence classes. For @xmath , let @xmath . That is, @xmath is
the set of faces in @xmath which are equal to @xmath on rows 2 through
@xmath . Then, since all faces in @xmath contain only even intervals,
@xmath can be partitioned into two sets,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, the set of non-empty @xmath and @xmath equals the set of
equivalence classes in @xmath . This observation leads to the following
lemma.

###### Lemma 4.6

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

Following the previous discussion, we reorder the sum to be over the
sets @xmath and since @xmath is uniquely determined by rows @xmath
through @xmath of @xmath , we will sum over faces @xmath , abusing
notation slightly to write @xmath when @xmath equals @xmath as sets.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath and @xmath in the inner sum are non-empty, we can use Lemma
4.5 . The set @xmath is empty precisely when the first row of @xmath
(which is the second row of the corresponding @xmath ) has particles in
positions @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of such @xmath and let @xmath
be the set of @xmath which has particles in positions @xmath . This
gives us the following expression.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The lemma follows by constructing a matching tree for the set @xmath (or
equivalently, for @xmath ). This set can be perfectly matched when
@xmath is odd and can be matched except for a single face with @xmath
particles when @xmath is even. ∎

It remains to describe the faces @xmath which are in the set @xmath . In
order to do this, we will further divide this set into three disjoint
sets, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath is the set of faces @xmath with signature @xmath .

-   @xmath is the set of faces @xmath for which all the intervals are of
    odd length, at least one of length greater than 3, and such that all
    even positions in the intervals are non-free.

-   @xmath is the set of faces @xmath with signature @xmath .

These sets partition the remaining faces since all @xmath with both odd
and even intervals are in @xmath and all @xmath with only even intervals
are in @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.7

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

Note that the faces with signature @xmath fall into three equivalence
classes of @xmath . Let @xmath . We will first determine the homotopy
type of @xmath . We then obtain the desired sum by determining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and multiply this by 3.

Figure 14 shows a sketch of the matching tree construction. If we split
on @xmath , the subtree where @xmath belongs to all faces will be
perfectly matched on @xmath . We can therefore assume that @xmath is
empty, and then match on @xmath . In the second graph, these vertices
have been fixed. We now have two vertices of degree 1, which we can
match in any order to obtain the third graph. Note that after removing
the first three rows and a total of @xmath particles, the third graph is
identical to the graph in the root. This provides a recursive relation.
The base cases are when @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The first two of
these leave a single configuration with @xmath and @xmath particles,
respectively. For @xmath , the entire complex is matched.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The lemma follows. ∎

###### Conjecture 3

Let @xmath be odd. Then, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can prove the following, which shows a special case of Conjecture 3 ,
but also holds for even @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.8

Let @xmath and assume that for all intervals @xmath , it holds that
@xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

Figure 15 shows the fixed vertices in the lower part of a typical
configuration in @xmath . In this particular example, @xmath and @xmath
. The same graph, when the fixed vertices are removed, is shown in the
root of Figure 16 . We will now construct a matching tree on this graph
and show that we can match all configurations @xmath , with @xmath
perfectly.

First, we match on @xmath and @xmath . By doing this, we obtain two new
vertices of degree 1, namely @xmath and @xmath . We also have the vertex
@xmath which had degree 1 already in the root node. We continue by
matching on @xmath and @xmath (in any order), and obtain the final graph
in Figure 16 . Removing all fixed vertices in this graph yields, after a
rotation of the cylinder, the graph in the root node of height 2 less.
This is the recursive step. It is easy to see that the base cases, for
@xmath and @xmath are perfectly matched. When @xmath , the set @xmath is
empty.

We argue that this construction is extendable to any @xmath , where
@xmath . Take such a @xmath and an interval @xmath . On the second row,
there are @xmath forced particles, due to the fact that all even
positions in @xmath must be non-free. Let @xmath be the last such
particle, which always exists since @xmath . Then, for each @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath forces a degree-1 vertex. In the example these
degree-1 vertices are @xmath and @xmath . We start by matching on these
vertices. In the second step, we note that for each interval, there will
now be @xmath vertices of degree 1 on row 3. In the example these
vertices are @xmath for the interval @xmath and @xmath and @xmath for
the interval @xmath . As in the example, when @xmath and @xmath
everything can be perfectly matched. Therefore, the number of intervals
does not matter, as long as they are all odd, and all of size greater
than or equal to 5. ∎

The final set @xmath will function as an inductive step, since we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

###### Proposition 4.9

Conjecture 3 implies Conjecture 1 .

###### Proof

Let @xmath be odd. We know from Lemma 4.4 that the alternating sum over
@xmath is 0. Since @xmath is odd, we further know that @xmath is empty.
For @xmath , we use Lemma 4.7 for @xmath and Conjecture 3 for @xmath .
Finally, as noted in @xmath , we get an inductive step from @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The base case is @xmath which is the alternating sum of the independence
complex on an @xmath -cycle. Its values are given by the following
expression.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is odd, this can be simplified to @xmath if @xmath and
@xmath otherwise. Together with the inductive step, this shows the
proposition. ∎

When @xmath , the set @xmath is empty and for @xmath and 9, Lemma 4.8
covers all the cases of Conjecture 3 . Therefore, Conjecture 1 holds for
these values of @xmath .

Conjecture 3 does not hold for all even @xmath . A counterexample is
given in Figure 17 , where @xmath and @xmath . A straightforward
application of the matching tree construction produces a matching on the
faces @xmath with @xmath which leaves a single face with six particles.
Thus, @xmath in this case.

Still, we can determine @xmath for some small, even @xmath . When @xmath
, both @xmath and @xmath are empty. Lemma 4.6 , Lemma 4.7 and @xmath
gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath is the following periodic sequence, starting from
@xmath . The period is 12.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In Table 8 we have taken the values of @xmath from Table 3 and removed
the part which can be explained using Lemma 4.6 , Lemma 4.7 and @xmath
similarly to what we did in the previous example. What remains in the
table is therefore the alternating sums over the faces in @xmath , or
alternatively over those faces in @xmath which are not matched by Lemma
4.8 . These are still unexplained, but several interesting patterns seem
to emerge.

## 5 Transfer matrices

In [ 3 ] , Bousquet-Mélou, Linusson and Nevo determined the partition
function of the hard particle model on a parallelogram shaped region
@xmath of the square grid. We describe it by letting @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Figure 18 shows the region @xmath . The skewed border allowed them to
find a Morse-matching for the complex @xmath and determine its homotopy
type. They further realised that this could be used to produce parts of
the spectrum of the transfer matrix for the cylinder @xmath . In this
section, we will review this idea and show how we can complete the case
for @xmath . We also find the missing eigenvalue when @xmath .
Unfortunately, we were not able to generalise our findings to new,
unknown spectra.

We start by defining the two transfer matrices of interest. For a fixed
@xmath , the matrix @xmath describes the configurations on the region
@xmath and @xmath describes the configurations on the region @xmath .
Throughout this section, @xmath will denote the square root of @xmath .

Let @xmath be the @xmath -matrix, indexed by subsets of @xmath on both
rows and columns, and defined as follows.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath .

Let @xmath be the @xmath -matrix, indexed by independent sets on a path
with @xmath vertices, and defined as follows.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

We here follow [ 3 ] and in contrast to the example in Section 2.4
distribute the weights of the entries in row @xmath , column @xmath and
row @xmath , column @xmath evenly.

As was illustrated in Section 2.4 , we can determine the values of
@xmath by taking the trace of the @xmath th power of either one of these
matrices. Therefore, the following relation between the generating
functions of @xmath holds.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

We conclude that the spectra of @xmath and @xmath are equal, apart from
the multiplicity of the null eigenvalue due to the difference in size.

Let @xmath and assume that we prescribe the particles given by @xmath
and @xmath on the left and right boundary of @xmath . That is, when
@xmath , then the @xmath th particle from the top on the left boundary
is present, and otherwise it is missing in each configuration and
similarly for @xmath on the right boundary. This induces a subgraph of
@xmath which we will denote by @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the element is row @xmath , column @xmath of @xmath .
Then, @xmath is the generating function for configurations on @xmath ,
weighted as given by @xmath and has the following expression.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

We can then split the left-hand side of @xmath into

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

The observation made in [ 3 ] was that parts of the spectra can be
recovered by finding @xmath for some @xmath and that this can be done in
the model for @xmath which is more easily determined than that of @xmath
.

The characteristic polynomial of @xmath is determined both in [ 3 ] and
[ 9 ] and is given by @xmath . Let @xmath denote the first @xmath terms
in the expansion of @xmath . By finding a Morse-matching for the region
in Figure 18 , Bousquet-Mélou, Linusson and Nevo effectively calculated
@xmath . When @xmath , they found that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

This determined

This recovers one of the factors of @xmath . Using this case, and a
recursion for @xmath , they could then determine the function @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

We will now determine the remaining cases for @xmath . We start with the
following lemma.

###### Lemma 5.1

Assume that @xmath for some @xmath and let @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof

Figure 19 illustrates that the regions remaining after fixing the
boundaries to @xmath and @xmath respectively are equal. Since the
addition of two elements does not change the parity, we have @xmath .
Since furthermore @xmath , all terms except the constants cancel and we
have @xmath . ∎

Using Lemma 5.1 we can avoid calculating certain sets by choosing a
partial matching on @xmath which satisfies the condition in the lemma.
We will in this way match @xmath with @xmath , @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath with @xmath . This leaves only @xmath unmatched among the
potential candidates for Lemma 5.1 . We can produce its generating
function by noting that @xmath . Lemma 5.1 applied to @xmath and @xmath
gives us

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

The sets that remain are the singleton sets, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. By symmetry, we can restrict our calculations to the sets @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We present the calculations for @xmath and
@xmath .

We start with the case @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is an arbitrary
subset of @xmath . When @xmath , we have the recursive relation @xmath .
Thus, @xmath which gives us the following general expression.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

The recursive relation which was used to produce @xmath , and those that
follow, are obtained using simple matching trees. We present some, but
not all trees here.

Figure 20 illustrates a matching tree when @xmath . This gives us the
following recursive relation for the case @xmath .

  -- -- -- ------
           (20)
  -- -- -- ------

For the second term, we calculate @xmath , which, using @xmath , gives
@xmath . Plugging this term into @xmath gives the expression

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

which, after calculating @xmath , gives the final function for @xmath ,
and by symmetry for @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

For @xmath , we have the recursion

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

We proceed by summing over @xmath and calculating the base cases.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the last equality, we have calculated the polynomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and used the expression for @xmath in @xmath . It turns out that @xmath
.

The final two cases, when @xmath and @xmath , are determined similarly,
and we present them without any explicit calculations.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that @xmath implies that all the singleton sets have the same
generating function.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

We note that while all factors of the characteristic polynomial show up
in the individual terms, we can not deduce their multiplicities until we
have taken the sum over all sets. Expanding this sum into partial
fractions, we arrive at the following expression.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the two roots of @xmath . As expected, we
recover the roots and multiplicities of the characteristic polynomial of
@xmath , which apart from the 8 zeroes equals the characteristic
polynomial of @xmath .

Next, we determine the factor of the characteristic polynomial for
@xmath which does not follow from the case @xmath . The characteristic
polynomial for @xmath is given by @xmath [ 3 , 9 ] and the function
@xmath follows from the general result in [ 3 ] .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

This leaves the factor @xmath unexplained. We show that this factor
appears in the generating function @xmath for @xmath .

As in the previous case, we start by deriving an expression for @xmath
for an arbitrary @xmath . The matching leading up to the recursion
contains more steps, but is straightforward using matching trees. The
final formula is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

We will also make use of the recursive relation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

from which we derive that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the last equality we have used that @xmath . The main recursion for
@xmath is given by the following relation.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

The matching tree needed to produce this relation is shown in Figure 21
. The terms @xmath and @xmath in the right-hand side of @xmath are
obtained in nodes 1 and 4, respectively.

After summation over @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

Calculations of initial terms in the relevant series provides the
polynomials

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath evaluates to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

This recovers the missing factor @xmath .

Acknowledgements The author wishes to thank his supervisor Svante
Linusson, who provided many ideas and suggestions to the work presented
in this paper and who also patiently read and commented on countless
early manuscripts.