##### Contents

-    Acknowledgment
-    Abstract
-    1 Introduction
-    2 Review of the von Neumann lattice formalism
    -    2.1 Orthonormal von Neumann lattice basis
        -    2.1.1 Landau level quantization
        -    2.1.2 Eigenstate of the magnetic angular momentum operator
        -    2.1.3 Coherent state
    -    2.2 Magnetic translation group and von Neumann Lattice basis
        -    2.2.1 Magnetic translation group
        -    2.2.2 Eigenstate of the commutative magnetic translation
            operators
    -    2.3 von Neumann lattice formalism
        -    2.3.1 Hamiltonian of the quantum Hall system
        -    2.3.2 Hartree-Fock Hamiltonian
        -    2.3.3 Density operator
        -    2.3.4 Magnetic field in momentum space
-    3 Periodic states in the quantum Hall system
    -    3.1 Background
        -    3.1.1 Early studies
        -    3.1.2 vNL formalism for striped Hall, CDW, and bubble
            states
    -    3.2 Striped Hall state
        -    3.2.1 Assumption of the unidirectional density
        -    3.2.2 Diagonalization, eigenstates and eigenvalues
        -    3.2.3 Self-consistency condition and solution
    -    3.3 Charge density wave state
        -    3.3.1 Assumption of the CDW density
        -    3.3.2 Diagonalization, eigenstates and eigenvalues
        -    3.3.3 Self-consistency condition
        -    3.3.4 Density profile and Energy dispersion of CDW states
    -    3.4 Bubble state
        -    3.4.1 Assumption of the bubble density
        -    3.4.2 Self-consistency condition and solution
        -    3.4.3 Relation between the @xmath -electron bubble state
            and the CDW state at @xmath
-    4 Effects of an injected current on highly anisotropic states
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 Experiments of highly anisotropic states
    -    4.3 Highly anisotropic states in the Hartree-Fock theory
        -    4.3.1 Striped Hall state at @xmath
        -    4.3.2 Anisotropic charge density wave state at @xmath
    -    4.4 Response functions
        -    4.4.1 Response function of the striped Hall state
        -    4.4.2 Response function of the anisotropic charge density
            wave state
    -    4.5 Energy corrections due to injected currents
        -    4.5.1 Current and charge distributions
        -    4.5.2 Energy corrections
    -    4.6 Summary
-    A von Neumann lattice formalism
    -    A.1 Wave function of the von Neumann lattice basis
    -    A.2 Explicit form of the inner product @xmath
    -    A.3 Density operator on the von Neumann lattice basis
    -    A.4 Landau level matrix elements
    -    A.5 Hartree-Fock Hamiltonian
        -    A.5.1 Hartree term
        -    A.5.2 Fock term
-    B Highly anisotropic states
    -    B.1 Deviation of the Hartree-Fock Hamiltonian due to currents
    -    B.2 Calculation of @xmath for the ACDW state

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Since the discovery of the integer quantum Hall effect by von Klitzing
et al. [ 1 ] in 1980, a two-dimensional (2D) electron system in a
perpendicular magnetic field has attracted much attention for more than
a quarter of a century. In 1980, von Klizing et al. have measured the
Hall conductivity of the 2D electron system in strong perpendicular
magnetic fields at low temperatures, and have found that the Hall
conductivity exhibits plateaus just at integer multiples of @xmath as
the magnitude of the magnetic field is varied, where @xmath is the
electron charge and @xmath is the Plank constant. This is the integer
quantum Hall effect (IQHE), and after its discovery, a 2D electron
system subjected to a perpendicular magnetic field is called a quantum
Hall system . The integer quantization of the Hall conductivity is
closely related to a Landau level quantization of an energy spectrum of
free electrons as follows. In classical mechanics, a free electron
performs a cyclotron motion in a uniform magnetic field @xmath . Since
this cyclotron motion corresponds to a harmonic oscillation with the
cyclotron frequency @xmath ( @xmath : electron mass) in quantum
mechanics, the energy spectrum is quantized to @xmath ( @xmath ). This
quantized energy level is called Landau level (LL) named after Landau
who solved this problem for the first time. The number of states in each
LL is proportional to @xmath , and when the magnetic field is strong and
the lower few LLs are fully occupied by electrons, the Hall conductivity
is quantized. Thus, the IQHE is closely related to the LL quantization.
In order to explain the emergency of the plateau structure, a
localization effect of electrons trapped by impurities should be taken
into account and this provides another interesting topic. For more
details about the IQHE, see the reviews by Ando et al. [ 2 ] and Störmer
[ 3 ] .

Only two years later after the discovery of the IQHE, another surprising
phenomenon, a fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE), was found. In 1982,
working with much higher mobility sample, Tsui et al. [ 4 ] have
discovered the fractional quantization of the Hall conductivity. The
fractional quantizations have been observed around characteristic
partial fillings in the lowest LL. Around these fillings,
electron-electron interaction plays a predominant role, which results in
a unique collective phenomenon. Among a number of theoretical studies
done to solve this problem, it was Laughlin [ 5 ] who has succeeded in
discovering a Laughlin’s variational wave function which explains the
fractional quantization at the characteristic fillings. The fact that
the Laughlin wave function is a good variational wave function implies
that the ground state at these fillings is a translationally invariant
liquid state. Now, various studies support this conclusion. After the
discovery of the Laughlin’s wave function, his novel work has evolved
into a concept of a composite Fermion which is an electron bound to an
integer number of magnetic flux quanta. Composite Fermion is based on
the observation by Jain [ 6 ] that the Laughlin’s wave function could be
viewed as integer quantum Hall states of composite Fermions with an even
number of flux quanta, in a very natural way. On the basis of this
prominent idea, most experimental results for the FQHE can be explained
naturally, which supports the idea of the composite particles
experimentally. The composite Fermion has provided exciting fields of
theoretical studies since its discovery by Jain. For more details, see
the reviews by Jain and Kamilla [ 7 ] .

There are many interesting topics other than the IQHE and the FQHE,
especially in higher LLs where various electron solid phases exist. In
1996, Koulakov et al. [ 8 ] have studied a possibility of charge density
wave (CDW) states in higher LLs, which include bubble states (CDW states
with two or more electrons per unit cell) and striped Hall states
(unidirectional charge density wave states), within the Hartree-Fock
(HF) theory. They have found that CDW and bubble states are
energetically favorable in higher LLs, and in particular around half
fillings, striped Hall states are energetically favorable. Indeed, in
1999, working with ultra-high mobility samples at low temperatures,
Lilly et al. [ 9 ] and Du et al. [ 10 ] have reported the highly
anisotropy in the longitudinal resistivity, which is interpreted as due
to a formation of stripe states or anisotropic charge density wave
(ACDW) states. Away from half-fillings, more precisely around @xmath ,
@xmath , reentrant integral quantizations of the Hall conductivity have
been observed [ 10 , 11 ] . This reentrant integer quantum Hall effect
(RIQHE) is interpreted as due to a collective insulating property of a
bubble state pinned by impurities. Although these intriguing phenomena
in higher LLs have been studied intensively over ten years, many issues
still remain to be solved. Among them, we focus on the highly
anisotropic states. While experimental features of the anisotropic
states suggest that the anisotropic states are the striped Hall states,
the ACDW state has a slightly lower energy than the striped Hall state
within the HF theory with no electric current. This has been an enigma
as to the anisotropic states. In experiments of the anisotropic states,
current is injected. This effect has not been taken into account in the
previous calculations. We focus on this fact and investigate the effect
of the injected current on the striped Hall states and the ACDW states
by calculating response functions against the injected current [ 12 ] .
This is one of main topics of this thesis. The details are given in
Chapter 4 .

Another main topic of this thesis is a calculational method for periodic
states in the quantum Hall system by means of a von Neumann lattice
(vNL) basis [ 13 , 14 ] . Most theoretical studies of the quantum Hall
system start by expansion of the Hamiltonian using a complete set of
eigenstates of free electrons in a magnetic field. There are mainly
three different complete sets to be used according to the purpose:

1.  Eigenstates of a magnetic angular momentum operator

2.  Eigenstates of a magnetic translation operator in one-direction

3.  A complete set of a vNL basis which we use aggressively in this
    thesis

All of them are closely related to a magnetic flux @xmath , and @xmath
is closely related to a magnetic translation group as follows. As has
been mentioned, eigenenergies of electrons in a uniform magnetic field
@xmath are quantized to LLs and each LL has a large number of degeneracy
given by @xmath , where @xmath is a total area of the 2D system. This
number of degeneracy is equal to the number of magnetic flux quanta
penetrating the system, which means that one state in each LL occupies
an area penetrated by one magnetic flux. This fact can be viewed from a
point of view of a magnetic translation. In the case of no magnetic
field, translation operators commute with each other and they commute
with a free Hamiltonian, too. Therefore, a momentum is well-defined as a
good quantum number. On the other hand, in the presence of a uniform
magnetic field, previous translation operators are not commutative with
the free Hamiltonian anymore. This is because the vector potential
generating the magnetic field is not uniform in coordinate space even if
a magnetic field is uniform. To obtain the proper translation operator,
the previous translation operator should be modified to a magnetic
translation operator which is commutative with the free Hamiltonian in
the uniform magnetic field. After we obtain the proper translation
operators, two linearly independent magnetic translation operators are
still non-commutative with each other for an arbitrary translation. Only
discrete translation operators are commutative with each other, which
span a magnetic translation group [ 15 ] . For these discrete operators,
a momentum is well-defined as a good quantum number, and the momentum is
reduced to a magnetic Brillouin zone owing to the discrete translation
symmetry. Actually, the vNL basis is an eigenstate of these discrete
magnetic translation operators so that it has a momentum as a good
quantum number and periodicities in two linearly independent directions.
The area spanned by the two different unit magnetic translation
operators is given by @xmath which corresponds to an area penetrated by
@xmath . Hence, the area occupied by one electron and a magnetic
translation group are closely related to each other.

Three complete sets mentioned above are discretized as one state
occupies an area @xmath as follows:

1.  For the complete set of eigenstates of a magnetic angular momentum
    operator, the eigenstate is characterized by the eigenvalue of a
    magnetic angular momentum operator @xmath , where @xmath is the LL
    index and @xmath is a nonnegative integer. The probability density
    of the eigenstate with @xmath is localized on the circumference with
    a radius @xmath with @xmath , which gives @xmath per eigenstate.

2.  For the complete set of eigenstates of a translation operator in one
    direction (which is set to @xmath ), while the probability density
    in the @xmath -direction is uniform, the density in the @xmath
    -direction is localized at discrete coordinates with the interval
    @xmath , where @xmath is the system size in the @xmath -direction,
    which gives @xmath per eigenstate, too.

3.  For the complete set of the vNL basis, the probability density is
    localized at lattice sites with an area of the unit cell given by
    @xmath , which naturally gives @xmath per eigenstate.

Thus, all of three basis sets are closely related to @xmath which is
closely related to the magnetic translation group. As for the vNL basis,
the periodicity of the vNL can be deformed as long as the area of the
unit cell is kept to @xmath . From this point of view, we develop the
vNL formalism to analyze periodic states, which include striped Hall
states, ACDW states, and Bubble states. The vNL basis is the most
suitable basis among three sets of basis mentioned above since it can be
deformed as the periodicity of the vNL coincides with the periodicity of
the periodic state. The details are given in Chapter 3 . The study of
the highly anisotropic states in this thesis is one of applications of
this formalism. There will be some other applications of this formalism
to study periodic states in the quantum Hall system, which is one of our
future plans.

This thesis is organized as follows. In Chapter 2 , a von Neumann
lattice formalism is reviewed. Some useful relations and features
peculiar to the von Neumann lattice formalism are also reviewed. In
Chapter 3 , a calculational method by means of the von Neumann lattice
formalism is developed to study periodic states in the quantum Hall
system. In Chapter 4 , effects of an injected current on highly
anisotropic states are studied using the von Neumann lattice formalism
developed in Chapter 3 . Some concrete calculations are presented in
Appendixes.

## Chapter 2 Review of the von Neumann lattice formalism

In this chapter, we review the von Neumann lattice formalism which is a
powerful tool to study periodic states in the quantum Hall system as has
been mentioned in the previous chapter. The von Neumann lattice basis is
an eigenstate of commutative magnetic translation operators, which spans
a Hilbert space in the quantum Hall system in conjunction with a Landau
level space. The von Neumann lattice basis is first introduced as a
complete set of coherent states. Since they are coherent states, two
different states are not orthogonalized. However, by Fourier
transforming and normalizing them, we obtain a discrete set of
orthonormal von Neumann lattice basis as a complete set of one-particle
eigenstates. We review this procedure and show that the obtained basis
is indeed the eigenstate of commutative magnetic translation operators.
Some useful relations and features peculiar to the von Neumann lattice
basis are also reviewed.

Note that in this thesis, we only consider the rectangular von Neumann
lattice basis for simplicity. However, the oblique von Neumann lattice
can be obtained by a similar procedure. For details, see Ref. [ 14 ] .

### 2.1 Orthonormal von Neumann lattice basis

#### 2.1.1 Landau level quantization

Let us consider a two-dimensional (2D) electron system in the @xmath -
@xmath plane subjected to a perpendicular magnetic field @xmath . In the
absence of electron-electron interactions, electrons just perform a
cyclotron motion with a cyclotron frequency @xmath . Since this
cyclotron motion corresponds to a harmonic oscillator in quantum
mechanics, one expects that the energy level is quantized to @xmath with
@xmath . We confirm this quantization by a microscopic analysis below.

The cyclotron motion is represented by a guiding center coordinates
@xmath and the relative coordinates @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is the electron charge. Here, @xmath and @xmath
satisfy the following commutation relations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

By using these coordinates, the one-particle free Hamiltonian @xmath is
expressed by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, we introduce new operators @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the magnetic length. Since these operators satisfy the
following commutation relations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

new operators can be regarded as independent two kinds of creation and
annihilation operators. Using these operators, we rewrite the
one-particle free Hamiltonian @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is a Hamiltonian of a harmonic oscillator with a frequency @xmath .
The eigenstate and eigenvalue of @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath satisfies @xmath . Hence, the naive expectation with
respect to the quantization of the energy level is confirmed. The energy
level labeled by @xmath , @xmath , is called the @xmath th Landau level
(LL).

#### 2.1.2 Eigenstate of the magnetic angular momentum operator

In the above discussion, the guiding center coordinates are not used to
derive the LL quantization. Since the free Hamiltonian @xmath is
commutative with the guiding center coordinates, each LL has degeneracy
coming from the eigenstate related to the guiding center coordinates.
The most simple one is the eigenstate of the operator @xmath . This
eigenstate is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The direct product @xmath is a simultaneous eigenstate of
the free Hamiltonian @xmath and the operator @xmath , and spans a
Hilbert space of a one-particle state. Actually, the operator @xmath is
a magnetic angular momentum operator since it commutes with the free
Hamiltonian, and when the magnetic field is set to zero, it takes @xmath
which is an angular momentum operator in the absence of a magnetic
field. Here, the fact that @xmath is proportional to @xmath is used. The
electron density of the eigenstate with @xmath is localized on the
circumference with a radius @xmath with @xmath , which gives the area
@xmath ( @xmath is a magnetic flux quantum) per eigenstate as has been
mentioned in the previous chapter (see also Appendix A.1 ). Note that
each LL has the degeneracy factor @xmath ( @xmath is a total area of the
2D system), which means that the number of degeneracy in each LL is
equal to the number of magnetic flux quanta penetrating the 2D system.

#### 2.1.3 Coherent state

There is another eigenstate constructed by the guiding center
coordinate, that is, a coherent states of the guiding center
coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are integers. In coordinate space, these
coherent states are localized at the rectangular lattice point @xmath ,
where @xmath is a lattice constant, and @xmath is an asymmetry parameter
of the unit cell (see Appendix A.1 ). The magnitude of @xmath is of the
order of tens of nano meter for a few Tesla of magnetic field. Since the
number of these coherent states in each Landau level is equal to @xmath
, the direct product @xmath with @xmath forms the complete set of a
one-particle state. Note that the completeness of this coherent set is
ensured mathematically [ 16 , 17 , 18 ] and this set is called von
Neumann lattice (vNL) basis [ 13 , 14 ] .

Since @xmath , we can take @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normalization constant. If we set @xmath , then @xmath
with an arbitrary phase factor. We use @xmath as a phase factor of
@xmath throughout this thesis and set @xmath unless otherwise stated.

The eigenstate @xmath is not an orthogonal basis since it is a coherent
state. However, the inner product,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a function of the difference, @xmath and @xmath , so that the Fourier
representation of @xmath becomes an orthogonal basis. Indeed, by using
the momentum representation of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

the inner product of @xmath is calculated as (see Appendix A.2 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Jacobi’s theta function of the first kind, @xmath ,
and we set @xmath . Thus, we obtain the orthonormal vNL basis by
normalizing @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the property of the theta function, @xmath and @xmath obeys the
following nontrivial boundary condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this boundary condition, we obtain the momentum space reduced to
the Brillouin zone (BZ), @xmath , hence, the Hilbert space of a
one-particle state is spanned by the state @xmath . Owing to the
boundary condition ( 2.17 ), @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The left hand side and the right hand side of Eq. ( 2.18 ) obey the same
boundary condition. If we restrict the momentum range to the first
Brillouin zone, then Eq. ( 2.18 ) becomes @xmath which expresses a usual
orthonormal relation.

### 2.2 Magnetic translation group and von Neumann Lattice basis

#### 2.2.1 Magnetic translation group

The translation operator in the system with zero magnetic field is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Indeed, if @xmath acts on a one-particle wave function
@xmath , then @xmath is translated to @xmath . The translation operator
@xmath commutes with the one-particle free Hamiltonian @xmath , and
@xmath and @xmath are commutative for an arbitrary @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are unit vectors in the
@xmath and @xmath directions, respectively. Hence, we can take @xmath as
a set which can be diagonalized simultaneously. The situation becomes
different when a magnetic field is applied. Let us consider the 2D
electron system in a uniform magnetic field @xmath . In this case, the
one-particle Hamiltonian is given by @xmath and the electron performs a
cyclotron motion. Clearly, @xmath does not commute with @xmath since the
vector potential @xmath depends on @xmath even if the magnetic field is
uniform. In order to obtain the proper translation operator, magnetic
translation operator , which commutes with @xmath , the gauge
transformation which brings @xmath back to @xmath is required in
conjunction with @xmath . This magnetic translation operator is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is rewritten as @xmath and @xmath is rewritten as Eq. ( 2.4
), it is clear that @xmath indeed commutes with @xmath .

The magnetic translation operator @xmath includes the spatial
translation and the gauge transformation. To make this point clear, we
divide @xmath into two parts. Using the Cambell-Hausdorff formula,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

we rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is constant and the vector potential @xmath is assumed to
be a linear function of x . This expression clearly shows that @xmath
consists of the spatial translation operator @xmath and the gauge
transformation operator @xmath .

The magnetic translation operators do not commute with each other for
arbitrary two translations owing to the non-commutativity of @xmath and
@xmath , i.e., @xmath . For simplicity, we consider two linearly
independent magnetic translation operators, @xmath and @xmath . Using
the commutation relation of @xmath and @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, @xmath does not commute with @xmath for arbitrary @xmath and
@xmath . However, if @xmath is equal to @xmath with an integer @xmath ,
@xmath commutes with @xmath . Here, notice that @xmath represents the
magnetic flux penetrating the rectangular area which is spanned by
@xmath and @xmath , and @xmath represents a magnetic flux quantum. This
implies that @xmath and @xmath are commutative only when the magnetic
flux penetrating the area spanned by @xmath and @xmath is equal to
integral multiples of a magnetic flux quantum @xmath . This statement
can be easily generalized for arbitrary two linearly-independent
magnetic translation operators. Hence, in the system with a uniform
magnetic field, we can take @xmath with @xmath and @xmath which satisfy
the relation @xmath , as the simultaneously diagonalizable set. @xmath
and @xmath form a group called magnetic translation group [ 15 ] .

#### 2.2.2 Eigenstate of the commutative magnetic translation operators

The vNL basis is a simultaneous eigenstate of the set @xmath , so that
it is an irreducible representation of magnetic translation group. Let
us check this statement in what follows.

First, @xmath and @xmath are the magnetic translation operators along
the @xmath and @xmath direction of a rectangular unit cell,
respectively. Since the magnetic flux penetrating the unit cell is equal
to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are commutative. Next, when @xmath and
@xmath act on @xmath , @xmath is translated to the nearest neighbor
states, @xmath and @xmath up to a phase factor, respectively, that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 2.24 ) gives the action of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence, the vNL basis @xmath is a simultaneous eigenstate with
eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Note
that the minus sign in Eq. ( 2.25 ) is a convention and we can take a
different phase factor instead of the minus sign in Eq. ( 2.25 ), in
which case the vNL basis @xmath has a different normalization factor [
19 , 20 ] .

### 2.3 von Neumann lattice formalism

In this section, we derive some useful relations in the quantum Hall
system in the vNL formalism. We use the natural unit @xmath , set @xmath
, and ignore the spin degree of freedom, unless otherwise stated.

#### 2.3.1 Hamiltonian of the quantum Hall system

In the second quantized form, the Hamiltonian of the quantum Hall system
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an electron field operator, @xmath is a density
operator, colons represent a normal ordering with respect to creation
and annihilation operators, @xmath is a Coulomb potential, and @xmath is
the dielectric constant. The electron field operator is expanded by the
vNL basis as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath obeys the boundary condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and satisfies the following anti-commutation relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Fourier transform of the density operator @xmath is written as
(Appendix A.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath (the explicit form is given in Appendix A.4 ) and @xmath .
Note that the integrand of @xmath is invariant under the transformation
@xmath . Substituting Eqs. ( 2.28 ) and ( 2.31 ) into Eq. ( 2.26 ), we
obtain the kinetic term @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Coulomb interaction term given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath owing to the charge neutrality of the system. Using the new
density operator defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

we write @xmath as @xmath and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.2 Hartree-Fock Hamiltonian

The Hamiltonian of the quantum Hall system takes a simple form in the
Hartree-Fock (HF) approximation by virtue of the magnetic field. Both
the Hartree term and the Fock term are proportional to the density
operator @xmath (Appendix A.5 ). The Coulomb interaction term @xmath is
approximated by @xmath , where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the HF potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In Eq. ( 2.37 ), the first term and the second term in
the right hand side represent the Hartree term and the Fock term,
respectively.

If the Hamiltonian is projected to the @xmath th LL, the kinetic term is
quenched and the Hamiltonian is given only by the Coulomb interaction
term projected to the @xmath th LL. In this case, the @xmath th LL
projected Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We call @xmath a projected density operator .

The projected HF Hamiltonian is given by @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

These notations will be used in the following chapters.

#### 2.3.3 Density operator

The projected density operator ( 2.40 ) is noncommutative. Indeed, the
commutation relation of projected density operators is calculated using
Eq. ( 2.30 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Owing to this noncommutativity, various phases are realized in the
quantum Hall system.

The operator of the total number of electrons is given by @xmath .
Substituting Eq. ( 2.31 ) into this expression, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, in the LL projected space, the density operator in the momentum
space is given by @xmath .

#### 2.3.4 Magnetic field in momentum space

In the vNL formalism, nontrivial phase factors appear in expressions
such as the commutation relation of the field operator Eq. ( 2.30 ) and
the density operator Eq. ( 2.31 ). This nontrivial phase factor can be
interpreted as due to the magnetic field in momentum space. On the vNL,
the momentum is defined in the Brillouin zone and has a periodicity
@xmath in both @xmath and @xmath directions. Hence, the momentum is
defined on a 2D torus. Since the field operator @xmath obeys a boundary
condition @xmath , for one period, the phases @xmath in the @xmath
-direction and @xmath in the @xmath -direction are obtained. If these
phases are interpreted as due to the Aharonov-Bohm phase caused by the
magnetic field in momentum space, the phase @xmath can be regarded as
due to two magnetic fluxes with the magnitude @xmath shown in Fig. 2.1
and the phase @xmath can be regarded as due to the magnetic field
perpendicular to the surface of the torus with the magnitude @xmath .

Indeed, the expression of the density operator Eq. ( 2.31 ) is rewritten
as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath integral is a line integral on the straight line from
@xmath to @xmath and @xmath which corresponds to a vector potential in
momentum in Landau gauge. The magnetic field obtained from this vector
potential is @xmath . The phase factor in Eq. ( 2.45 ) is a gauge
connection form @xmath to @xmath in order to keep the integrand of
@xmath invariant against the gauge transformation in momentum space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the nontrivial phase factor in the expression of the density
operator Eq. ( 2.31 ) can be interpreted as due to the magnetic field in
momentum space consistently. While the vector potential takes the form
in Landau gauge, other gauges can be taken by the gauge transformation
in momentum space.

## Chapter 3 Periodic states in the quantum Hall system

In this chapter, we develop a formalism based on the von Neumann lattice
(vNL) basis to treat periodic states in the quantum Hall system, which
include charge density wave (CDW) states or Wigner crystal states,
bubble states, and striped Hall states. Wigner crystal states or CDW
states have been observed at low partial fillings and e.g., the Landau
level filling factor @xmath in the lowest Landau level (LL) [ 21 ] ,
whereas bubble states and anisotropic charge density wave (ACDW) or
striped Hall states have been observed at, e.g., partial filling factor
@xmath 1/4, 3/4 in higher LLs for the bubble state [ 10 , 11 ] and
@xmath 1/2 in the higher LLs for the ACDW or striped Hall state [ 9 , 10
] . The vNL basis is the most suitable basis to study these periodic
states consistently. We first review the background of this issue, then
we develop the vNL formalism for periodic states in the quantum Hall
system.

### 3.1 Background

In the quantum Hall system, energy levels split into LLs owing to the
cyclotron motion of electrons and the energy difference between the
nearest LLs is given by @xmath . If the magnetic field is so strong that
the energy difference @xmath is much larger than the typical order of
the Coulomb interaction @xmath , the LL mixing effects can be neglected.
In this case, it is enough to consider only the system projected to the
uppermost partially-filled LL where the kinetic term is quenched and the
Hamiltonian is given by only the projected Coulomb interaction term.
This projected Coulomb interaction term is totally different from the
unprojected Coulomb interaction term in that the projected density
operators are noncommutative with each other as seen in Eq. ( 2.43 ). If
we neglect this noncommutativity, an expected ground state in this
system is a Wigner crystal state. A Wigner crystal state is a state
where electrons form a triangular lattice through the Coulomb
interaction so that the Coulomb energy becomes minimum. When the partial
filling factor is small enough, the triangular Wigner crystal is indeed
the ground state. This is because for low partial fillings, the
superposition of wave functions is negligible and the problem can be
treated as a classical one. The situation totally changes when the
superposition of wave functions becomes large and the problem cannot be
treated as a classical one anymore. In this case, if we exclude a
possibility of liquid states or fractional quantum Hall states, naively
expected ground states are “ CDW states ”. The CDW states are obtained
as a self-consistent solution within the Hartree-Fock (HF) approximation
by proper treatment of the noncommutativity of the density operators [
24 ] . In the low partial filling limit, the self-consistently obtained
CDW state coincides with the triangular Wigner crystal state. However,
as the partial filling factor approaches the half-filling, bubble states
which are CDW states with two or more electrons per unit cell, ACDW
states, and striped Hall states which are unidirectional charge density
wave states, become ground states. To treat these states, some
theoretical approaches have been developed in early studies.

#### 3.1.1 Early studies

Among early studies of CDW states in the quantum Hall system [ 22 , 23 ,
24 , 25 ] , the self-consistent HF solution was first studied by
Yoshioka and Fukuyama [ 24 ] . They focused on the triangular and square
CDW state in the lowest LL and calculated the energy dispersion and the
total energy of the ground state, neglecting the higher harmonics of the
CDW. The calculation was done by means of the Green function. In their
calculation, first, the Hamiltonian is expanded by the eigenstate of the
magnetic translation operator in one direction, and then, the Green
function was ingeniously introduced to solve the problem
self-consistently. Although their formalism is a bit complicated, the
self-consistent calculation including the noncommutativity of the
projected density operator is performed properly. Later, Yoshioka and
Lee [ 26 ] developed a simpler formalism and calculated the same problem
including higher harmonics of the CDW, in a different way. Using the
same basis as the previous one, they more directly obtained the solution
by diagonalizing the HF Hamiltonian self-consistently. Their results are
essentially the same as the previous one except for small corrections.

There is a totally different approach to obtain the same results first
developed by Côté and MacDonald [ 27 ] , which is an approach using an
equation of motion. They calculated the total energy and the mean value
of the density operator for the CDW ground state by solving the HF
equation of motion numerically, and obtained the same results as the
previous one. As pointed out in their paper [ 27 ] , it is not possible
to obtain the one-particle energy dispersion with this approach in
contrast to the previous studies [ 24 , 26 ] . However, their main topic
was to investigate collective modes of the CDW state, and for this
purpose, it was enough to know the mean value of the density operator
for the CDW state since the collective modes are associated with poles
of the density-density response function which can be derived in the
time-dependent Hartree-Fock approximation (TDHFA). Later, the TDHFA has
been applied for anisotropic charge density wave (ACDW) states [ 28 ]
and bubble states [ 29 ] to investigate the collective modes.

#### 3.1.2 vNL formalism for striped Hall, CDW, and bubble states

Our vNL formalism for the CDW state is a similar one to the
diagonalization technique developed by Yoshioka and Lee [ 26 ] , except
for the use of the vNL basis instead of the eigenstate of the magnetic
translation operator in one direction. Expanding the HF Hamiltonian by
the vNL basis and adjusting the periodicity of the vNL to an integer
multiple of the periodicity of the CDW, we can easily diagonalize the HF
Hamiltonian self-consistently. The essential difference is that a
physical picture is more clear in the vNL formalism. In the vNL
formalism, in contrast to other basis, momenta are clearly defined as
eigenvalues of the commutative magnetic translation operators and the
one-particle energy dispersion is obtained as a function of the momenta.
The one-particle energy dispersion of the CDW states resembles that of
noninteracting electrons in an external periodic potential [ 30 , 31 ] .
In the latter case, when the filling factor @xmath (not the LL filling
factor) is rational, i.e., for @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath have no
factors in common and @xmath with an electron density @xmath is the
unit-cell area of the crystal, the Landau level splits into @xmath
non-overlapping subbands. On the other hand, in the former case, while
there is no periodic potential or external lattice structure, the von
Neumann lattice plays a similar role and the one-particle energy
dispersion of the CDW state has @xmath bands for the partial LL filling
factor @xmath . In both cases, the momenta are defined in the Brillouin
zone (or the magnetic Brillouin zone) and the one-particle energy
dispersion has the @xmath -band structure owing to the @xmath -fold
reduction of the Brillouin zone. In this sense, the physical picture is
more clear for the vNL formalism.

The vNL formalism was first developed for the striped Hall state by
Ishikawa and others [ 32 , 33 , 34 ] . Recently, this formalism has been
developed for CDW states [ 12 ] and bubble states [ 35 ] . We review the
details in the following sections.

### 3.2 Striped Hall state

#### 3.2.1 Assumption of the unidirectional density

Let us consider the case of the partial filling factor @xmath ( @xmath )
in the @xmath th LL. The striped Hall state is a unidirectional CDW
state in the quantum Hall system, which has the following unidirectional
density (Fig. 3.1 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the period of the density in the @xmath -direction,
@xmath is an order parameter determined self-consistently, and @xmath .
Equation ( 3.1 ) gives the following form of the mean value of the
projected density operator,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we take the vNL asymmetry parameter @xmath , Eq. ( 3.2 ) with @xmath
takes the simple form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 3.2.2 Diagonalization, eigenstates and eigenvalues

The HF Hamiltonian of the striped Hall state is already diagonalized on
the vNL basis. Substitution of Eq. ( 3.3 ) into the HF Hamiltonian Eq. (
2.41 ) gives the HF Hamiltonian for the striped Hall state by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a one-particle energy given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In Eq. ( 3.5 ), @xmath is a uniform Fock energy given by @xmath . The
values of @xmath are shown in Table 3.1 .

For the ground state of the striped Hall state, the two-point function
of the operator @xmath is given by [ 32 , 33 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Fermi energy and @xmath is a step function.

#### 3.2.3 Self-consistency condition and solution

The self-consistent equation for @xmath is obtained by substitution of
Eq. ( 3.6 ) into the left hand side of Eq. ( 3.3 ). @xmath is a solution
of the self-consistent equation. This solution has the Fermi sea, @xmath
(shown in Fig. 3.2 ) and gives the one-particle energy as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The HF energy per particle is given as a function of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the total number of particles within the @xmath th LL.
We determine the optimal value of @xmath by minimizing @xmath with
respect to @xmath . The optimal value of @xmath and the minimum energy
at each LL are shown in Table 3.2 [ 33 ] .

For the optimal value of @xmath , the one-particle energy and the
density profile of the striped Hall state at @xmath in the @xmath LL are
plotted in Fig. 3.3 and Fig. 3.4 , respectively.

When the density is uniform in the @xmath -direction, the one-particle
energy is a function of only @xmath and uniform in the @xmath
-direction. The energy dispersion becomes gapless in the @xmath
-direction and has a inter-LL gap in the @xmath -direction. The Fermi
velocity @xmath is logarithmically divergent [ 32 ] .

### 3.3 Charge density wave state

#### 3.3.1 Assumption of the CDW density

Let us consider the case of @xmath in the @xmath th LL. Here, we
consider only the rectangular CDW state for simplicity. The CDW state
has the following periodic density (Fig. 3.5 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath with integers @xmath , @xmath . Equation ( 3.9 )
gives the following form of the mean value of the projected density
operator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The reciprocal vector @xmath is given by @xmath , which satisfies @xmath
with an integer @xmath . Since one electron in the CDW state with the
density Eq. ( 3.9 ) occupies the area @xmath and one state in each LL
occupies the area @xmath with the vNL constant @xmath , the partial
filling factor @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the relation @xmath holds. In particular, in the case of @xmath ,
this relation is given by @xmath , where we set @xmath and the integers
@xmath , @xmath have no factors in common. By using this relation,
@xmath is rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . If we take @xmath (Fig. 3.6 ), @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with integers @xmath ( @xmath ).

#### 3.3.2 Diagonalization, eigenstates and eigenvalues

Substituting Eq. ( 3.14 ) into the HF Hamiltonian Eq. ( 2.41 ), we can
block-diagonalized the HF Hamiltonian as follows. Under the assumption
Eq. ( 3.9 ) at @xmath , the HF Hamiltonian is written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

except for @xmath and @xmath . Substituting Eq. ( 2.40 ) into Eq. ( 3.15
) and using the boundary condition of @xmath given in Eq. ( 2.29 ), we
rewrite the HF Hamiltonian as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, if we divide the interval of the @xmath -integral into @xmath same
intervals and reduce each interval to the range @xmath using the
boundary condition Eq.( 2.29 ), @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the HF Hamiltonian @xmath is block-diagonalized and the problem
is reduced to the diagonalization problem of the @xmath Hermite matrix
@xmath . Note that the fact that @xmath is real gives the relation
@xmath , and by using this relation, it is proved that the @xmath matrix
@xmath with @xmath is Hermite.

The Hermite matrix @xmath is diagonalized using the unitary matrix
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

here, @xmath represents the eigenvalue of the @xmath th energy band, and
the eigenvector for @xmath is given by @xmath . @xmath represents the
reduced Brillouin zone, @xmath , @xmath . Hence, the HF Hamiltonian
@xmath is diagonalized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the present case of @xmath , the lower N bands (from @xmath to @xmath
) are fully occupied for the ground state.

#### 3.3.3 Self-consistency condition

The HF Hamiltonian should be diagonalized self-consistently. The ground
state is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normalization constant and @xmath is a vacuum state in
which the @xmath th and lower Landau levels are fully occupied. Using
this ground state, we obtain the self-consistency condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In what follows, we derive the self-consistent equation for @xmath from
Eq.( 3.25 ).

The field operators @xmath and @xmath satisfy the anti-commutation
relation Eq. ( 2.30 ). For @xmath and @xmath within the RBZ, Eq. ( 2.30
) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath and @xmath , the corresponding relation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 2.40 ), we rewrite the self-consistency condition Eq. ( 3.25
) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The left hand side of Eq. ( 3.28 ) is calculated using Eqs. ( 3.23 ) and
( 3.27 ), and the result is

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.30)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath within the RBZ. From Eqs. ( 3.25 ) and ( 3.30 ),
the self-consistent equation for @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the right hand side of Eq. ( 3.31 ) coincides with the left hand
side, the problem is self-consistently solved.

#### 3.3.4 Density profile and Energy dispersion of CDW states

As in the case of the striped Hall state, the HF energy per particle is
given as a function of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The optimal value of @xmath is determined by minimization of @xmath to
@xmath . The optimal value of @xmath and the minimum energy per particle
at several fillings in @xmath are shown in Table 3.3 and Fig. 3.8 ,
where cohesive energy, which is defined as @xmath , is shown for the
minimum energy. As for @xmath LL, the optimal value of @xmath is
approximately given by @xmath , which gives @xmath . Hence, the CDW
states in the @xmath LL become isotropic for the @xmath and @xmath
-directions. On the other hand, as for the @xmath LL, the optimal value
of @xmath takes a different value from @xmath especially near @xmath ,
which means that anisotropic states are energetically favorable at these
fillings. Hence, the CDW states in the @xmath LL become anisotropic near
@xmath . Since the original Hamiltonian has a rotational symmetry, the
direction of the anisotropy can take any direction. In the present case
of the rectangular vNL, two solutions whose anisotropy direction in
density face the @xmath or @xmath -direction are degenerate. This
degeneracy yields two optimal values of @xmath for anisotropic states.
When we set the smaller one to @xmath and the larger one to @xmath ,
they are related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Only the smaller value @xmath is shown in Table 3.3 as the optimal value
of @xmath for the CDW states in the @xmath LL.

The density profile of the CDW state is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath and @xmath -inversion symmetry is assumed. In Figs. 3.9
and 3.10 , the density profile is plotted at several fillings in @xmath
LLs for the optimal value of @xmath . As for the @xmath CDW density, the
density becomes isotropic for all partial fillings. On the other hand,
as for the @xmath CDW density, the density becomes highly anisotropic
near @xmath , and as the partial filling decreases, the density
approaches the isotropic one gradually. This difference between the
lowest LL and the higher LLs is mainly due to the difference of the form
of the HF potential @xmath . We refer to the direction with a narrower
periodicity in density as “ stripe direction ” in this thesis.

In the present vNL formalism, the energy dispersion of the CDW state is
obtained as a function of momenta @xmath and @xmath which are conjugate
to the vNL. As for the @xmath LL, the energy dispersion is isotropic in
the @xmath and @xmath -directions and the band width becomes narrower as
the density becomes lower. In Fig. 3.11 , the energy dispersion at
@xmath is plotted as a function of @xmath . As for the @xmath LL, the
energy dispersion becomes almost flat in the direction perpendicular to
the stripe direction. In Fig. 3.12 , the energy dispersion at @xmath is
plotted as a function of @xmath . In both cases, there is a large energy
gap between the filled bands and the empty bands. This large gap
coincides with the previously obtained results by Yosioka and Lee [ 26 ]
.

### 3.4 Bubble state

#### 3.4.1 Assumption of the bubble density

The bubble state is a CDW state with two or more electrons per unit
cell. We call the bubble state with @xmath electrons per unit cell the “
@xmath -electron bubble state ”. Let us consider the @xmath -electron
rectangular bubble state at @xmath in the @xmath th LL, with a period
@xmath and @xmath in the @xmath and @xmath direction, respectively. In
this case, since @xmath electrons are in the area of the unit cell
@xmath and the density of states is given by @xmath , the partial
filling factor is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the size of the system in the @xmath and
@xmath directions, respectively. In particular, in the case of @xmath ,
this relation becomes @xmath , where we set @xmath . By using this
relation, the mean value of the projected density operator of the @xmath
-electron bubble state is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we set @xmath . Hence, the diagonalization procedure of the HF
Hamiltonian is the same as in the case of the CDW state at @xmath with
@xmath .

#### 3.4.2 Self-consistency condition and solution

The important difference from the CDW state is a self-consistency
condition. The one-particle energy of the @xmath -electron bubble state
at @xmath has @xmath energy bands. Since the filling factor is @xmath ,
the lowest @xmath bands are fully occupied for the ground state. As a
result, the self-consistency condition is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the @xmath LL, no self-consistent bubble solution has been obtained.
For the @xmath LL, a self-consistent bubble solution is obtained for
@xmath . The obtained solution is a 2-electron bubble state. The optimal
value of @xmath is @xmath and the corresponding cohesive energy is
@xmath @xmath which is slightly lower than that of the CDW state at the
same filling. Hence, for the @xmath in the @xmath LL, the 2-electron
bubble state is more stable. The density profile of this state is shown
in Fig. 3.13 , which is almost isotropic. The energy dispersion consists
of eight bands and the lower two bands are fully occupied. As in the
case of the CDW state, there is a large gap between the filled bands and
the empty bands.

Since electrons of this 2-electron bubble state are well-localized in
density, it is expected that the state is easily pinned by impurities,
which results in a quantization of the Hall conductivity owing to its
collective insulating property. Indeed, this quantization has been
observed around @xmath in the @xmath LL [ 10 , 11 ] , and it is believed
that this observed quantization is an evidence of the bubble state.

#### 3.4.3 Relation between the @xmath-electron bubble state and the CDW
state at @xmath

The diagonalization formalism for the @xmath -electron bubble state at
@xmath includes the CDW solution at @xmath . To make this point clear,
let us compare the mean value of the density of the CDW state and the
bubble state. For the CDW state at @xmath , the mean values of the
density operators are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for the @xmath -electron bubble state at @xmath , they are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , where @xmath for the CDW state and @xmath for the bubble
state.

If we set @xmath , @xmath and other @xmath s is equal to zero, @xmath
becomes the same as @xmath . Hence, the HF Hamiltonian with the
assumption ( 3.36 ) becomes the same as the HF Hamiltonian with the
assumption ( 3.14 ).

## Chapter 4 Effects of an injected current on highly anisotropic states

In this chapter, we study effects of an injected current on highly
anisotropic states which have been discovered around half-filled third
and higher Landau levels (LLs) in experiments with ultra-high mobility
samples at low temperatures. While several states have been proposed to
theoretically explain the experimental results so far, it is still an
open problem which state is realized in the experiments. Most previous
studies have been done within the Hartree-Fock (HF) approximation with
no injected current. In experiments of anisotropic states, however, a
current is injected to investigate properties of the system. This effect
has not been taken into account in the previous studies. In this
chapter, we focus on two different anisotropic HF states, i.e., a
striped Hall state and an anisotropic charge density wave (ACDW) state,
and investigate the effect of the injected current on these two HF
states using response functions against the injected current. The
calculations are done by means of a von Neumann lattice (vNL) formalism
developed in Chapter 2 . With no injected current, the ACDW state has a
lower energy. We find that the striped Hall state becomes lower energy
state when the injected current exceeds a critical value. The critical
value is estimated at about @xmath - @xmath nA, which is much smaller
than the current used in experiments of anisotropic states.

### 4.1 Introduction

In the quantum Hall system, half-filled states at each Landau level (LL)
exhibit much attractive features. Around the half-filled lowest LL,
isotropic compressible states have been observed [ 36 , 37 ] , which are
widely believed to be the Fermi liquid of composite fermions. Around the
half-filled second LL, the @xmath fractionally quantized Hall
conductance has been observed [ 38 ] . The p-wave Cooper pairing state
of composite fermions, which is called the Pfaffian state, has been
proposed to explain this state [ 39 , 40 ] . Around half-filled third
and higher LLs, highly anisotropic states, which have extremely
anisotropic longitudinal resistivities and un-quantized Hall
resistivities, have been found in ultra-high mobility samples at low
temperatures [ 9 , 10 ] . Much theoretical work has been done to study
the anisotropic states [ 8 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49
, 34 , 28 ] and several states have been proposed so far. In this
chapter, we focus on two different HF states among them, i.e., a striped
Hall state [ 8 , 41 ] and an anisotropic charge density wave (ACDW)
state [ 28 ] .

The striped Hall state is a unidirectional charge density wave state
which is a gapless state with an anisotropic Fermi surface [ 32 , 33 ] .
The Fermi surface has an energy gap in one direction and is gapless in
the other direction (Figs. 3.2 and 4.1 ). The ACDW state is a CDW state
which has a similar periodic density in a direction perpendicular to
stripes, and in addition, has a density modulation along stripes (Fig.
4.2 ). The density modulation along stripes results in energy gaps in
both directions. These features suggest that the anisotropic state found
in experiments is the striped Hall state since the anisotropic
longitudinal resistivity and the un-quantized Hall resistivity are
naturally explained by the anisotropic Fermi surface [ 32 , 33 ] , while
it is difficult to explain these experimental features with the ACDW
state because of the energy gap. However, it has been pointed out that
the striped Hall state is unstable within the HF approximation to
formation of modulations along stripes so that the ACDW state is the
lower energy state [ 28 ] . This has been an enigma as to the
anisotropic states.

In the experiments of the anisotropic states, current is injected. This
effect has not been taken into account in the previous calculations of
the total energy. About two decades ago, MacDonald et al. have studied
the effect of the injected current on the integer quantum Hall system [
50 ] . They calculated the current and charge distributions and found
that charges accumulate around both edges of the sample with the
opposite sign, as expected from the classical Hall effect [ 50 , 51 , 52
, 53 ] . The charge accumulation causes the energy enhancement via the
Coulomb interaction between charged particles. The same type of energy
corrections may exist even in the present highly correlated quantum Hall
states. However, the effect of the injected current on the anisotropic
state has not been studied.

In this chapter, we calculate the correlation energies of the striped
Hall state and the ACDW state in the system with the injected current
flowing in the direction along stripes, and with no impurities and no
metallic contacts. It is important to know if the ACDW state has a lower
energy even in the system with the injected current. The density
modulation along stripes shown in Fig. 4.2 suggest that the effect of
the injected current becomes larger in the ACDW state. To verify whether
this naive expectation is true or not, the dependence of the correlation
energies on the injected current is studied in detail. Effects of
impurities and metallic contacts are ignored in our calculations of
correlation energies since these effects are expected to be small in
experiments of anisotropic states in ultra-high mobility samples and are
outside the scope of this work. Effects of the injected current are
investigated using response functions for electromagnetic fields. The
current and charge distributions are determined and energies of the two
states are calculated from these distributions. It is found that the
energy of the ACDW state increases faster than that of the striped Hall
state as the injected current increases. Hence, the striped Hall state
becomes the lower energy state when the current exceeds the critical
value. The critical value is estimated at about @xmath - @xmath nA,
which is much smaller than the current used in the experiments. Our
result suggests that the anisotropic states observed in experiments are
the striped Hall states. Hence, the enigma as to the anisotropic states
is resolved.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Sec. 4.2 , we review the
experiments of the anisotropic states and discuss the problem briefly.
In Sec. 4.3 , properties of the striped Hall state and the ACDW state
are discussed within the HF approximation with no injected current. In
Sec. 4.4 , electromagnetic response functions of the two HF states are
calculated in the long wavelength limit. Using these response functions,
we determine the current and charge distributions and calculate the
energy corrections due to injected currents in Sec. 4.5 . A summary is
given in Sec. 4.6 .

### 4.2 Experiments of highly anisotropic states

In 1999, working with 2D ultra-high mobility samples at low
temperatures, Lilly et al. [ 9 ] and Du et al. [ 10 ] have reported
strong anisotropy in longitudinal resistivities @xmath around @xmath in
@xmath LLs. The experimental result by Lilly et al. is shown in Fig. 4.3
.

In this figure, the sample A is a GaAs/AlGaAs heterojunction grown by
molecular beam epitaxy, where the density of the sample is close to
@xmath @xmath , the low temperature mobility is @xmath , and the sample
size is a @xmath mm square. The electrical transport measurements have
been performed using @xmath - @xmath nA, @xmath Hz excitation. For more
details about experimental parameters used by Lilly et al. , see Ref. [
9 ] . We refer to these experimental parameters as Lilly’s parameters in
this thesis.

In this experiment, longitudinal resistivities @xmath and Hall
resistivities @xmath have been measured for two different
configurations. For the configuration shown in the left inset in Fig.
4.3 , @xmath is almost zero around half-fillings in @xmath LLs, such as
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . On the other hand, for the other
configuration shown in the right inset in Fig. 4.3 , @xmath revels very
large values around the same fillings, where the sample itself is not
rotated and only the direction of current is changed. Here, no quantized
plateau in the Hall resistivity @xmath have been observed around these
fillings. These experimental results indicate that the ground state
around these fillings is not an isotropic state such as a fractional
quantum Hall state but an anisotropic state. Since the original
Hamiltonian of the quantum Hall system has a rotational symmetry, it is
considered that the anisotropic state is energetically favorable and a
spontaneous symmetry breaking occurs with respect to the direction of
the anisotropy which would be determined by some small residual
inhomogeneity of the sample.

### 4.3 Highly anisotropic states in the Hartree-Fock theory

In this section, the striped Hall state and the ACDW state at the
partial filling factor @xmath in higher LLs are investigated.
Calculations are performed by means of a vNL basis within the HF
approximation with no injected current. As has been mentioned in Chapter
2 , the vNL basis is a suitable basis to study spatially periodic
states.

#### 4.3.1 Striped Hall state at @xmath

The striped Hall state is obtained as a HF solution under the assumption
of the unidirectional charge density wave Eq. ( 3.1 ). The solutions at
@xmath are given in subsection 3.2.3 in Chapter 3 in detail. Let us
consider the striped Hall state in which stripes face the @xmath
-direction. In this case, the anisotropic Fermi surface of the striped
Hall state has the inter-LL energy gap in the @xmath -direction and is
gapless in the @xmath -direction. When a current flows in the @xmath
-direction, an electric field is generated in the @xmath -direction
owing to the Hall effect so that the Fermi sea slides in the @xmath
-direction. Since the Brillouin zone in the @xmath -direction is fully
occupied, there is no dissipation in this case and the longitudinal
resistivity in the @xmath -direction is expected to be zero. On the
other hand, when the current flows in the @xmath -direction, the Fermi
sea slides in the @xmath -direction so that the energy dissipation
occurs owing to the gapless structure of the Fermi surface in this
direction, which would result in a large longitudinal resistivity.
Hence, it is expected that the striped Hall state revels the highly
anisotropic longitudinal resistivity, which coincides with the
experimental results.

#### 4.3.2 Anisotropic charge density wave state at @xmath

CDW states studied in Sec. 3.3 in Chapter 3 become highly anisotropic
around @xmath in higher LLs. We call these highly anisotropic states at
@xmath “ anisotropic charge density wave (ACDW) states” and the
direction with a narrower periodicity in density “ stripe direction ” in
this thesis. In the vNL formalism, the HF Hamiltonian of the ACDW state
can be rewritten in the form of a @xmath matrix. Therefore, eigenvalues
and eigenstates for the ACDW state can be easily obtained in a more
analytical form as a function of order parameters. In what follows, we
derive them and discuss the features of the self-consistent ACDW
solution.

Let us start by the HF Hamiltonian of the CDW state at @xmath . From
Eq. ( 3.15 ), this is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.2)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath is a uniform Fock energy given by @xmath , the momentum
integration is performed over the reduced Brillouin zone (RBZ), @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath is a @xmath Hermite matrix, and @xmath , @xmath are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The Hamiltonian Eq. ( 4.1 ) can be diagonalized at each momentum just by
unitary transformation of the field operator @xmath . In the present
case of @xmath , the Brillouin zone is reduced to the half size of the
original domain and two energy bands are formed (Fig. 4.4 ).

@xmath is diagonalized using the unitary matrix @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath represent the upper energy band and the lower
energy band respectively. If we assume the @xmath - and @xmath
-inversion symmetries for the density, the order parameters become real
and have the property @xmath . The self-consistent solution is available
only when the two energy bands are symmetric with respect to the energy
gap, i.e., @xmath , as expected from the particle-hole symmetry of the
original Hamiltonian. This gives @xmath , where @xmath denotes the trace
with respect to the @xmath matrix indices, and @xmath . In this case,
@xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Using the basis @xmath , we obtain the HF Hamiltonian of
the ACDW state

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is determined as a numerical solution of the self-consistent
equation Eq. ( 3.31 ).

The HF energy of the ACDW state depends on the asymmetry parameter
@xmath . The optimal value of @xmath , the HF energy per particle, and
the magnitude of the energy gap are given in Table 4.1 ,

in which there are two values of @xmath at each LL owing to the @xmath
-rotational symmetry. The magnitude of the energy gap is estimated to be
of the order of @xmath K for a few tesla. Therefore, the extremely
anisotropic longitudinal resistivities are not expected at tens of milli
Kelvin and it is difficult to explain the experiments with the ACDW
state. On the other hand, the HF energy of the ACDW state is slightly
lower than that of the striped Hall state at each LL. This was one of
the remaining issues for the anisotropic states.

### 4.4 Response functions

In this section, electromagnetic response functions of the two HF states
are calculated in the long wavelength limit. We consider the quantum
Hall system with an infinitesimal external gauge field @xmath and
calculate the response functions of the striped Hall state and the ACDW
state. These response functions will be used to determine current and
charge distributions and energy corrections due to an injected current
in Sec. 4.5 .

#### 4.4.1 Response function of the striped Hall state

The Hamiltonian in the quantum Hall system with @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . We project the Coulomb interaction part to each LL and
apply the HF approximation to the projected Coulomb interaction. Then,
by using the vNL basis, the Hamiltonian in the HF approximation is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined by (see Appendix A.4 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which @xmath is the electron velocity. Repeated Greek indices @xmath
and @xmath are summed for 0, 1, 2 in throughout the following
calculations. The action is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Heisenberg representation of @xmath .

Let us concentrate on the striped Hall state with the stripe direction
facing the @xmath -direction at half-filling. Substituting Eq. ( 3.3 )
into Eq. ( 4.11 ), we obtain the action of the striped Hall state given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are the
first order term and the second order term with respect to @xmath ,
respectively.

The partition function @xmath is calculated using path integrals by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the power of the exponent is expressed in the matrix
representation in momentum space and @xmath denotes the trace of the
momentum indices and the LL indices. @xmath is the Green function given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an infinitesimal positive constant. The effective action
@xmath is defined as @xmath , which consists of the non-perturbed part
@xmath and the correction part due to the external gauge field @xmath .
@xmath is given by (Fig. 4.5 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Substituting the expressions for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath into Eq. (
4.17 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the uppermost partially filled LL and @xmath .
@xmath is a response function given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the loop integral in Fig. 4.5 (c), which is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

in which the @xmath integral has been performed. In Eq. ( 4.4.1 ), the
first term and the second term come from @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, and the second term is canceled with the @xmath part of
the first term, as expected from gauge invariance. Hence, @xmath for
@xmath .

In the long wavelength limit, the largest contribution in the response
function comes from the @xmath part. In the case of @xmath and @xmath ,
which is used in the next section, the largest contribution comes from
the lowest order term in @xmath with respect to @xmath . Expanding
@xmath up to the lowest order, we obtain the response functions in the
long wavelength limit given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is identified as the Hall conductance
since if we consider a static homogeneous electric field in the @xmath
-direction generated by the gauge field @xmath , then the electric
current in the @xmath -direction @xmath is given in the long wavelength
limit by @xmath , where the response function transformed in the
coordinate space is used. The longitudinal resistivity becomes zero in
the present calculation since the impurity potential is not included. If
impurities are added, it is expected that the longitudinal resistivity
becomes zero in one direction and finite in the other direction owing to
the anisotropic Fermi surface.

#### 4.4.2 Response function of the anisotropic charge density wave
state

The action of the ACDW state at half-filling is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath is a @xmath matrix given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a @xmath matrix Green function given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Eq. ( 4.24 ), @xmath is a one-particle Green function for the upper
or lower band, @xmath is a @xmath unit matrix, and @xmath .

The partition function @xmath is calculated using path integrals by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The correction part of the effective action @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the trace with respect to the momentum indices, the
LL indices and the @xmath matrix indices, and @xmath denotes the trace
with respect to only the @xmath matrix indices. Substituting the
expressions for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath into Eq. ( 4.27 ), we obtain
the following expression for the @xmath part of @xmath as in the case of
the striped Hall state,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

up to @xmath . In Eq. ( 4.4.2 ), the last term is canceled with the
@xmath term of the second term as expected from gauge invariance again.
Hence, @xmath for @xmath .

In the long wavelength limit @xmath and @xmath , the largest
contribution in the response function comes from the lowest order term
with respect to @xmath . The expressions of @xmath and @xmath become the
same as in the case of the striped Hall state. The expression of @xmath
becomes slightly different by the correction from the intra-LL effect at
the uppermost partially-filled LL. For the striped Hall state, the
one-particle energy shown in Fig. 3.3 has the inter-LL energy gap in the
@xmath -direction, and the inter-LL effect gives the response functions
given in Eq. ( 4.4.1 ). For the ACDW state, the one-particle energy
shown in Fig. 4.4 has the intra-LL energy gap in the @xmath -direction
as well as the inter-LL energy gap. While the inter-LL effect gives the
same expression of the response function as that of the striped Hall
state, the intra-LL effect causes some corrections to the response
function. Including these corrections, we obtain @xmath of the ACDW
state in the long wavelength limit given by (see Appendix B.2 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is used explicitly in order to compare the theoretical
results with experimental data. The value of @xmath at each LL is shown
in Table 4.2 . Note that the unit of @xmath is @xmath .

The Hall conductance is given by @xmath , as in the case of the striped
Hall state. The longitudinal resistivity becomes zero in the present
calculation since the impurity potential is not included. However it is
expected that the longitudinal resistivity remains zero even in the
system with impurities because of the energy gaps.

### 4.5 Energy corrections due to injected currents

In this section, we consider the quantum Hall system with an injected
electric current and investigate the current effect on the striped Hall
state and the ACDW state. Effects of impurities and metallic contacts
are ignored in our calculations. For the striped Hall state, we only
consider the current parallel to the stripe direction since in this
case, the current effect can be estimated with no ambiguity even in the
system with impurities. When the current flows in the stripe direction,
charges accumulate around both edges of the sample in the direction
perpendicular to the stripe direction (perpendicular direction), as we
will see later, and the electric field generates in the perpendicular
direction. In this case, the impurity effect is negligible since the
Fermi surface has the inter-LL energy gap in the perpendicular
direction. On the other hand, when the current flows in the
perpendicular direction, the impurity effect becomes relevant since the
electric field generates in the stripe direction while the Fermi surface
is gapless in this direction. The current effect in this case is
nontrivial and will be studied in future work.

In the system with an injected current, it is naively expected that the
current flow causes the plus and minus charge accumulation at both edges
of the sample with the opposite sign, as expected from the classical
Hall effect. MacDonald et al. have studied effects of an injected
current on the integer quantum Hall state about two decades ago [ 50 ] .
They have calculated current and charge distributions and found that the
charge accumulation occurs in the integer quantum Hall state. The charge
accumulation causes the energy correction via the Coulomb interaction
between the accumulated charges. It is expected that the same type of
energy corrections exists even in the present highly correlated quantum
Hall states. However, it has not been studied as far as the present
authors know. In what follows, first, we derive current and charge
distributions in the striped Hall state and the ACDW state using the
effective action, then, we estimate the current dependence of energy
corrections of the two HF states. It is shown that the energy of the
ACDW state increases faster than that of the striped Hall state as the
injected current increases.

#### 4.5.1 Current and charge distributions

We study current and charge distributions of the striped Hall state and
the ACDW state. Let us begin with the system with no injected current.
We denote the two-point function in the HF theory with no injected
current as @xmath . If a finite electric current is injected,
electromagnetic fields and the two-point function deviate from their
original values. We define these deviations by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are unspecified for the moment and will be
determined later. The total action in the Coulomb gauge @xmath is given
as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the magnetic constant, @xmath is the effective electron
mass, and the dot means the time derivative. This total action consists
of the three-dimensional electromagnetic field term and the
two-dimensional electron field term. In the Coulomb gauge, the
interaction between electric fields is expressed by the Coulomb
interaction. By applying the HF approximation to the Coulomb interaction
part and substituting Eq. ( 4.5.1 ) into Eq. ( 4.32 ), we rewrite the
total action as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the expression of @xmath , the term of the uniform external magnetic
field is dropped since it gives only the same energy constant to the two
HF states. In Eq. ( 4.34 ), the term including @xmath and the term
including @xmath are the Hartree term and the Fock term, respectively.
As seen in Appendix B.1 , the Fock term becomes negligible compared to
the Hartree term in the long wavelength limit since in the momentum
space, the Hartree term is proportional to the Coulomb potential @xmath
, which is @xmath , and gives a larger contribution than the Fock term
for the small momentum @xmath . In the following calculation, the
deviation of the Fock term is dropped. If we introduce the potential
generated by the electron density deviation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This HF action @xmath has the same form as the Hamiltonian in the system
with the infinitesimal external gauge field shown in Eq. ( 4.8 ) if we
apply the HF approximation to the Coulomb interaction part. The
important difference is that @xmath in the present case represents not
the infinitesimal external gauge field but the finite gauge field
induced by the current flow. Although the meaning of @xmath is
different, the effective action obtained in the previous section is
applicable as long as @xmath is small.

The partition function is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating out electron fields and expanding the results up to second
order of @xmath and @xmath , we obtain the effective action @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The functional derivative of @xmath with respect to @xmath gives the
Maxwell’s equation for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a current operator and @xmath means an expectation value
of an operator @xmath for the system with finite @xmath (or equivalently
finite currents). The solution of this equation gives the stationary
point of the action with respect to @xmath . We use the action into
which the solution of Eq. ( 4.39 ) is substituted as the effective
action. @xmath and @xmath are calculated from the effective action by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath is the expectation value of the density operator in the
system with no injected current. Equations ( 4.35 ), ( 4.39 ) and ( 4.40
) determine @xmath and @xmath , or equivalently @xmath and @xmath ,
self-consistently.

We concentrate on the finite system with the static injected current
flowing in the @xmath -direction and depending only on @xmath . The
lengths of the 2D electron system in the @xmath -direction and the
@xmath -direction are @xmath and @xmath , respectively (Fig. 4.6 ).

In this case, the electron density also depends only on @xmath and
Eqs. ( 4.35 ) and ( 4.39 ) give the following solutions at @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As shown in the previous section, the effective action can be divided
into the non-perturbed part and the correction part due to currents, and
in the long wavelength limit, the correction part @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a uniform part of the density, and @xmath is the total
time. @xmath is the Fourier transformed form of the response function
obtained in the previous section. Substitution of Eq. ( 4.42 ) into
Eq. ( 4.40 ) gives @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 4.41 ) and ( 4.43 ) determine the current and charge density
distributions up to an overall constant. The overall constant is
determined by requirement of the following constraints:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a total current. Using the explicit form of the response
functions derived in Sec. 4.4 , we obtain the integral equations to
determine the current and charge distribution.

The same type of the integral equations has already been solved for the
integer quantum Hall state [ 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 ] . Their results are
summarized as follows:

1.  In Eq. ( 4.43 ), the terms including the vector potential @xmath
    give a very small effect in the integral equations compared to the
    terms including the scalar potential @xmath and the vector potential
    terms are negligible in a good approximation.

2.  The analytical solution of the integral equation without the vector
    potential term is obtained by means of the Wiener-Hopf technique.

3.  @xmath is the good approximate form of the analytical solution
    except near the edge and the constant coefficient is determined from
    the constraint for the total current.

The same results hold in the present case. The integral equation for the
potential is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ( @xmath for the striped Hall state). @xmath has the
dimension of length and is very small for the magnetic fields of the
order of several tesla in the quantum Hall regime. For example, if
@xmath , @xmath (these are parameters in GaAs), and @xmath , then @xmath
is of the order of @xmath m. The current and charge distributions are
obtained from @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The approximate solution of Eq. ( 4.45 ) is given by (Fig. 4.7 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a linear extrapolation of @xmath to @xmath in the interval within
@xmath from the edge, where @xmath and @xmath is the Hall resistivity.
One may verify that Eq. ( 4.47 ) is indeed the approximate solution of
the integral Eq. ( 4.45 ), by substituting Eq. ( 4.47 ) into Eq. ( 4.45
) and performing one partial integration.

#### 4.5.2 Energy corrections

The energy correction due to the injected current per unit space-time
volume is calculated from the effective action by @xmath . Since in the
present case of @xmath , the area occupied by one particle at the
uppermost partially-filled LL is @xmath (here, the vNL constant @xmath
is written explicitly), the energy correction per particle @xmath is
given by @xmath . Substituting Eqs. ( 4.41 ) and ( 4.43 ) into this
expression, we obtain the energy correction per particle given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting Eq. ( 4.46 ) into Eq. ( 4.48 ) and using Eq. ( 4.45 ), we
rewrite the energy correction as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting Eq. ( 4.47 ) into Eq. ( 4.49 ) and performing the @xmath
integral, we obtain the final result;

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a dimensionless constant given by @xmath . This
expression depends on the filling factor, the magnetic field strength
and experimental parameters. Since the actual filling factor includes
the spin degree of freedom, we use @xmath for lower spin bands and
@xmath for upper spin bands instead of @xmath . The magnetic field
strength is related to the filling factor by @xmath ( @xmath is an
electron density). For example, if @xmath , then the magnetic field
strengths are 4.42 T ( @xmath ), 3.15 T ( @xmath ), 2.45 T ( @xmath ),
2.01 T ( @xmath ), 1.70 T ( @xmath ) and so on. We use @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath m, and @xmath m in order to estimate the values of energy
corrections, which are the parameters used in the experiment by Lilly et
al. [ 9 ] . Then the energy correction is given by @xmath with the
coefficient @xmath shown in Table 4.3 .

As shown in Sec. 4.3 , in the system with no injected current the energy
of the ACDW state is slightly lower than that of the striped Hall state.
The differences of energy per particle @xmath are @xmath ( @xmath ),
@xmath ( @xmath ), @xmath ( @xmath ) and so on in units of @xmath . When
the finite current is injected, charges are accumulated in both edges
with the opposite sign. The accumulated charges give the energy
corrections @xmath which depend on the value of current @xmath .
Including these corrections, the energy difference between the striped
Hall state and the ACDW state @xmath varies depending on @xmath . The
current dependence of @xmath is shown in Fig. 4.8 . In Fig. 4.8 , only
the parallel case is plotted for the ACDW states since it has a weaker
current dependence than the perpendicular case does.

The signs of the energy differences change at the critical values of
current @xmath . The critical values are shown in Table 4.3 . The
critical values are about @xmath - @xmath nA for @xmath and @xmath LLs.
The current used in the experiments [ 9 , 10 ] is above @xmath nA and is
much larger than the critical value. At @xmath nA, the energy
differences @xmath become @xmath @xmath and @xmath @xmath in units of
@xmath which are much larger than the original energy differences at a
zero injected current. Hence, the striped Hall state becomes the lower
energy state and should be realized in the experiments. We note that for
@xmath nA, the density deviation around edges is of the order of 0.001%
of the mean value of the density, which ensures that the electromagnetic
fields induced by currents are kept small enough for the current of the
order of @xmath nA.

### 4.6 Summary

In this chapter, we have investigated the effect of the finite electric
current on the striped Hall state and the ACDW state in the system with
no impurities and no metallic contacts within the self-consistent HF
approximation. First, at zero injected current, the energies of the two
HF states have been calculated and we have confirmed that the ACDW state
has slightly lower energy than the striped Hall state as pointed out in
Ref. [ 28 ] . Next, within the same HF approximation, energy corrections
due to finite injected currents flowing in the stripe direction have
been calculated and the energies of the two HF states including the
energy corrections have been compared. For this purpose, we calculated
electromagnetic response functions, and using them, current and charge
distributions were determined for both states in the system with the
injected current. It has been found that the charge accumulation occurs
around both edges with the opposite sign, just as in the case of the
integer quantum Hall state studied by MacDonald et.al and other authors
[ 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 ] . We hope that current and charge distributions
will be observed in experiments for anisotropic states. The charge
accumulation results in the energy enhancement via the Coulomb
interaction between the accumulated charges. The energy enhancement was
estimated from the current and charge distributions. It is found that
the energy of the ACDW state increases faster than that of the striped
Hall state does as the injected current increases. Hence, the striped
Hall state becomes the lower energy state when the current exceeds the
critical value. The critical value is estimated at about @xmath - @xmath
nA. The current used in the experiments for the anisotropic states [ 9 ,
10 ] is above @xmath nA. This result suggests that the striped Hall
state is realized in the experiments. In addition, the striped Hall
state has the anisotropic Fermi surface, which naively explains the
experimental features of the anisotropic states, i.e., the anisotropic
longitudinal resistivities and the un-quantized Hall resistivities.
Hence, we conclude that the striped Hall state is realized in the
experiment rather than the ACDW state and predict that the ACDW state is
realized if an experiment is performed with a current smaller than the
critical value.

## Appendix A von Neumann lattice formalism

### a.1 Wave function of the von Neumann lattice basis

By using the von Neumann lattice basis introduced in Chapter 2 , the
Hilbert space of a one-particle state of a free electron in a magnetic
field @xmath is spanned by @xmath . The wave function in the coordinate
space @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The explicit form of @xmath is obtained by using the coordinate
expression of @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

These expressions are rewritten by using the complex coordinates @xmath
and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the derivations act on not only the exponential function but also
the wave function on which these operators act. Using these expressions
and performing some calculations, we obtain the explicit form of @xmath
;

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a normalization factor, and @xmath is a Laguerre
polynomial. In Eq. ( A.5 ), the polar coordinate representation of
@xmath , @xmath , is used. If @xmath , @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( A.6 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, for @xmath , the probability density is localized at the lattice
points, @xmath . A similar argument can be applied for the case of
@xmath .

### a.2 Explicit form of the inner product @xmath

By using the momentum representation of @xmath , @xmath , the inner
product is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the @xmath is a function of @xmath and @xmath , Eq. ( A.9 ) can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the relation, @xmath , is used. In what follows, we derive the
explicit form of @xmath .

From Eq. ( 2.15 ), @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using the identity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.14)
  -- -- -- --------

the index of the exponential function in Eq. ( A.13 ) can be transformed
from the quadratic function to the linear function in @xmath and @xmath
as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Substitution of Eq. ( A.15 ) into Eq. ( A.10 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The summation of @xmath and @xmath gives the delta function. The
integration of @xmath and @xmath rewrites @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By using the relation between the summation of an integer @xmath and the
definition of a Jacobi’s theta function of the first kind @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

the summation of @xmath in Eq. ( A.17 ) is rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the summation of @xmath in Eq. ( A.17 ) is rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In addition, by using the relations between theta functions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

here we provide that @xmath is a pure imaginary, we obtain the explicit
form of @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

### a.3 Density operator on the von Neumann lattice basis

On the von Neumann lattice basis, an electron density operator @xmath is
expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral over @xmath is performed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the operation form of @xmath , @xmath , and the identity @xmath
are used. In Eq. ( A.26 ), @xmath is given in Appendix A.4 . Whereas,
@xmath is calculated in what follows.

By using the relation @xmath , @xmath is expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the relations @xmath and @xmath , we rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

here, the Cambell-Hausdorff formula Eq. ( 2.21 ) is used. By using Eq. (
A.28 ) and the relations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

the matrix element @xmath is calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we set @xmath and define @xmath . Since the explicit form of
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

the function @xmath in Eq. ( A.30 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the boundary condition for @xmath is used. As a result, the
density operator @xmath is expressed on the vNL basis as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

### a.4 Landau level matrix elements

The matrix elements @xmath are given as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Laguerre polynomial. For @xmath , the Laguerre
polynomial is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eq. ( A.36 ), the matrix elements @xmath defined by Eq. ( 4.10 )
are given by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath holds
following from its definition.

The values of @xmath and its derivatives are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.38)
     @xmath      (A.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.40)
                 (A.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

### a.5 Hartree-Fock Hamiltonian

In the HF theory, the Coulomb potential term given by Eq. ( 2.35 ) is
approximated by Eq. ( 2.36 ). In the summation in Eq. ( 2.36 ), both the
Hartree term and the Fock term are proportional to the density operator
@xmath . This is a characteristic of the quantum Hall system [ 54 , 55 ]
. In what follows, we derive Eq. ( 2.36 ) from Eq. ( 2.35 ).

#### a.5.1 Hartree term

The Hartree term is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Transforming the variable @xmath to @xmath and using the relation @xmath
, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### a.5.2 Fock term

Fock term is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

For simplicity, we define @xmath by @xmath and calculate @xmath .

If we insert the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

into @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Dividing the integral range of the @xmath integral by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and using the relation derived from the boundary condition Eq. ( 2.29 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

we rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

and rewriting the variable @xmath as @xmath and @xmath as @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Transforming @xmath to @xmath and @xmath to @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

we rewrite Eq. ( A.53 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

and transforming @xmath to @xmath , we finally obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, the combination of the Hartee term and the Fock term gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the HF potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix B Highly anisotropic states

### b.1 Deviation of the Hartree-Fock Hamiltonian due to currents

In Sec. 4.5 , the deviations of the magnetic field and the two-point
function are taken into account in the long wavelength limit in order to
consider the current effect on the HF states. The deviation of the
two-point function is caused by the deviation of @xmath . We only
consider the deviation at the partially filled LL @xmath since it would
give the largest contribution in our calculation and denote it as @xmath
. Then, the deviation of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the long wavelength limit, @xmath is relevant only for the small
momentum. When we expand @xmath with respect to @xmath , the largest
contribution comes from the lowest order term with respect to @xmath .
For each set of the LLs @xmath , the Hartree term of the HF potential
gives the lower order term with respect to @xmath since the Hartree term
has @xmath which is @xmath . Hence, the Hartree term gives the main
contribution and the Fock term is negligible in the long wavelength
limit.

### b.2 Calculation of @xmath for the ACDW state

When @xmath and @xmath , the response function @xmath is Taylor expanded
with respect to @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first and second terms become zero. The third term includes the
corrections from the inter-LL term and the intra-LL term. The inter-LL
term gives the same expression for @xmath as that in the striped Hall
state. The intra-LL term gives the extra correction @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath in Eq. ( 4.30 ) is defined by @xmath . The finite @xmath is the
result of the band formation at the partial filled LL, while the band
structure is generated by the density modulation of the ACDW state in
both directions. Hence, it may be considered that the finite @xmath
reflects the remaining density modulation effect of the ACDW state in
the long wavelength limit.