##### Contents

-    1 Symmetries and physical fields
    -    1.1 Symmetries in physical theories
        -    1.1.1 Structural remarks
        -    1.1.2 Symmetries of a physical theory
        -    1.1.3 Formal symmetry action on a physical field
    -    1.2 Lie theory
        -    1.2.1 Lie groups and Lie algebras
        -    1.2.2 The classification of simple, finite dimensional Lie
            algebras
        -    1.2.3 Representation theory
        -    1.2.4 Real forms
        -    1.2.5 Representations of Lie groups
    -    1.3 Diffeomorphisms
        -    1.3.1 Diffeomorphisms in physical theories
        -    1.3.2 The group of diffeomorphisms @xmath
        -    1.3.3 Subalgebras of @xmath
        -    1.3.4 Ogievetsky’s theorem
    -    1.4 Application to physical fields
        -    1.4.1 Explicit symmetry action on a physical field
        -    1.4.2 The connection @xmath on fields
        -    1.4.3 The vielbein frame
-    2 The dynamics and why @xmath supergravity?
    -    2.1 A brief excursion to quantum electrodynamics
        -    2.1.1 Gauging a symmetry
        -    2.1.2 Relating the gauged theory to physics
    -    2.2 Gravity as a gauge theory
        -    2.2.1 Gauging an external symmetry
        -    2.2.2 Conventions and diffeomorphisms
        -    2.2.3 General relativity
        -    2.2.4 Geometric interpretation
        -    2.2.5 Teleparallel interpretation
        -    2.2.6 An aspect of quantization
        -    2.2.7 Comments on the literature
    -    2.3 Maximal supergravity
        -    2.3.1 Quantization, higher dimensions and more
            supersymmetry
        -    2.3.2 Supergravity in @xmath
        -    2.3.3 The @xmath supergravity action
        -    2.3.4 Hidden symmetries
        -    2.3.5 Hidden symmetries in @xmath
-    3 Non-linear realizations
    -    3.1 Connections with affine linear equivariance
        -    3.1.1 Setup
        -    3.1.2 The affine coset
        -    3.1.3 The minimal connection of the affine coset
        -    3.1.4 Connections with affine linear equivariance
    -    3.2 Connections with @xmath -equivariance
        -    3.2.1 Properties of @xmath
        -    3.2.2 The vielbein gauge
        -    3.2.3 The conformal coset
        -    3.2.4 The minimal connection @xmath of @xmath
        -    3.2.5 Joint realizations of the symmetries
        -    3.2.6 Summary and corollaries
    -    3.3 Other perspectives
        -    3.3.1 A unified coset description
        -    3.3.2 What about torsion?
        -    3.3.3 Goldstone bosons for internal symmetry groups
        -    3.3.4 Problems with a generalization to external symmetries
        -    3.3.5 Technical aspects
        -    3.3.6 Related work in the literature and @xmath
-    4 Maximal supergravity in @xmath
    -    4.1 Exceptional geometry
        -    4.1.1 The symplectic form @xmath
        -    4.1.2 Symplectic vector fields
        -    4.1.3 Comments on the holomorphic frame
        -    4.1.4 Connections with symplectic equivariance
        -    4.1.5 The quartic symmetric tensor @xmath
        -    4.1.6 Vector fields preserving @xmath and @xmath
        -    4.1.7 The vector field representation of @xmath
        -    4.1.8 Connections @xmath for supergravity
    -    4.2 Decomposition of @xmath under @xmath
        -    4.2.1 The algebra @xmath
        -    4.2.2 Action of @xmath on the coordinates
    -    4.3 Vielbein and connection in @xmath decomposition
        -    4.3.1 The vielbein of the exceptional geometry
        -    4.3.2 The explicit form of the vielbein
        -    4.3.3 Matrix form and inverse vielbein
        -    4.3.4 The Maurer–Cartan form @xmath
    -    4.4 A first comparison to @xmath supergravity
        -    4.4.1 The bosonic fields
        -    4.4.2 The connection
    -    4.5 Supersymmetry
        -    4.5.1 The equivariant supersymmetry variation
        -    4.5.2 Fermions
        -    4.5.3 The supersymmetry variations in @xmath
        -    4.5.4 Decomposition into @xmath representations
        -    4.5.5 Comparison to @xmath supergravity
-    5 Conclusion and outlook
-    6 Appendix
    -    6.1 To chapter 1
        -    6.1.1 To the proof of theorem 1.9
        -    6.1.2 Isometries
        -    6.1.3 The integral curve to the conformal vectorfield
            @xmath
        -    6.1.4 Global properties of the conformal group
        -    6.1.5 Proof of Ogievetsky’s theorem
        -    6.1.6 Proof of corollary 1.11
    -    6.2 To chapter 2
        -    6.2.1 Clifford algebras
        -    6.2.2 Explicit calculation of @xmath
    -    6.3 To chapter 3
        -    6.3.1 Proof of theorem 3.2
        -    6.3.2 Proof of ( 3.2.11 )
    -    6.4 To chapter 4
        -    6.4.1 Symplectomorphisms
        -    6.4.2 Vector fields preserving @xmath and @xmath
        -    6.4.3 Some relations for @xmath matrices
        -    6.4.4 Action of the @xmath -generators on the coordinates
            in the @xmath decomposition

## Chapter 1 Symmetries and physical fields

I want to start with an introduction to the mathematical language that
will be used to describe physical theories in the chapters 2 , 3 and 4 .
Since the investigation of symmetry structures in these theories has
been my prime motivation to write the thesis, I will devote this chapter
to the action of symmetries on physical fields. I will proceed in four
steps that correspond to the four sections 1.1 - 1.4 of this chapter.

1.  Definition of a physical theory and of a formal symmetry action on
    physical fields. I will show that this naturally leads to a Lie
    structure.

2.  Review of finite dimensional Lie structures, such as Lie groups, Lie
    algebras, their real forms and representations that will be relevant
    for this dissertation.

3.  Discussion of the infinite dimensional Lie algebra of vector fields
    @xmath and its finite dimensional subalgebras that generate @xmath
    by Ogievetsky’s theorem.

4.  An application of this representation theory of real Lie groups
    allows to define an explicit symmetry action on physical fields. I
    close this chapter with the introduction of the vielbein frame.

This thesis will be focussed on the symmetry group of coordinate
transformations @xmath that corresponds to the Lie algebra of vector
fields @xmath . @xmath is closely linked to finite dimensional groups:
In chapter 2 , I will show that gauging the finite dimensional Poincaré
group leads to @xmath -invariant theories. In chapter 3 , I will review
and reinterpret the result of Borisov & Ogievetsky [ 3 ] to construct a
@xmath -invariant theory by requiring invariance under its finite
dimensional affine linear and conformal subgroups alone. And in chapter
4 , I will show that @xmath supergravity seems to be extendable to a
theory in @xmath dimensions, endowed with a particular geometry that
contains a restriction of an infinite dimensional @xmath subgroup to a
finite dimensional one.

Due to this close link between finite dimensional symmetry groups and
infinite dimensional ones, I will discuss all symmetry groups on the
same footing. I will also include a sketch of Cartan’s classification of
finite dimensional, complex, simple Lie algebras, because I want to
highlight the analogy to Ogievetsky’s theorem: in both cases, the
algebras can be descibed by their simpler finite dimensional subalgebras
with relations in between. These are the Serre relations in Cartan’s
case and the vector field representation in Ogievetsky’s. I will provide
further details in section 1.3.4 .

### 1.1 Symmetries in physical theories

#### 1.1.1 Structural remarks

In this dissertation, a physical theory will always denote a collection
of fields @xmath with local dependence on space-time coordinates @xmath
that locally parametrize a real manifold @xmath in @xmath dimensions,
equipped with a non-degenerate metric @xmath of Lorentzian signature.
The explicit dependence of the fields on the coordinates is called the
dynamics of this field theory. It is prescribed by specific partial
differential equations, which are called the equations of motion. Quite
often, these can be derived from an action @xmath by a variational
principle. ¹ ¹ 1 If the theory includes self-dual @xmath -forms, it is
not straightforward to state an action. An example for a case where this
is possible nonetheless is provided in [ 25 ] .

In order to facilitate the analysis, I restrict myself to considering
manifolds @xmath with analytic transition functions [ 62 ] . As
experiments indicate that the concept of spinors is appropriate to
describe physical processes, I further constrain the manifolds @xmath to
have trivial first and second Stiefel–Whitney class [ 41 , 45 ] in order
to be able to define a spin structure. This directly implies
orientability of @xmath .

A theory consists of a collection of fields. In the language of
differential geometry, these are sections of a tensor bundle ² ² 2 This
is not restricted to tensor products of the tangent bundle, the spin
bundle could also be involved. over a manifold @xmath . A simple example
is a scalar field @xmath . This is a mapping from the manifold @xmath to
the field of real numbers

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As the manifold is analytic, it is natural to require that @xmath
analytically depends on points @xmath . Its precise dependence however,
is only determined by the dynamics, i.e. the equations of motion. More
interesting examples are a vector field @xmath or a tensor field @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.2b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

To every position @xmath , this vector field @xmath associates a vector
@xmath in the tangent space @xmath and @xmath a tensor @xmath in the
tensor product of two cotangent spaces. Examples for these objects are
the electromagnetic potential @xmath and the metric @xmath , if the
tensor product @xmath is symmetric.

The simplest example of a Lorentzian manifold @xmath , i.e. a manifold
@xmath with a non-degenerate metric @xmath of Lorentzian signature, is
flat Minkowski space

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In this special case, the manifold is a vector space. This implies that
the linear span of an arbitrary choice of linearly independent basis
vectors @xmath with @xmath generates the manifold

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Every point on @xmath is hence uniquely determined by the coefficients
@xmath with respect to this global basis:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This defines a coordinate system on @xmath , which is globally defined.
For a general manifold @xmath , e.g. the @xmath -sphere @xmath , the
situation is different: there is no distinguished set of coordinate
systems as in the Minkowski case such that the entire manifold @xmath
can be covered by a single coordinate system. ³ ³ 3 There also are
curved manifolds that have this property, e.g. the @xmath sphere @xmath
. These are called parallelizable manifolds that are important for the
teleparallel interpretation of general relativity addressed in section
2.2.5 . However, there is a remnant of this structure: by the very
definition of a differentiable manifold, for any point @xmath , there is
an open neighbourhood @xmath with @xmath which is diffeomorphic to a
vector space. The important insight is that one can still use the
coordinate basis introduced in ( 1.1.4 ), if the global validity is
changed to a local one and if the metric @xmath is replaced by the
Lorentzian metric @xmath ( 1.1.2b ). Technically, this is done by
substituting the open neighbourhood @xmath for @xmath in the definitions
above and using the appropriate form of @xmath in local coordinates.
This procedure will be of prime importance for the discussion of
non-linear realizations in chapter 3 , where I will work with a fixed
coordinate system, i.e. with fixed vectors @xmath ( 1.1.4 ) whose linear
span is diffeomorphic to the open set @xmath .

#### 1.1.2 Symmetries of a physical theory

After these first structural remarks I want to introduce the notion of
symmetry in a physical theory: a symmetry maps one set of physical
fields to another one, with both sets satisfying the equations of
motion. In this dissertation, I want to distinguish two possible ways a
symmetry can act on physical fields.

1.   External symmetries :
    An external symmetry acts on the coordinates and thus induces an
    action by the relevant bundle structure on the physical field. Even
    for a scalar field @xmath ( 1.1.1 ), this action is not trivial.
    This immediately follows from a Taylor expansion about the
    coordinate @xmath . For a general manifold, these transformations
    are diffeomorphisms and illustrate only the arbitrariness of the
    choice which local coordinate system has been fixed. Sometimes, they
    are also referred to as space-time symmetries.

2.   Internal symmetries :
    An internal symmetry only acts on the fibres of the tensor bundle
    and not on the manifold directly. In particular, it does not act on
    the coordinates. A simple example is provided by the system of two
    scalar fields with identical dynamics and the symmetry would be a
    mixing of the two.

For both kinds of symmetries, the following definition applies: if the
same transformation is considered for all points @xmath , the symmetry
is called global . If this is not the case, one speaks of a local or
soft symmetry. The process of making a global symmetry local is known as
gauging this global symmetry. This will be the main topic of chapter 2 .

In chapters 4 and 5 , I will address the question whether an (in this
sense) internal symmetry of supergravity, the gauge symmetry of the
@xmath -form potential, is in fact an external symmetry in an extended
picture with additional coordinates, on which these gauge
transformations act in a non-trivial way. I want to emphasize that this
interpretation is not in conflict with the Coleman-Mandula theorem [ 24
] , because the geometry is enlarged.

Before discussing the symmetry action on physical fields in more detail,
I want to mention a possible source of confusion: the discrimination
between external and internal symmetries is not equivalent to the
distinction between physical symmetries and gauge symmetries in the
setting of general relativity. Gauge symmetries always are external
symmetries, but physical ones can be of external or internal type. ⁴ ⁴ 4
An example for a gauge symmetry would be any isometry of the spacelike
hypersurface @xmath in the de Sitter solution in @xmath . As @xmath does
not have a boundary, the Noether charges, e.g. the ADM-mass for
asymptotically flat manifolds [ 1 ] , are not affected. Hence, the
solution is not changed by the symmetry action. For a spacelike
hypersurface with non-trivial boundary, however, the Noether charges
would be affected, which may lead to a different solution. This is an
example for a physical symmetry. For this thesis however, these notions
will not be important.

#### 1.1.3 Formal symmetry action on a physical field

Let @xmath denote the physical field that solves the equations of
motion. For this thesis, I want to define the action of a symmetry
@xmath on @xmath to depend analytically ⁵ ⁵ 5 More general symmetries,
e.g. discrete symmetries, are interesting in their own right, but I will
not treat them in this thesis. on a (multi)label @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In general, a physical theory contains more than one field. For these
cases, @xmath is an abbreviation for the set they create. Following the
definition from section 1.1.2 , the physical field @xmath also solves
the equations of motion. This defines an equivalence relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The action of the same symmetry with a different (multi)label @xmath on
@xmath results in

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence, I can define a third (multi)label @xmath for this symmetry by the
concatenation of the two symmetry transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Thus, I have defined a product structure on the space of symmetry
transformations. Due to the continuous dependence on the (multi)label
@xmath , there is a unity element @xmath , i.e. a trivial symmetry
transformation. And as the two equivalence relations @xmath and @xmath
should have the same meaning, there should also be an inverse symmetry
transformation. In other words, for every (multi)label @xmath there is
another label @xmath such that @xmath in ( 1.1.9 ). Finally, consider
the chain of symmetry transformations linking the four solutions @xmath
:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Following ( 1.1.9 ), this defines two symmetry transformations @xmath
and @xmath . Hence, there are two possibilities to define a symmetry
transformation linking @xmath to @xmath , either @xmath or @xmath .
Requiring a unique symmetry transformation that links the two solutions
@xmath and @xmath is equivalent to demanding associativity of the
product

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the space of analytic symmetry transformations exactly
reproduces the definition of a Lie group . The set of all physical
fields satisfying the equations of motion, forms an orbit of the Lie
group action. The remaining part of this chapter is devoted to this
topic. The reason for this is that symmetries play a crucial role in
@xmath supergravity, whose structures I will investigate in chapter 4 .
In passing, I introduce the following definitions:

###### Definition 1.1

Let @xmath be objects, on which symmetry transformations can act, such
as solutions of physical theories, their equations of motion or actions.

-   @xmath is called invariant under a symmetry action @xmath if

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.11)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

    As an example may serve the Ricci scalar ( 2.2.12 ) that is
    invariant under a general coordinate transformation @xmath .

-   @xmath is called covariant under a symmetry transformation if the
    induced action on @xmath is (multi)linear. An example is the
    transformation of Einstein’s equations of motion under a general
    coordinate transformation @xmath : the induced action is a
    multiplication with the Jacobi matrix of the diffeomorphism @xmath
    of both free indices. ⁶ ⁶ 6 Sometimes, @xmath is called a tensor, if
    it fulfills this property. I do not use this name at this point,
    because it is also used in contradistinction to “spinor” in the
    physics literature, which also is a covariant object. I will come
    back to this subtlety in section 1.2.5 .

-    A physical theory shall be called invariant under a symmetry
    transformation, if its equations of motion are covariant. ⁷ ⁷ 7 If
    an action @xmath exists, this is equivalent to an invariance of
    @xmath modulo a constant rescaling.

-    A covariant derivative or connection @xmath acting on a covariant
    object @xmath is called equivariant under a symmetry transformation,
    if @xmath also is covariant.

The last definition may require some further explanation: I have defined
a physical theory by its equations of motion that are differential
equations of the physical fields. Furthermore, I have already mentioned
in section 1.1.2 that a symmetry transformation can be @xmath
-dependent, in particular if it is gauged. If I want both the physical
fields and the equations of motion to be covariant objects, it is
natural to replace the differential operator @xmath by a connection
@xmath that is equivariant under the symmetry transformation.

### 1.2 Lie theory

#### 1.2.1 Lie groups and Lie algebras

After this physical introduction to the Lie structure, I want to
formalize this to make contact with the mathematical literature [ 62 ,
18 ] .

###### Definition 1.2

A Lie group @xmath is a differentiable manifold which is also endowed
with a group structure such that the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is differentiable.

As the group multiplication always is associative, a short comparison of
this definition with section 1.1.3 indeed shows that the symmetry
structure of a physical theory is provided by a Lie group. The basic
building blocks of finite dimensional Lie groups, i.e. of symmetry
groups with finitely many symmetry generators, can be classified. This
is done by the relation to Lie algebras:

###### Definition 1.3

Let @xmath be a field of characteristic @xmath . A Lie algebra is a
@xmath -vector space @xmath with a bilinear ( 1.2.2a ), antisymmetric (
1.2.2b ) multiplication @xmath satisfying the Jacobi identity ( 1.2.2c
):

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath      (1.2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

For all @xmath and for all @xmath , this implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
     @xmath      (1.2.2a)
     @xmath      (1.2.2b)
     @xmath      (1.2.2c)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Lie algebras @xmath are linked to Lie groups @xmath by the exponential
map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The local diffeomorphism @xmath is a homomorphism mapping the additive
structure of the Lie algebra @xmath to the multiplicative structure of
the Lie group @xmath . ⁸ ⁸ 8 The Lie product ( 1.2.1 ) is linked to the
group multiplication ( 1.1.9 ) and the Jacobi identity ( 1.2.2c ) to the
associativity ( 1.1.10 ). Note that @xmath is not a global
diffeomorphism in general. I will comment on this in section 1.2.5 . In
the classical domain of physical theories, the real numbers @xmath are
the relevant choice for the field @xmath . I will start the
classification with the complex numbers @xmath in the next section
before refining to real forms in section 1.2.4 .

#### 1.2.2 The classification of simple, finite dimensional Lie algebras

The main aim of this section is to motivate the way this classification
of complex Lie algebras is proved [ 18 ] . In chapter 4 , I will need
this argumentation to identify the geometric structures that are linked
to @xmath supergravity.

###### Definition 1.4

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional, complex Lie algebra. There is a
natural action of @xmath on itself, defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is called the adjoint action of the Lie algebra @xmath on the
vector space @xmath . The Cartan subalgebra @xmath is defined to be the
maximal Abelian diagonizable subalgebra of @xmath . Its dimension is
called the rank of the Lie algebra @xmath .

In order to define the roots of a Lie algebra, I restrict the adjoint
action to the Cartan subalgebra

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As all elements of the Cartan subalgebra @xmath commute, Schur’s lemma
and the Jacobi identity ( 1.2.2c ) imply that all the maps @xmath
commute. Hence, there is a common eigenvector of @xmath . The
eigenvalues however, do depend on the element @xmath . This mapping is
called the root of a Lie algebra:

###### Definition 1.5

For a given eigenvector @xmath of the adjoint action @xmath , the
eigenvalues are given by the functional

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For any eigenvector @xmath , the non-zero functionals @xmath are called
roots or equivalently weights of the adjoint representation .

A further necessary definition is the one of a simple Lie algebra:

###### Definition 1.6

A simple Lie algebra @xmath has no non-trivial ideal. ⁹ ⁹ 9 This is
equivalent to stating that a simple @xmath does not have a proper
subspace @xmath with the property @xmath for all @xmath and all @xmath .

With a short calculation using the Jacobi identity ( 1.2.2c ), one can
prove that if @xmath and @xmath are different roots, @xmath also is a
root, if the corresponding common eigenvector @xmath does not vanish.
This is one of the most important insights in Lie theory. Together with
the finite dimensionality, it results in the fact that there must be a
highest root [ 18 ] . Hence there are finitely many roots for all finite
dimensional Lie algebras, which introduces a discrete lattice structure,
the root lattice, for a Lie algebra. This is the starting point of the
classification and the result is the following table:

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| @xmath                            | []                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| @xmath                            | []                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| @xmath                            | []                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| @xmath                            | []                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| @xmath                            | []                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| @xmath                            | []                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| @xmath                            | []                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| @xmath                            | []                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| @xmath                            | []                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Every node in these diagrams is labeled by a root @xmath and corresponds
to an @xmath algebra in the following sense: For the node with label
@xmath with @xmath , one associates three vectors @xmath , a so-called
Chevalley triple forming an @xmath subalgebra of @xmath . Its
commutation relations are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --

The @xmath commuting generators @xmath form the Cartan subalgebra @xmath
of @xmath . The complete Lie algebra @xmath is a subspace of the free
algebra , which is the vector space generated by the @xmath vectors
@xmath and arbitrary commutators thereof. The precise embedding of
@xmath in the free algebra is provided by the relation between the
different @xmath subalgebras, i.e. the commutators of @xmath with @xmath
for @xmath . These are encoded in the Dynkin diagram or equivalently, in
the Cartan matrix @xmath : ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 For the cases discussed here, @xmath
is an @xmath matrix with @xmath on the diagonal. If the nodes @xmath and
@xmath are linked with one line, @xmath . If there are two or three
lines between the nodes @xmath and @xmath with the arrow pointing to
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath respectively, whereas one still has @xmath .
All the other elements are zero. For a generalization, consult [ 38 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

To sum up, every simple, finite dimensional, complex Lie algebra @xmath
is the quotient space of the corresponding free algebra modulo the Serre
relations ( 1.2.7 ), modulo the commutation relations @xmath and modulo
( 1.2.5 ). @xmath is hence uniquely characterized by a Dynkin diagram or
equivalently, by its commution relations.

This property is the starting point of Kac-Moody theory [ 36 ] . I have
already mentioned above that the derivation of the discrete structure of
Lie theory heavily relies upon the finite dimensionality of the
algebras. In discussing infinite dimensional Lie algebras, Kac and Moody
realized that postulating the Serre relations ( 1.2.7 ) for an infinite
dimensional Lie algebra also leads to a very interesting mathematical
structure. This can also be encountered in physical theories. An example
is the Geroch group [ 5 , 19 ] , which is a symmetry acting on the space
of solutions of General Relativity with two commuting, independent
Killing vectors. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Its corresponding Lie algebra @xmath [ 34 ]
possesses two @xmath subalgebras, whose corresponding real groups are
called Ehlers and Matzner-Misner group respectively. The
Kramer-Neugebauer transformation from General Relativity [ 15 ]
corresponds to the automorphism of the Dynkin diagram of @xmath .

As the Serre relations provide the same information as the Dynkin
diagram, any Kac-Moody algebra is uniquely defined by its Dynkin
diagram. However, note that in contradistinction to the finite
dimensional case, this subset of infinite dimensional Lie algebras does
not contain all physically interesting structures: the Virasoro algebra
of @xmath conformal field theory and the algebra of all vector fields
are two very prominent examples for infinite dimensional Lie algebræ of
non-Kac Moody type, i.e. they do not have an associated Dynkin diagram.

#### 1.2.3 Representation theory

I have defined physical fields to be sections of a tensor bundle over a
@xmath -dimensional manifold. This implies that for every point @xmath ,
the physical field can be written as a tensor product of vector spaces.
Therefore, the induced action of a symmetry on these vector spaces has
to be a linear one. Hence, one is led to the definition of a linear
representation:

###### Definition 1.7

A linear representation @xmath of a Lie algebra @xmath is a map from the
Lie algebra @xmath to the endomorphisms @xmath of a representation space
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Furthermore, this map must be compatible with all the properties of the
Lie algebra ( 1.2.2 ). In formulæ:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

with @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . The vector space @xmath is also called
@xmath - module .

For the case @xmath , the elements of @xmath are matrices and the
commutator is defined by the ordinary matrix product @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the case of the diffeomorphism symmetry in section 1.3.2 , the
objects @xmath will be derivative operators and @xmath will be the
concatenation of functions respecting the chain rule. ¹² ¹² 12 The
reader will also encounter an example of a non-linear representation
@xmath in this context, the one of the conformal algebra @xmath on
Minkowski space @xmath . The compatibility with all the properties of a
Lie algebra still holds, but @xmath is not an endomorphism of the
Minkowksi space. To classify linear representations, the notion of
irreducibility is useful.

###### Definition 1.8

A representation @xmath of a Lie algebra @xmath is called irreducible if
the corresponding @xmath -module @xmath does not contain a proper
submodule. ¹³ ¹³ 13 In other words, there is no proper subspace @xmath
of @xmath on which a non-trivial representation @xmath of @xmath is
defined @xmath . For example, @xmath is not irreducible as a @xmath
representation, because @xmath is a proper subspace.

I had already introduced an example for a representation before, the
adjoint representation @xmath ( 1.2.1 ). Irreducibility for this
representation is equivalent to the Lie algebra @xmath being simple.
This already hints at the fact that the classification of all
admissible, irreducible, finite dimensional representations @xmath of a
Lie algebra and the classification of all finite dimensional, simple Lie
algebras from section 1.2.2 are closely related: one simply has to
replace @xmath by @xmath . Thus, the roots or weights of the adoint
representation are replaced by the weights of a general representation.
The finite dimensionality again introduces a discrete structure, the
weight lattice . This leads to a classification of all inequivalent,
irreducible, linear representations @xmath of simple, finite
dimensional, complex Lie algebras @xmath [ 18 ] .

#### 1.2.4 Real forms

In this dissertation, real forms of the finite dimensional Lie algebras
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and of the exceptional one @xmath will
play a prominent role. To define the notion of a real form, recall that
all these complex algebras are uniquely determined by their Dynkin
diagram or equivalently, by their non-degenerate Cartan-Killing matrices
@xmath . For the algebras under consideration, these @xmath can always
be written as a matrix product of a diagonal matrix with a symmetric one
[ 36 ] , from which it is possible to define a symmetric, non-degenerate
@xmath -bilinear form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This form can be extended to the entire complex Lie algebra @xmath by
requiring [ 36 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Furthermore, there always exist sesquilinear endomorphisms @xmath on
@xmath , so-called involutions with the property @xmath . These induce
Hermitean quadratic forms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which are equivalent to specifying a real norm on @xmath , the Killing
norm. Due to the fact that, in contrast to @xmath , the field @xmath is
not algebraically closed, the signature of the Killing norm @xmath
distinguishes different real forms of a single complex Lie algebra. ¹⁴
¹⁴ 14 A complete list of all real forms can be found in [ 7 ] .
Diagrammatically, they are distinguished by so-called Satake diagrams [
59 ] . The character @xmath of a real form is the difference between the
numbers of linearly independent vectors in @xmath with positive and
negative Killing norm. In general, the character can have the values
@xmath . The different real forms of @xmath are then defined to be the
fixed point sets of different choices of involutions @xmath , e.g. for
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In this dissertation, I will only use its split real form, which is
simply obtained by taking real coefficients in the span of the free
algebra from section 1.2.2 . It contains @xmath generators with negative
Killing norm. As @xmath , there are @xmath generators with positive
Killing norm and hence @xmath . This real form @xmath will be linked to
@xmath supergravity in chapter 4 .

Generators with negative Killing norm are also referred to as compact
generators, the ones with positive norm are called non-compact. This
name results from the observation that in the matrix representation of
@xmath , the transposition of matrices together with a complex
conjugation is an example for an involution @xmath . Since the
corresponding Killing norm is the trace of the matrix product, the
antihermitean matrices are called compact. This is consistent with the
fact that the corresponding Lie group is compact as a topological
manifold.

Another important real form for this thesis is the compact one.
Following the name, all its generators are compact, i.e. @xmath . The
compact forms of the orthogonal algebras @xmath and @xmath have the
particular name @xmath and @xmath , respectively, because they have a
representation as antisymmetric matrices @xmath in @xmath dimensions.
The antisymmetry is defined with respect to a symmetric tensor @xmath
with @xmath , the Euclidean metric @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

I will also consider other real forms, which are conventionally denoted
by @xmath and @xmath with @xmath , corresponding to metrics @xmath with
a different signature, i.e. @xmath minus signs. Prime examples are the
Minkowski metric for the Lorentzian case @xmath and the split real form
with @xmath .

In chapter 4 , the real forms of the symplectic algebra @xmath will be
important. Their standard representation is provided by @xmath matrices
@xmath that are subject to a similar constraint as ( 1.2.9 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with an antisymmetric, non-degenerate tensor @xmath and @xmath . I will
denote its split real form by @xmath and its compact one by @xmath .
Finally, the split real form of @xmath has the name @xmath and the
compact one @xmath .

To conclude, recall that the entire classification was aimed at simple
Lie algebras, defined in 1.6 . An example of a non-simple algebra is
@xmath , containing @xmath and a one-dimensional Abelian ideal. This is
the algebra of all real @xmath -matrices, which hence contains
orthogonal and symplectic subalgebras. This fact also leads to my
definition of the maximal compact subalgebra of a Lie algebra @xmath :
it consists of the generators of @xmath that are antisymmetric matrices
in the embedding of @xmath in @xmath for @xmath as small as possible. ¹⁵
¹⁵ 15 For @xmath , this deviates from the standard definition of a
maximal compact subalgebra, because the dimension of the subalgebra
@xmath is bigger than the one of @xmath , but the former does not
consist of antisymmetric matrices in @xmath . For the case of @xmath , I
will explicitly show in chapter 4 that the @xmath generators of @xmath
with negative Killing norm actually form the subalgebra @xmath , which
are antisymmetric matrices in @xmath .

#### 1.2.5 Representations of Lie groups

It follows from the classification of irreducible representations in
section 1.2.3 that every irreducible representation of @xmath is a
subrepresentation of a (multiple) tensor product of the @xmath
-dimensional vector representation @xmath and its dual or contragredient
representation @xmath [ 18 ] . This is the reason why @xmath and @xmath
are referred to as fundamental and antifundamental representations of
@xmath . Since the orthogonal algebra @xmath is a subalgebra of @xmath ,
every representation of @xmath also is a representation of @xmath .
There are however representations of @xmath that are not representations
of @xmath . These are the spin representations that are related to
representations of the Clifford algebra [ 18 , 69 ] , which will be
important for the discussion of fermions in physical theories in
chapters 2 and 4 .

For the representation of Lie groups, recall from section 1.2.1 that the
homomorphism @xmath ( 1.2.3 ) locally maps the Lie algebra @xmath to a
corresponding group @xmath . For the finite dimensional Lie algebras,
@xmath is the standard matrix exponential. Thus, every representation
@xmath of a Lie algebra @xmath induces a representation of a simply
connected Lie group @xmath [ 44 ] . As @xmath merely is a local
diffeomorphism, the Lie groups @xmath and @xmath may have different
topologies. For @xmath , it is standard to denote the simply connected
Lie group @xmath by @xmath . For @xmath , this is not the case: @xmath
is by definition a subgroup of @xmath . This is the reason why @xmath is
not simply connected. Therefore, the spin representations are not
representations of @xmath , but representations of its simply connected
covering group ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The discussion of these discrete subgroups has
often been disregarded in the literature in the past, e.g. in the
context of possible symmetry groups @xmath or @xmath of M-theory. By
referring to these discrete subgroups, these conjectures could be
strongly constrained [ 38 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It also is standard to reserve the notion tensor representation for
@xmath representations. @xmath or @xmath representations that are not
tensors in this sense are called spinors . This is the reason why I have
not called @xmath a tensor in the definitions of section 1.1.3 . In
other words, only representations with an even number of spinor indices
are representations of the group @xmath , because an even number of
spinors can always be transformed into tensor representations by the
Fierz identity.

This fact that spinors are not a representation of the Lorentz group
@xmath may have led some authors to the conclusion that spinors must be
described by infinite dimensional spin representations in the context of
non-linear realizations [ 39 ] . Since all physical expectation values
are of even degree in fermions, the Fierz identity argument applies,
however. Hence, it is perfectly consistent to describe physical objects
as @xmath equivalence classes of spinors, on which a Lorentz group
action is well-defined. It is common in the physics literature not to
mention this subtlety explicitly and just to talk about an induced
Lorentz action on spinors instead. I will adopt this convention in the
chapters 2 and 3 .

For the discussion of supergravity in chapter 4 , this distinction will
also be important. Therefore I want to add an easy prescription how to
identify the topology of a subgroup. Let @xmath be the maximal compact
subgroup of a Lie group @xmath . Then all admissible @xmath
representations arise from a decomposition of all admissible @xmath
representations under @xmath . For the case @xmath , the fundamental
representation @xmath decomposes into the @xmath representations @xmath
. This implies that all the admissible representations of @xmath have an
even number of @xmath indices: the discrete group action that multiplies
every index with a minus sign can hence be divided out. In the context
of supergravity in chapter 4 , this implies that @xmath is the
covariance group of the bosons, whereas its simply connected covering
group @xmath is the covariance group of the fermions.

### 1.3 Diffeomorphisms

I have already discussed in the context of Dynkin diagrams in section
1.2.2 that a Lie algebra @xmath can often be described as the free
algebra of @xmath subalgebras modulo some relations. Most prominent
among these are the Serre relations ( 1.2.7 ) for the case of (infinite
dimensional) Kac-Moody algebras. This section will deal with a
non-Kac-Moody algebra corresponding to a subgroup @xmath of the group of
diffeomorphisms on a manifold. This can also be constructed from two
finite dimensional subalgebras by Ogievetsky’s theorem [ 51 ] , which
can also be interpreted as defining relations between the two
subalgebras with the help of their vector field representation @xmath .

I will start with the geometric origin of the symmetry group of
diffeomorphisms in physical theories. Then, I will restrict this group
to the subgroup @xmath that corresponds to the Lie algebra of analytic
vector fields @xmath in section 1.3.2 . After discussing its relevant
subgroups in 1.3.3 , I will prove Ogievetsky’s theorem in 1.3.4 .

#### 1.3.1 Diffeomorphisms in physical theories

I have defined physical fields in section 1.1.1 to be sections of a
tensor bundle over an analytic manifold @xmath . By definition [ 62 ] ,
@xmath is equipped with an atlas of coordinate charts @xmath that
consists of simply connected open sets @xmath that cover @xmath and
mappings

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For every open set @xmath , the coordinate charts @xmath provide
analytic diffeomorphisms between @xmath and an open set @xmath in the
flat vector space @xmath . Given an open set on @xmath , it is obvious
that there are many choices for a coordinate chart. The content of a
physical theory should hence not depend on the arbitrariness of which
coordinate chart has been chosen. This is referred to as general
coordinate invariance of a physical theory, or diffeomorphism symmetry ,
equivalently. In formulæ, for every point @xmath and for two arbirary
charts @xmath and @xmath with @xmath , the diffeomorphism @xmath is a
map from @xmath to @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Hence, for the discussion of a physical theory with local dependence on
@xmath , it is no restriction to fix one coordinate chart @xmath , if
the equations of motion are covariant under the symmetry action of
diffeomorphisms. ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 This covariance follows the definition of
section 1.1.3 . In other words, a solution to the equations of motion
has to be identified with all solutions that are generated by the action
of a diffeomorphism. This implies that I can without loss of generality
introduce basis vectors @xmath ( 1.1.4 ) for the vector space @xmath ,
in which @xmath is embedded. This open set can then be parametrized by
coordinates @xmath with @xmath in the same way as the flat Minkowski
space ( 1.1.5 ).

#### 1.3.2 The group of diffeomorphisms @xmath

The requirement of locality for a physical theory, which is standard for
a theory that should be quantized [ 24 ] , has a further implication.
Since the dependence on the point on the manifold @xmath is local, it is
natural to ignore diffeomorphisms that link points on the manifold in a
non-local way. Technically, this offers the possibility to use the same
basis vectors @xmath ( 1.1.4 ) for both open sets @xmath and @xmath .
Furthermore, I can restrict the group of diffeomorphisms to a subgroup
@xmath whose elements @xmath are labelled by some (multi)label @xmath
and are analytically connected to the identity map. In the basis
provided by @xmath , the coordinates transform as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In this way, the group of diffeomorphisms of any @xmath -dimensional
manifold is restricted to a subgroup that does not depend on the global
structure of @xmath any more. It is therefore consistent to simply
denote it by @xmath . ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 It may also be interesting to discuss the
relevance of other diffeomorphism structures to physics, but I will
refrain from doing so in this thesis.

The definition of @xmath strongly reminds of the definition of a
symmetry group in section 1.1.3 . It turns out that one can exactly
follow the line of argumentation used for finite dimensional Lie groups.
The fact that any @xmath is by definition analytically connected to the
identity map, allows to prove that @xmath is locally diffeomorphic to a
Lie algebra @xmath :

###### Theorem 1.9

For any analytic manifold @xmath , the subgroup @xmath ( 1.3.3 ) of
diffeomorphisms on @xmath is a Lie group in the sense specified in the
proof. Its corresponding Lie algebra is provided by the vector space
@xmath of all analytic vector fields, endowed with the standard Lie
bracket.

###### Proof.

At first, I would like to remind the reader of the definition of a
vector field @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath may depend analytically on the point @xmath and @xmath is
some (multi)label, on which @xmath depends linearly . Since I fixed a
particular chart @xmath , it is sufficient to state the vector field in
the basis @xmath that I chose for the open set @xmath and that
canonically induces a basis for the tangent vector space @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath coefficients @xmath are analytic functions of the
coordinates @xmath . Thus, @xmath is a vector space. To prove the
theorem 1.9 , I have to define a Lie bracket on @xmath . This is a
bilinear antisymmetric mapping

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which has to satisfy the Jacobi identity ( 1.2.2c ). The standard
definition is by representing the basis vectors @xmath of the tangent
space @xmath , which are induced by the choice of coordinate vectors
@xmath , as derivative operators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

that act on the @xmath -dependent coefficients @xmath of the vector
fields @xmath . This implies that the coefficient @xmath of the vector
field @xmath has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This endows the vector space @xmath with the structure of a Lie algebra.

Next, I have to make contact to the formula ( 1.3.3 ) for an arbitary
analytic diffeomorphism @xmath that depends analytically on the
(multi)label @xmath and fulfills @xmath . Due to these properties, every
@xmath uniquely specifies a vector field @xmath by a Taylor expansion in
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

in its domain of validity @xmath . I prove in the appendix 6.1.1 that
@xmath can be reconstructed from @xmath by the explicit formula

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Its evaluation is performed by an expansion of the exponential series
taking into account the chain rule for differentiations. This defines
the local homomorphism ( 1.2.3 ) for the Lie algebra @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath         (1.3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------

Thus, @xmath indeed is a Lie group, but there is a subtlety to observe
that is related to the domain of validity @xmath of the finite
diffeomorphism @xmath :

-   Given any point @xmath , I can fix the chart such that @xmath . For
    any fixed vector field @xmath , there is an open neighbourhood
    @xmath of @xmath on which the formula ( 1.3.9 ) converges for all
    @xmath .

-   In particular, it is not possible in general to multiply the Lie
    algebra element by an arbitrary finite number without risking to
    destroy the convergence of the series ( 1.3.9 ), which is in
    contrast to finite dimensional Lie groups. This is related to the
    question of local and global existence of a coordinate chart in an
    obvious way.

-   The concatenation @xmath of diffeomorphisms @xmath only is an
    element in @xmath , if the domain of validity @xmath of @xmath is
    restricted in such a way that the concatenation still converges.

∎

Since I am discussing local physical theories in this thesis, I will not
have to mention this subtlety in the sequel, unless it is explicitly
necessary as for the case of the conformal diffeomorphism @xmath (
1.3.35 ) in section 1.3.3 .

In concluding, I want to mention that @xmath is also called the integral
curve to a vector field @xmath , which does not have to be globally
defined [ 62 ] . Furthermore, it is crucial to observe that dropping all
restrictions on the diffeomorphisms destroys the structure of a Lie
group [ 44 ] .

Finally, observe that it is the representation @xmath of the basis
elements of the tangent space @xmath as derivative operators ( 1.3.6 )
acting on the space-time coordinates @xmath in this chart that allowed
to prove the Lie algebra properties of @xmath and that is essential for
the formula ( 1.3.9 ). I provide explicit examples for the evaluation of
( 1.3.9 ) in the next section.

#### 1.3.3 Subalgebras of @xmath

In the preceding section, I have shown that the vector fields @xmath
form a Lie algebra. Next, I will construct two finite dimensional
subalgebras that are defined by two particular forms of the vector
fields ( 1.3.4 ), being the affine linear one ( 1.3.11 ) and the
conformal one ( 1.3.22b ). These are the ones whose closure in the
vector field representation generates the infinite dimensional Lie
algebra @xmath . This has become known as Ogievetsky’s theorem [ 51 ]
and I will explicitly prove it in section 1.3.4 .

##### Affine linear subalgebra @xmath

The first example for the evaluation of the formula ( 1.3.9 ) is the
affine linear vector field @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The corresponding finite diffeomorphism hence is ( 1.3.9 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where powers of @xmath are defined by @xmath and @xmath is the standard
matrix exponential series.

To prove that the transformations ( 1.3.11 ) form a subalgebra of @xmath
, it is sufficient to show that the Lie bracket of two such
transformations maps to a diffeomorphism with the same form as ( 1.3.11
), but with another parameter, of course. A short computation of the
commutator of vector fields ( 1.3.7 ) of the affine linear vector field
( 1.3.11 ) results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the matrix commutator @xmath and arbitrary @xmath and @xmath .
Hence, this is a finite dimensional subalgebra of @xmath , which is
called the affine algebra @xmath . ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 This affine algebra should
not be confused with the notion of an affine Kac-Moody algebra or
current algebra, as defined e.g. in [ 36 ] .

It is standard to isolate the generators of the Lie algebra from the
coefficients in ( 1.3.11 ) tantamount to the identification

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath            @xmath      (1.3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

It should be noted that the representation @xmath of @xmath as a
derivative operator is the same one as in ( 1.3.6 ). With these
definitions, the commutation relation ( 1.3.13 ) decomposes as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.15a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.15b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.15c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The commutation relation ( 1.3.15a ) reveals that the generators @xmath
generate a @xmath subalgebra of @xmath . The other relations show that
the translations @xmath form an ideal, which I denote by @xmath ,
because the @xmath transform in the fundamental representation of @xmath
. As a vector space, the affine algebra hence decomposes into

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that the concept of the generators of a Lie algebra @xmath always
is an abstract one, determined by its commutation relations as discussed
in section 1.2.2 . By the definition of a representation @xmath , any
representation induces the commutation relations of the algebra and the
normalization of the generators. In this thesis, I will always denote
the vector field representation by @xmath . The normalization of an
abstract algebra element @xmath is also fixed by a comparison of the
vector field representation ( 1.3.14 ) with the definition of the affine
linear vector field @xmath ( 1.3.11 ) to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The affine algebra @xmath ( 1.3.16 ) corresponds to the affine group

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

a finite dimensional subgroup of @xmath , consisting of the semidirect
product of the general linear group @xmath and the Abelian group of
constant translations @xmath in @xmath dimensions. There also are
infinite dimensional subgroups of @xmath . These are classified by
Cartan’s theorem [ 6 ] . One example is the group of symplectomorphisms
that I will address again in the context of supergravity in section
4.1.2 .

##### Conformal isometries of the metric @xmath

In the section 1.2.4 on real forms of finite dimensional Lie algebras, I
have already mentioned the concept of a metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

of signature @xmath , i.e. with @xmath minus signs in ( 1.3.19 ). This
defined the subalgebra @xmath of the matrix algebra @xmath by ( 1.2.9 ).
The reader may recall that representations preserve the subalgebra
property. This implies that the affine linear vector fields @xmath (
1.3.11 ) with antisymmetric matrices @xmath ( 1.2.9 ) form a vector
field representation @xmath of @xmath . In this sense, @xmath also is a
subalgebra of @xmath . The antisymmetry of @xmath induces the property
of the finite diffeomorphisms @xmath ( 1.3.3 ) that they preserve the
symmetric tensor @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

A diffeomorphism @xmath with the property ( 1.3.3 ) is called an
isometry of the metric @xmath . In the appendix 6.1.2 I prove that the
subalgebra @xmath of diffeomorphisms @xmath generates all
diffeomorphisms with this property. For Lorentzian signature, i.e.
@xmath , this algebra is called the Poincaré algebra with the associated
Poincaré group

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This group will be of crucial importance in chapter 2 . Vector fields
@xmath whose associated finite diffeomorphisms @xmath preserve a metric
tensor @xmath , are called Killing vector fields of @xmath . Conformal
Killing vector fields @xmath are the ones whose associated integral
curve @xmath preserve the metric tensor up to a scalar function. For the
case of the constant metric @xmath ( 1.3.19 ), the Poincaré algebra is
enlarged by the following two classes of vector fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.22a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.22b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The vector field @xmath is an element of the affine algebra @xmath (
3.1.7 ) ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 To be precise, it corresponds to the one-dimensional
ideal of the algebra @xmath that I have mentioned in section 1.2.4 . ,
but the other one @xmath is not. This fact will be an important
ingredient to prove Ogievetsky’s theorem in 1.3.4 .

In this context, I want to comment on the appearance of @xmath in the
formula ( 1.3.22b ). This does not restrict the manifolds under
consideration to the ones that globally allow for a constant metric of
the form @xmath . Given a coordinate chart @xmath with local basis
vectors @xmath , it is always possible to define a symmetric tensor
@xmath of arbitrary signature in @xmath that induces a symmetric tensor
on one open set @xmath . However, this tensor cannot be consistently
continued on the other open sets @xmath covering @xmath in general. ²¹
²¹ 21 As an example may serve the flat Euclidean metric on the compact
three-sphere @xmath . This is the crucial difference to the metric
tensor @xmath defined on the entire manifold @xmath , which I will start
to discuss in section 1.4.3 . The vector field @xmath should not be
confused with the Weyl rescaling of a general metric @xmath either,
which is not possible by a diffeomorphism action.

To sum up, the conformal Killing vector field @xmath merely is a special
form of a general vector field @xmath , because the latter can
arbitrarily depend on the coordinates @xmath in an analytic way ( 1.3.4
). @xmath also forms a subalgebra @xmath with the signature @xmath of
@xmath ( 1.3.19 ). Isolating the @xmath parameters @xmath from the
generators @xmath as in ( 1.3.14 ), I obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

A short computation of the commutator of vector fields ( 1.3.7 ) induces
the algebra relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, @xmath is an Abelian subalgebra of @xmath . The corresponding
finite diffeomorphisms ( 1.3.9 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

hence form an Abelian subgroup @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

##### The subalgebra of conformal isometries @xmath of @xmath

The definition of a conformal Killing vector field stated that the
corresponding finite diffeomorphism was an isometry ( 1.3.3 ) of @xmath
modulo a scalar function. This immediately implies that the Lie algebra
of these vector fields must close. The resulting algebra is called the
conformal subalgebra of @xmath . Since only the Poincaré subalgebra
@xmath and the one-dimensional ideal ( 1.3.23 ) of @xmath are the parts
of the affine algebra @xmath ( 1.3.16 ) with the conformal Killing
property, it will prove convenient to introduce the following
abbreviations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.28a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.28b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

A short calculation with the vector field representations @xmath of the
conformal generators ( 1.3.11 ) and ( 1.3.22b ) fixes the remaining
commutation relations of the conformal algebra to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.29a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.29b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.29c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

It is standard [ 58 ] to show that the @xmath -dimensional conformal
algebra is isomorphic to the orthogonal algebra @xmath in @xmath
dimensions. Following my definitions of section 1.2.4 , the latter is
provided by antisymmetric matrices with respect to a metric @xmath with
@xmath minus signs ( 1.2.9 ). With the identifications

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.30a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.30b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.30c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.30d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

the commutation relations ( 1.3.15a ) restricted to antisymmetric
generators @xmath in @xmath dimensions coincide with the ones of the
conformal algebra. This implies with the discussion in section 1.2.5
that the corresponding groups may only differ by a discrete group, which
indeed is the case. I will address this point in the next section.

##### The conformal group

Although the theorem 1.9 uniquely defines the finite diffeomorphism
@xmath corresponding to the conformal vector field @xmath , I have not
stated its explicit formula in ( 1.3.26 ). A direct computation as
performed for the affine linear vector field @xmath in ( 1.3.3 ) is not
the best way to obtain the result. The isomorphism of the conformal
algebra to @xmath suggests to introduce @xmath light cone coordinates
@xmath that are linked to the @xmath standard coordinates in the
following way

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

It should be noted that the vanishing of the bilinear symmetric form in
the last line is a consistent constraint, because @xmath preserves this
form by definition. The identification ( 1.3.30 ) allows to evaluate the
action of @xmath in the representation of linear vector fields ( 1.3.14
) acting on the coordinates @xmath ( 1.3.31 ) in the standard way. ²² ²²
22 I provide more details in the appendix 6.1.3 . This procedure can
also be found in [ 58 ] . Introducing the inversion

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that obviously has the property @xmath , I obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This leads to the explicit form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

I want to close this section with three comments

-   From the equation ( 1.3.35 ), it is obvious that the finite
    diffeomorphism @xmath is an example for the case of a restricted
    domain of validity @xmath as I explained at the end of section 1.3.2
    . For any parameter @xmath corresponding to the fixed vector field
    @xmath , there is a domain of validity @xmath for which the formulæ
    ( 1.3.9 ) or ( 1.3.35 ) are well-defined.

-   The fact that these diffeomorphisms @xmath form an Abelian group
    @xmath ( 1.3.27 ) also follows from ( 1.3.34 ).

-   The global structures of the conformal subgroup of @xmath and of the
    orthogonal group @xmath do not match. In even dimensions @xmath ,
    the conformal group is isomorphic to @xmath . In odd dimensions,
    this is not the case, because the inversion ( 1.3.33 ) is an element
    of @xmath . Since @xmath has a pole, it is not in @xmath , however.
    ²³ ²³ 23 I exlain this subtlety in the appendix 6.1.4 . More details
    on the conformal group can be found in [ 14 ] .

#### 1.3.4 Ogievetsky’s theorem

I want to start this section with the observation that all generators in
the conformal algebra @xmath that are not contained in the affine
algebra @xmath , are encoded in the Abelian algebra @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence, the closure of the algebras @xmath and @xmath in their vector
field representation @xmath is equivalent to the closure of the algebras
@xmath and @xmath in their vector field representation @xmath . These
algebras are parametrized by the affine linear vector fields ( 1.3.11 )
and the conformal ones ( 1.3.22b ), respectively.

In order to show that this closure with respect to the Lie bracket of
vector fields ( 1.3.7 ) indeed generates the entire algebra of analytic
vector fields @xmath ( 1.3.4 ), a basis of the vector space @xmath has
to be specified. It is a standard result that the closure of the vector
space of all homogeneous monomials forms a basis of the space of all
analytic functions. This implies that the vector space of analytic
vector fields @xmath is spanned by the closure of the vector fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The basis vectors @xmath of @xmath have a vector field representation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

as homogeneous monomials of degree @xmath . The sum over @xmath in (
1.3.36 ) is a sum over @xmath , but it also contains a sum over the
partitions of @xmath in @xmath . ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 This is a Hamel basis, not a
Schauder basis, i.e. for every analytic vector field @xmath there are
coefficients @xmath such that ( 1.3.36 ) holds. Given @xmath , the
number of non-vanishing coefficients @xmath does not have to be finite,
however [ 26 ] . This definition allows to state Ogievetsky’s theorem [
51 ] in the following way:

###### Theorem 1.10

For @xmath , the vector field representation @xmath of any basis
monomial @xmath ( 1.3.37 ) is a linear combination of the affine linear
generators @xmath ( 1.3.14 ), the conformal ones @xmath ( 1.3.24 ) and
arbitrary commutators thereof in their representation @xmath as vector
fields.

###### Proof.

Following Ogievetsky [ 51 ] , I prove this theorem in detail in the
appendix 6.1.5 . It contains two parts: At first, I show that a general
vector field ( 1.3.37 ) of polynomial degree @xmath is contained in the
closure. Then, I use this to construct vector fields @xmath of arbitrary
degree @xmath by induction.∎

It is interesting to observe that not all conformal vector fields are
necessary for the theorem to hold. This allows to refine the theorem by
the following corollary that I prove in appendix 6.1.6 .

###### Corollary 1.11

For @xmath , fix @xmath arbitrary. Then the vector field representation
@xmath of any basis vector @xmath ( 1.3.36 ) in @xmath dimensions is a
linear combination of (commutators of) the affine linear generators
@xmath ( 1.3.14 ) in @xmath dimensions and the conformal ones @xmath (
1.3.24 ) in @xmath dimensions in their representation @xmath as vector
fields.

Ogievetsky’s theorem 1.10 is the starting point of the procedure of
Borisov & Ogievetsky to generate a gravitational theory from the
simultaneous non-linear realizations of the affine linear and the
conformal symmetry group, which will be the topic of chapter 3 . From
the details of the proofs, I want to highlight the following points:

-   It is interesting to ask if the Lie algebra @xmath is generated by
    the closure of the affine algebra @xmath with an arbitrary vector
    field whose dependence on the coordinates is quadratic or higher.
    This is not true: the vector field @xmath is quadratic in @xmath ,
    but it transforms as a vector representation under @xmath and it
    also is Abelian. To generate @xmath , it is essential to include
    vector fields like @xmath ( 1.3.24 ) in the closure that do not
    transform as a linear representation of @xmath .

-   The affine algebra @xmath does not preserve the structure defined by
    the symmetric form @xmath ( 1.3.19 ), which could be interpreted as
    the reason why the commutator maps outside the conformal algebra
    @xmath .

-   This implies in particular that the signature @xmath of the flat
    metric @xmath had no effect on the proof of Ogievetsky’s theorem.
    There is no connection to the signature of the metric @xmath on the
    Lorentzian manifold @xmath .

-   It is only for the construction of a gravitational theory à la
    Borisov & Ogievetsky that it is necessary to endow the conformal
    vector field ( 1.3.22b ) with the Lorentzian signature @xmath .

To conclude, I want to close the loop of the analogy of Ogievetsky’s
theorem to the classification of simple, complex, finite dimensional Lie
algebras from section 1.2.2 . In both cases, the precise way how the
subalgebras are linked to each other is of crucial importance. As an
example, the reader may consider the two Kac–Moody algebras @xmath and
@xmath : both have two @xmath subalgebras, but @xmath is finite
dimensional and @xmath is not. This is due to the fact that the two
@xmath -subalgebras are linked by different Serre relations ( 1.2.7 ).
In the case of @xmath , the corresponding relation is provided by the
vector field representation @xmath of @xmath ( 1.3.14 ) and @xmath (
1.3.24 ), whereas for the embedding of both algebras in e.g. @xmath ,
the relations would be different.

### 1.4 Application to physical fields

#### 1.4.1 Explicit symmetry action on a physical field

In the introduction to the section 1.2.3 on representation theory, I
have already argued that the induced symmetry group action on physical
fields always is a (multi)linear one. Passing to the corresponding Lie
algebra, the induced action is linear. However, I have not explicitly
specified how this linear action is evaluated in coordinates, even
though it has to fulfill the criteria of a linear representation @xmath
of a Lie algebra @xmath . As the linear representation @xmath by
definition maps every algebra element @xmath to a linear map @xmath , a
physical field @xmath can without loss of generality be parametrized by
vectors @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

that span @xmath , i.e. @xmath . For every point @xmath , this vector
space @xmath is isomorphic to the fibre of the tensor bundle at this
point, keeping in mind that @xmath is a section of this tensor bundle.
It is standard in the physics literature to call the @xmath -dependent
coefficients @xmath physical fields, too.

Since the Lie algebra acts by an endomorhism @xmath , the corresponding
Lie group action on the vectors @xmath is provided by the exponential
series of matrices ( 1.2.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In other words, a symmetry action induces a change of the reference
frame @xmath to @xmath with respect to which the @xmath -dependent
coefficients @xmath are defined. Their transformation hence is induced
by ( 1.4.1 ), which results in the equality

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The corresponding Lie algebra action @xmath on the coefficients @xmath
is obtained from a linear expansion after substituting ( 1.4.2 ) in (
1.4.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

A simple, non-trivial example is a @xmath action on a @xmath
-dimensional vector field

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The discussion of real forms of Lie algebras from section 1.2.4 implies
that any element @xmath can be parametrized by a @xmath matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath real numbers @xmath and the abstract generators @xmath (
1.3.17 ). It is the vector field representation @xmath that dictates the
precise action on the vector field @xmath ( 1.4.4 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Comparing the basis vectors fixes the action on the coefficients to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This induced action by the commutator of vector fields ( 1.3.2 ) will be
sufficient to describe all symmetry actions on physical fields. In
section 4.5.2 , I will explain in which way it also induces an action on
spin representations.

In concluding this section, I want to highlight a subtlety. For internal
symmetries, i.e. @xmath , it follows from their definition in section
1.1.2 that the symmetry group is the same Lie group that acts on the
coefficients @xmath . To phrase it differently, the induced action is
the standard action by the symmetry Lie group. For external symmetries,
this is not the case in general. As an example may serve the conformal
subgroup of the diffeomorphism group @xmath . Its action on the
coordinates @xmath is non-linear ( 1.3.35 ), but the induced action on
e.g. a vector field is a linear one by the different Lie group @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

That the corresponding linear algebra action on a physical field is by
@xmath and not by @xmath is obvious from the fact that a @xmath
-dimensional vector field does not form a linear representation of
@xmath .

In this context, I also want to introduce the standard convention to
denote transformed object by a prime. As the symmetry action always is
induced by the action on the reference frame, e.g. for a diffeomorphism
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

it is clear with respect to which frame the indices have to be
contracted. Therefore, I do not adopt the convention to explicitly
denote the @xmath -dependence in the physical field, i.e. to write
@xmath and @xmath , because the reference frame already is uniquely
specified by one prime. I emphasize that the induced action @xmath on a
vector field @xmath should not be confused with the Lie derivative of a
vector field [ 62 ] . I will not need the concept of a Lie derivative in
the sequel.

#### 1.4.2 The connection @xmath on fields

For the discussion of local symmetry groups, the definition of an
equivariant connection or covariant derivative @xmath from section 1.1.3
is of major importance. If the group action on a physical field @xmath
is a local one, both the field @xmath and the equations of motion can
only be covariant, if all partial derivatives @xmath are replaced by
equivariant connections @xmath . It immediately follows from the
previous section that the covariance property is equivalent to @xmath
transforming as a linear representation under the induced symmetry
algebra action.

The case of prime importance for this thesis is the Lie algebra of
vector fields @xmath and its corresponding diffeomorphism group @xmath .
Its induced action on e.g. a vector field @xmath ( 1.4.1 ) is a
multiplication by the Jacobi matrix. To phrase this in other words: the
symmetry @xmath induces a @xmath action on the vector field @xmath ,
whose coefficients are the coefficients of the Jacobi matrix that are
@xmath -dependent in most cases. For the @xmath representation @xmath ,
the connection @xmath acting on the coefficients @xmath in the basis
@xmath has the general form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with a @xmath action @xmath . Equivariance of this connection @xmath (
1.4.7 ) under @xmath is then equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

being covariant, i.e. to transform as a @xmath representation under a
local @xmath action induced by the diffeomorphism action on the
coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To sum up, a connection @xmath consists of a partial derivative and a
@xmath -action on a @xmath -representation. It is straightforward from
the definition ( 1.4.7 ) how to generalize this concept to arbitrary
@xmath -representations. However, this does not cover all physical
fields of interest. Since fermions correspond to the spin
representations of the Lorentz group introduced in section 1.2.5 , I
will introduce the vielbein frame on a Lorentzian manifold in the next
section. To describe fermions, this is the appropriate framework.
Therefore, I will use it throughout this dissertation.

#### 1.4.3 The vielbein frame

I have already restricted the manifolds @xmath under discussion to be
equipped with a non-degenerate metric @xmath ( 1.1.2b ) of Lorentzian
signature at the beginning of this chapter. For every point @xmath , the
metric @xmath hence induces an invertible map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This canonical isomorphism between the tangent and the cotangent bundle
allows to identify the dual vector spaces @xmath and @xmath for all
points @xmath . Practically, this is the possibility to raise and lower
indices consistently. I want to emphasize that this canonical ismorphism
is not linked to the symmetry property of @xmath at all, but only to its
non-degeneracy. This will be important in chapter 4 where I will use a
non-degenerate symplectic form @xmath to establish the canonical
isomorphism between tangent and cotangent spaces.

The symmetry property of @xmath is important for the result that for
every point @xmath , there is a basis of the tangent space

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the property that every basis vector @xmath is mapped to its dual
@xmath modulo a real constant by ( 1.4.8 ). This is the spectral theorem
of linear algebra. Since the map ( 1.4.8 ) relates dual vector spaces,
the basis can be refined such that the following equality holds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the flat Minkowski metric introduced in ( 1.1.3 ). From
this relation, it is obvious that this choice of basis can only be
unique up to an isometry of the Minkowski metric.

Next, recall from section 1.3.2 that I have restricted the
diffeomorphisms in such a way that allowed me to choose coordinates
@xmath on some open set @xmath ( 1.3.3 ). These canonically induce
another basis of the cotangent space

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If I define the coefficients of the metric @xmath and of the dual basis
elements @xmath with respect to this basis

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.11b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

then the relation ( 1.4.10 ) implies for the coefficients of the basis
vectors for every point @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath matrices @xmath are called repère mobile or vielbein . I have
already mentioned that given a metric @xmath , the corresponding
vielbein matrix @xmath is not unique. The possible choices of @xmath
decompose into disjoint @xmath orbits that are labelled by the different
signatures of the eigenvalues of @xmath . For the rest of this thesis, I
will restrict to the orbit @xmath of matrices with positive eigenvalues.
Two vielbeine @xmath are in the same orbit @xmath , if they are linked
by a Lorentz transformation in the following way

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To sum up, given any Lorentzian metric in coordinates @xmath , then for
every point @xmath , there is a unique @xmath orbit of matrices @xmath
with positive eigenvalues such that the relation ( 1.4.12 ) is true.
Since @xmath varies smoothly with @xmath by definition, the same holds
for @xmath , which proves the local existence of @xmath as a one-form.
This also is true globally, because I have restricted all manifolds
@xmath to the ones with trivial first and second Stiefel–Whitney class [
41 , 45 ] . Therefore, the vielbein matrix @xmath defines @xmath
one-forms @xmath by ( 1.4.11b ). This implies that the vielbein
transforms by the standard pull-back under a general coordinate
transformation @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Recalling that for a given metric @xmath , the vielbein is only defined
as an @xmath orbit @xmath , it is not possible to exclude an
accompanying @xmath action mixing the basis vectors @xmath of the
vielbein frame. In the next chapter, I will argue that it is sensible
from a physical point of view to relate the action @xmath to the
diffeomorphism @xmath . This will allow to define an induced action of
diffeomorphisms @xmath on the spinor representations that I have
introduced in section 1.2.5 . I want to conclude with some remarks.

-   The vielbein matrix @xmath is the matrix that links the coordinate
    induced frame @xmath of the cotangent space to the one @xmath that
    is preferred by the metric tensor ( 1.4.10 ). This is the reason,
    why the vielbein @xmath is sometimes called the soldering form.

-   The frame @xmath is not coordinate induced in general. In other
    words: for a Lorentzian manifold, the one-forms @xmath that
    transform as @xmath vectors under coordinate transformations, are
    not integrable to coordinates. This is different for @xmath in the
    case of a symplectic manifold due to Darboux’s theorem [ 43 ] ,
    which I will use for the discussion of supergravity in chapter 4 .

-   The vielbein frame is a special case of a @xmath structure as
    discussed in Joyce’s book [ 33 ] .

In relating physical theories to experiments the flat Minkowski space
@xmath ( 1.1.4 ) plays a distinguished role. For this particular
manifold there is a globally defined coordinate chart such that the
vielbein frame and the coordinate induced frame coincide. Hence, the
vielbein @xmath is the identity matrix in this case. This situation is
the starting point to relate the mathematical concepts of this chapter
to interesting physical theories in the next ones.

## Chapter 2 The dynamics and why @xmath supergravity?

In this chapter, I will introduce the dynamics of the theories relevant
for this dissertation. I have closed the previous chapter with the
remark that the flat Minkowski space @xmath ( 1.1.3 ) plays a prominent
role in relating physical theories to experiments. I will start by
providing an example for such a physical theory in the first part: the
gauging of the global, internal @xmath symmetry of a free Dirac field
and its quantization that leads to quantum electrodynamics. The big
advantage of describing an observable force by a gauge theory lies in
the possibility to use the concept of a perturbation expansion in its
domain of validity to relate the theory to experiments. ¹ ¹ 1 The
restricted domain of validity of the perturbation expansion emphasizes
the interpretation of quantum electrodynamics as an effective field
theory: neither for very large energies nor to infinite accuracy, it is
adequate to use the tool of perturbation expansion, which is an
asymptotic series in general [ 70 ] .

This is the reason to devote the second part of this chapter to the
gauging of the global, external Poincaré isometry group of Minkowski
space. This procedure naturally leads to a gravitational theory with
torsion [ 60 ] , a so-called Einstein–Cartan theory such as
supergravity. Thus, it restores the property of the metric being a
dynamical object, which was dropped in establishing the contact to
experimental physics to begin with. Where the role of torsion is
concerned, I would like to suggest the point of view that it might be
inconsistent for a theory of quantum gravity to require vanishing
torsion on the level of the operators. In analogy to the Gupta–Bleuler
formalism of quantum electrodynamics, it could be possible that this
only is a consistent constraint on the physical states. If this
interpretation was adopted, supersymmetry could be interpreted as a
natural symmetry of the free @xmath gravity theory linking the torsion
degrees of freedom to the vielbein ones. This is my personal motivation
to study supergravity theories from a physical point of view.

I will conclude this chapter with an argument why it might be
interesting to discuss higher dimensional supergravities in order to
quantize the gravitational interaction in @xmath . Taking the
requirement of maximal supersymmetry as a guideline, one is led to
discuss supergravity in @xmath dimensions [ 10 ] . This theory will be
further investigated in chapter 4 .

### 2.1 A brief excursion to quantum electrodynamics

#### 2.1.1 Gauging a symmetry

A physical theory that is quite well understood, adequately tested and
verified by experiment is the classical Dirac theory that describes
fermions such as electrons or quarks in Minkowski space @xmath . As long
as the gravitational interaction can be neglected, it is expected that
the restriction of the manifold to flat Minkowski space is sufficient to
describe experiments.

Since the reason for discussing this topic is of mere motivational
nature, I will stick to the simpler case of electrons, which are
described by Graßmann valued, i.e. anticommuting, sections of the spin
bundle over the manifold @xmath . The corresponding dynamics are
provided by the action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Although there is no experimental evidence for a dimension @xmath , I
have kept the dimension @xmath arbitrary in order to emphasize that the
entire argumentation is independent of the value of @xmath . The @xmath
-matrices fulfill the standard Clifford property ( 6.2.1 ) and @xmath
denotes the Dirac conjugation, i.e. transposition, complex conjugation
and multiplication by @xmath . Due to the latter, the Lagrangian @xmath
( 2.1.1 ) is invariant under the following transformation of the spinors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . As the action on the coordinates is trivial, this symmetry
transformation is an internal symmetry according to the classification
of section 1.1.2 . Furthermore, as @xmath does not depend on @xmath , it
is a global symmetry transformation. Since the corresponding symmetry
Lie group @xmath is one-dimensional, I refrain from introducing basis
vectors @xmath ( 1.4.1 ) for the @xmath representation space @xmath
explicitly.

I have already mentioned in the formal introduction to symmetry groups
of section 1.1.2 that every global symmetry transformation can be
enhanced to a bigger symmetry by making it local. For the case of the
@xmath symmetry, this corresponds to allowing @xmath in ( 2.1.3 ) to
become @xmath -dependent. Following the definitions of section 1.1.3 ,
the physical theory will only be invariant under this enlarged symmetry
group, if the partial derivative @xmath is replaced by an equivariant
connection @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the action @xmath of the Lie algebra @xmath . The requirement of
equivariance under the local version of the symmetry ( 2.1.3 ) implies
the identity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where I have used the standard abbreviation from section 1.4 to denote
the transformed objects by a prime. Note that both the global and the
local symmetry group are internal by the definition from section 1.1.3 ,
because they do not act on the coordinates.

The process of transforming a global continuous symmetry into a local
one is known as gauging the global symmetry group. To complete it, all
partial derivatives @xmath in the Lagrangian @xmath ( 2.1.1 ) have to be
replaced by covariant ones @xmath . This implies that the gauged
Lagrangian contains the term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the Noether current being the term in the bracket. In deriving the
equations of motion from the gauged action, @xmath is then treated as an
independent physical field, the gauge field , that couples to the
fermions @xmath at least by the term ( 2.1.6 ). In order to relate this
gauged theory to experiments, other terms containing the gauge field
@xmath can be added to the Lagrangian. These terms have to be
constructed in such a way that the resulting theory is invariant under
the local version of the symmetry action ( 2.1.3 ). Therefore, these
terms may only implicitly depend on @xmath by the connection @xmath .
For an internal symmetry, this is equivalent to stating that all
admissible terms must contain the field strength tensor

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Since the Lagrangian is a scalar quantity, one has to build a scalar
from ( 2.1.7 ). One choice for a gauged Dirac Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where indices have been raised with the canonical isomorphism ( 1.4.8 )
provided by the Minkowski metric @xmath of @xmath . Before commenting on
the physical interpretation of this Lagrangian, I want to recapitulate
the recipe for gauging a global symmetry.

1.  Start with a given theory that describes physical objects.

2.  Observe that the corresponding action is invariant under a global
    continuous symmetry group transformation.

3.  Gauge the symmetry by introducing a connection @xmath .

4.  Construct a gauged Lagrangian in such a way that the gauged theory
    is invariant.

#### 2.1.2 Relating the gauged theory to physics

It is obvious from the recipe I provided in the previous section that
the resulting gauged Lagrangian is by no means unique. There are many
mathematically well-defined gauged Lagrangians that could lead to
physical observations. In order to find out which one indeed leads to a
physically interesting theory, one has to establish some correspondence
between an observable object in nature and the gauge field.

For the case of the Dirac theory, this relation is provided by
electromagnetism. The observable electric and magnetic field strengths
@xmath and @xmath are in one-to-one correspondence with the field
strengh @xmath ( 2.1.7 ) in @xmath . As electrons are charged objects,
this identification allows to test if there is a gauged Lagrangian that
corresponds to the interaction of electrons under the electromagnetic
force. It is one of the most exact results in physics that there is a
Lagrangian that fulfills this property, which is provided by the example
I have stated in ( 2.1.8 ).

The gauge field @xmath is usually referred to as the electromagnetic
potential. In contrast to the field strength @xmath , it is not in
one-to-one correspondence to observable objects, because it is only
defined modulo the gauge transformation ( 2.1.5 ). This allows to set
the exact part of the one-form @xmath to zero classically, which implies
@xmath . ² ² 2 In classical electrodynamics, this is called the Lorenz
gauge. This choice is not unique, however: the Coulomb gauge is a
prominent different gauge. This arbitrariness corresponds to the
so-called horizontal polarizations of a photon.

In the introduction to this chapter, I mentioned that I will discuss
quantum aspects at some point. The standard quantization procedure of
the Lagrangian ( 2.1.8 ) has led to remarkable agreement with
experiments [ 54 ] . Therefore, I want to highlight two facts of this
procedure.

1.   The objects to be quantized are the modes parametrizing the space
    of solutions of the free field equation for the gauge potential
    @xmath .

2.   It is inconsistent to impose @xmath as an operator relation. It has
    to be imposed on physical states.

The second point is referred to as the Gupta-Bleuler formalism in
quantum electrodynamics. To phrase this in other words: it appears to be
inconsistent for the quantization of a gauge theory to fix a symmetry
prior to quantization, even though this would not make a difference for
the classical theory. It is important to keep this in mind for the
discussion of gravity in the next section. I close the discussion of
quantum electrodynamics with three comments.

-   I want to emphasize that the definition ( 2.1.4 ) is not a
    restriction, because the explicit form of the Lagrangian ( 2.1.8 )
    was not fixed a priori. Only in this case, the relation ( 2.1.4 )
    should be referred to as minimal coupling. Any non-minimal coupling
    is hence equivalent to choosing a different Lagrangian ( 2.1.8 ) and
    keeping ( 2.1.4 ).

-   For all the other real finite dimensional symmetry Lie groups that
    follow the classification in the sections 1.2.2 and 1.2.4 , the
    procedure works in the same way, keeping in mind the results of
    section 1.4 for more complicated groups. As an example may serve the
    quarks @xmath of quantum chromodynamics that transform as
    non-trivial representations of @xmath ( 1.4.1 ). The connection has
    the form

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.9)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    with an action @xmath of the Lie algebra @xmath on the coefficients
    @xmath . The gluons of the strong interaction are set into
    correspondence to the @xmath valued gauge field @xmath .

-   If the gauge group @xmath is not simple, it is convenient to
    introduce gauge fields for all simple parts and ideals separately.
    This is no restriction, because the gauge field always takes values
    in the corresponding Lie algebra @xmath , which is a vector space
    and can hence be decomposed. This will be the case in the next
    section.

### 2.2 Gravity as a gauge theory

All physical theories that are related to observations are formulated in
flat Minkowski space @xmath , unless they involve the gravitational
interaction. This implies that they all have a common external symmetry
group, the Poincaré isometry group @xmath of flat Minkowski space @xmath
( 1.3.21 ). Since all physical fields are expected to couple to gravity,
it is hence natural to apply the gauging recipe provided in section
2.1.1 to the Poincaré group and try to relate the result to the
gravitational interaction afterwards again.

#### 2.2.1 Gauging an external symmetry

To perform the gauging process, I have to introduce a connection @xmath
that is equivariant under a local version of the Poincaré group action
on physical fields @xmath . Since the Poincaré algebra @xmath decomposes
into the Lorentz algebra @xmath and the algebra of translations @xmath ,
I introduce one gauge field @xmath for the Lorentz subgroup @xmath and
another one @xmath for the subgroup of translations. Recalling that the
generators of translations @xmath only act on the sections in their
representation @xmath as derivative operators ( 1.3.6 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

the natural way to introduce the gauge field @xmath is by defining a new
coordinate frame

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which has to transform in the vector representation @xmath of the
Lorentz group under local, invertible translations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

I want to stress that introducing the gauge field @xmath as an @xmath
representation @xmath only restricts the general form of the induced
action on @xmath to ( 2.2.3 ). The precise dependence of a possible,
induced Lorentz action @xmath on the translation @xmath ( 2.2.2 ) is not
fixed. In particular, the trivial action @xmath is not an inconsistent
choice at this stage.

Since @xmath describes a change of frames for the tangent space, it must
be non-degenerate as a matrix. It is conventional to denote the inverse
by switching the indices

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In this notation, the cotangent space is spanned by the dual frame of
one-forms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The reader may have noticed that the gauge field of translations @xmath
appears to be related to the vielbein frame that I have introduced in
section 1.4.3 and for which I have used the same symbol @xmath . Before
explaining why the gauge field of translations @xmath can indeed be
identified with the vielbein @xmath in the next section, I want to
address the other gauge field @xmath , the one of the Lorentz part
@xmath of the Poincaré group.

Where @xmath is concerned, it is important to recall from the discussion
of representations of Lie groups in section 1.2.5 that every physical
field @xmath in Minkowski space transforms as a Lorentz representation.
Therefore, I can apply the procedure of section 1.4 to separate the
@xmath -dependent field coefficients @xmath from the constant vectors
@xmath that span the representation space @xmath : the identity ( 1.4.3
)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the transformation ( 1.4.2 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.2.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

generated by the Lorentz generators @xmath ( 1.3.28a ) in the
appropriate representation @xmath , induces the @xmath action on the
coefficients

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In complete analogy to the case of an internal symmetry ( 2.1.9 ), the
connection @xmath that is equivariant under gauged Poincaré
transformations hence has the general form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The index @xmath indicates that I have used the dual frame ( 2.2.4 ),
because this is the one that transforms as a Lorentz tensor under a
gauged Poincaré action. The abstract generators @xmath of the Lorentz
algebra @xmath defined in ( 1.3.28a ) parametrize the Lorentz action
@xmath on the physical field @xmath . ³ ³ 3 Due to the convention to
distinguish the different frames of the (co)tangent space only by
different indices ( 2.2.1 ), it may be necessary to emphasize that the
names of the indices in ( 1.3.28a ) were completely arbitrary. The
important fact is that the antisymmetry of the generators @xmath is to
be understood with respect to the flat Minkowski metric @xmath
throughout this thesis, whatever symbols of the indices are used. If
different symbols for indices actually denote a different object, e.g.
the definition ( 2.2.1 ), I will always refer to the appropriate
definition. Furthermore, I want to remind the reader that the action of
the abstract generators @xmath on @xmath is defined by the
representation space spanned by the vectors @xmath ( 1.4.2 ) and not by
the vector field representation ( 1.3.14 ).

Thus, the transformation of the gauge fields @xmath and @xmath under a
local Lorentz transformation ( 2.2.1 ) is fixed to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath defined by ( 2.2.5 ) with the generators @xmath spanning the
vector representation @xmath of @xmath , similarly to the example in
section 1.4 .

Before completing the gauging procedure by constructing invariant
actions, I want to highlight a subtlety that is due to the semidirect
product structure of the Poincaré group: local Lorentz actions always
affect both gauge fields @xmath ( 2.2.8 ) and @xmath ( 2.2.9 ), whereas
local translations only affect @xmath , if the possible Lorentz action
@xmath in ( 2.2.3 ) is non-trivial @xmath . Otherwise, @xmath is
invariant under a local translation.

To construct invariant objects under gauged Poincaré transformations
however, the argumentation from section 2.1.1 still holds: these may
only implicitly depend on the gauge fields via the connection. Keeping
in mind the fact that the derivative operators transform as a
representation of the Lorentz group, a quick calculation ⁴ ⁴ 4 To
illustrate the procedure from section 1.4 , I have included the explicit
calculation in the appendix 6.2.2 . with the commutation relations (
1.3.15 ) shows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the two abbreviations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.11b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Recalling that the Lorentz algebra in @xmath dimensions @xmath is
parametrized by antisymmetric matrices ( 1.2.9 ) with respect to @xmath
, the Riemann tensor @xmath ( 2.2.11b ) prescribes an endomorphism of
the vector space @xmath . Its trace is the Ricci scalar

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Since external symmetries also act on the coordinates, the curvature
tensor @xmath ( 2.2.11b ) is not the only Lorentz tensor under local
Poincaré transformations that arises from the commutator @xmath ( 2.2.10
). The torsion tensor @xmath ( 2.2.11a ) can also be used to construct a
Lagrangian.

This is the last step in the gauging procedure, to construct a
Lagrangian from gauge invariant objects. One possibility is to add the
terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

to the matter Lagrangian @xmath , where @xmath symbolizes a term
constructed from the degrees of freedom of the tensor @xmath and a
global constant @xmath . A comment should be added concerning the
latter. In the case of internal symmetries, a global constant would not
change the theory, because it would drop out from the Lagrangian under a
variation of the action in order to get the equations of motion. The
reason for this is that no gauge field enters the measure of the action.

This is however inconsistent for gauging an external symmetry. In order
for the action to be invariant under local Poincaré transformations, the
measure has to be defined by the @xmath fold wedge product of the dual
form @xmath ( 2.2.4 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This implies that a global constant @xmath in the Lagrangian does lead
to non-trivial dynamics provided by the action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In the matter Lagrangian @xmath , all partial derivatives have to be
replaced by covariant ones @xmath ( 2.2.7 ) and all physical fields are
contracted in the Lorentz covariant frame that is induced by the
vielbein frame @xmath ( 1.4.9 ). The equations of motion can thus be
deduced by the standard variational principle. This completes the
gauging procedure of the Poincaré symmetry for any matter theory in
Minkowski space.

#### 2.2.2 Conventions and diffeomorphisms

I want to investigate the transformation under local, invertible
translations ( 2.2.2 ) a bit more closely. Comparing this transformation
with the action of a diffeomorphism @xmath with its associated vector
field @xmath ( 1.3.9 ) from section 1.3.2 , it is obvious that the two
transformations coincide in their common domain of validity

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This implies that the gauge field of translations @xmath is nothing but
the vielbein @xmath that solders the coordinate induced frame to the
vielbein frame @xmath as explained in section 1.4.3 : its transformation
under a diffeomorphism @xmath ( 1.4.3 ) is the same as the one of the
gauge field ( 2.2.3 ) with an up-to-now not specified action @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

A short look at ( 2.2.8 ) reveals that the coefficients of the
space-time metric @xmath in the coordinate induced frame ( 1.4.12 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

are invariant under local Lorentz transformations. Of course, @xmath
transforms as a symmetric @xmath -tensor under local translations or
diffeomorphisms, equivalently.

Next, I want to cast the definition of the Lorentz tensor @xmath (
2.2.11a ) in a more convenient form for the discussion in chapter 3 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the abbreviations ⁵ ⁵ 5 For this thesis, I use antisymmetrizations
of strength one, i.e. @xmath . The abbreviations @xmath and @xmath (
2.2.17 ) naturally arise in the context of non-linear realizations. I
will explain this in chapter 3 . after lowering the Lorentz index with
the Minkowski metric @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.17b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.17c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Having identified local translations with diffeomorphisms, the
connection @xmath ( 2.2.7 ) with local Poincaré equivariance is the
Levi–Civita connection of differential geometry modulo the torsion
tensor @xmath in disguise: it is usually referred to as the spin
connection with contorsion @xmath . The Levi–Civita connection acts in
the coordinate induced frame @xmath , whereas @xmath acts in the
vielbein frame @xmath ( 2.2.4 ). This implies that the requirement of a
covariantly constant metric @xmath is trivial, because in the vielbein
frame, any metric has the form of the constant Minkowski metric @xmath (
1.4.10 ) by the very definition of the frame, which is annihilated by
any Lorentz algebra valued connection @xmath .

Before linking the mathematical concept of gauging the Poincaré isometry
group to a physically observable theory, I want to emphasize again that
the relations ( 2.2.11a , 2.2.16 ) are mere definitions of the Lorentz
tensors @xmath and @xmath . In the sections 2.2.4 and 2.2.5 , I will
provide two examples for constraints that establish a relation between
the a priori independent gauge fields @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.2.3 General relativity

Einstein proposed in 1915 that any gravitational coupling to a test
particle can be interpreted as a force resulting from an appropriate
change of the coordinate frame. To phrase it differently, for any matter
system there is a coordinate system in which the gravitational coupling
is absent. Any test particle in this frame is referred to as a freely
falling particle. If the torsion tensor @xmath ( 2.2.11a ) is set to
zero, the equations of motion of the action @xmath ( 2.2.15 ) are called
the Einstein equations. This theory is referred to as General Relativity
and it has led to remarkable agreement with experiment.

An important point is that this theory can only be linked to
experiments, if a holonomic or integrable frame is used: these are
equivalent names for a frame @xmath that is induced by coordinates
@xmath . And experiments always measure distances in these coordinates.
This implies that the dynamical object of general relativity is the
metric @xmath ( 1.4.10 ). At every point @xmath , it is given by the
@xmath independent components of a symmetric matrix @xmath . Due to the
associativity of matrix multiplication, the gauge field @xmath of
translations can also be interpreted as a @xmath matrix. ⁶ ⁶ 6 A local
translation acts from the left and a local Lorentz rotation from the
right. Due to associativity, the two actions commute. Since there are no
constraints on this matrix @xmath , the degrees of freedom in equation (
1.4.12 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

do not match. I have already addressed this fact in section 1.4.3 : if
the eigenvalues of the vielbein matrix @xmath are positive, then to
every symmetric tensor @xmath there is a unique @xmath orbit @xmath of
vielbein matrices @xmath . ⁷ ⁷ 7 From the gauge theoretic point of view,
the requirement of positive eigenvalues of @xmath is natural due to the
concept of a perturbation expansion @xmath .

The important point is that the Lorentz group, whose orbit is @xmath ,
acts in the same way as the Lorentz subgroup of the Poincaré group that
I have gauged ( 2.2.8 ). This implies that it is consistent to fix any
representative @xmath in the equivalence class @xmath , which is
equivalent to fixing the matrix form of @xmath for all @xmath . Thus, a
local translation @xmath with @xmath induces a compensating local
Lorentz rotation @xmath such that the transformed matrix @xmath has the
same matrix form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is this particular constraint of a fixed representative in the
equivalence class @xmath that induces a diffeomorphism action on the
vielbein frame @xmath or in other words, that establishes the link from
the tangent bundle to the spin bundle. Hence, physical fields in the
spin bundle transform under a local translation of coordinates @xmath by
an induced Lorentz action @xmath , which is well-defined because
expectation values always are even in fermions as discussed in section
1.2.5 .

I will adopt this choice ( 2.2.3 ) for the induced Lorentz action of a
diffeomorphism in the sequel. I want to emphasize again that this is a
choice ⁸ ⁸ 8 I am grateful to T. Damour for pointing this out to me.
,but a canonical one, which is due to the following argument.

I have already mentioned in the sections 1.4.3 and 2.2.1 that it would
be consistent to fix the trivial Lorentz action @xmath for the induced
action on the vielbein ( 2.2.3 ). This would imply that the gauge field
@xmath would be invariant under a local translation or a diffeomorphism.
In order to construct an action that is invariant under diffeomorphisms
alone, it would hence be sufficient to consider any polynomial in @xmath
. Thus, even if I imposed vanishing torsion @xmath , the
Einstein–Hilbert action ( 2.2.13 with @xmath ) would not be the unique
possibility of an action @xmath with diffeomorphism invariance any more
that only depends on the vielbein matrix @xmath and is quadratic in
derivatives.

This non-uniqueness is not a contradiction to results from differential
geometry for one reason: the dependence of the action @xmath on @xmath
would not in general be in a way that allows to rephrase @xmath as a
function of the metric @xmath . Requiring this possibility is related to
the symmetry of @xmath or to local Lorentz invariance of the action,
equivalently. And as soon as the entire local Poincaré invariance is
required, the uniqueness property of the Einstein–Hilbert action is
restored, of course. Therefore, it is natural to require that every
diffeomorphism @xmath also induces a local Lorentz rotation @xmath ,
because then it is sufficient to demand diffeomorphism invariance of the
action alone to guarantee the uniqueness property of the
Einstein–Hilbert action.

#### 2.2.4 Geometric interpretation

I have shown that the equations of motion of any theory for which the
Poincaré symmetry is gauged, correspond to a theory that is invariant
under the group of diffeomorphisms @xmath , which is by definition the
group of general coordinate transformations.

Since I defined a local physical theory by its analytic equations of
motion, global properties like the topology of the underlying manifold
do not influence the dynamics. As the gauging procedure is performed in
local coordinates and as the Minkowski space is diffeomorphic to any
open set on any Lorentzian manifold @xmath of equal dimension, I am free
to start with an arbitrarily curved Lorentzian manifold and cover it
with a coordinate chart @xmath containing open sets @xmath . For each
open set @xmath , I can introduce basis vectors @xmath ( 1.1.4 ) that
span @xmath . In the coordinate induced basis of the cotangent space
@xmath , define a Minkowski metric @xmath with respect to which the
ungauged matter Lagrangian is specified. ⁹ ⁹ 9 The metric @xmath will of
course have a different shape in these coordinates in general. Locally,
@xmath is always well-defined, as I have already mentioned in the
context of the conformal isometries ( 1.3.22b ). I am grateful to
D. Giulini for pointing this out to me. Gauging the Poincaré isometry of
@xmath introduces gauge fields @xmath and @xmath . As the gauged
translations are equivalent to coordinate transformations, it is
consistent to identify the gauge field of translations @xmath with the
Lorentzian metric @xmath in this coordinate frame tantamount to the
relation ( 1.4.12 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This procedure can be performed for any open neighbourhood on @xmath and
for any coordinate chart @xmath . The resulting theory is invariant
under gauged translations or diffeomorphisms @xmath -equivalently. The
equations of motion of a local physical theory do not differ for
different manifolds or for different open sets on the same manifold.
They are universal in the sense that the abstract equations of motion
for @xmath are the same for all points @xmath , whereas the metric
tensor @xmath itself is different for different @xmath in general.

For every open set, I could in principle define a separate action in
some coordinate chart that provides these universal equations of motion
after a variation. This is what is actually meant by integrating over a
manifold @xmath . In this spirit, the gauged version of the matter
Lagrangian can be reinterpreted as a local physical theory on an
arbitrary Lorentzian manifold @xmath , whose universal equations of
motion can be derived from the following action in the standard way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This action is globally invariant under diffeomorphisms. Therefore,
General Relativity can also be interpreted as follows: given the concept
of a Lorentzian manifold, there is the arbitrariness which coordinate
frame should be chosen to describe a physical theory. General Relativity
claims that the physics is the same in every coordinate chart, i.e. the
equations of motion are universal. Hence, having fixed a coordinate
chart, the resulting equations of motion should be covariant under a
general coordinate transformation, or equivalently under any
diffeomorphism. The subtlety is that thus, non-local diffeomorphisms
@xmath would not be excluded. Hence, although I excluded them in section
1.3.1 , the resulting theory ( 2.2.19 ) is invariant under their action.

To conclude this section, I want to stress that the argumentation from
section 2.1.2 how to relate a gauge theory to physics applies to the
Poincaré group in the same way as to any internal symmetry group. In
particular, the gauged Lagrangian is not uniquely determined by the
gauging procedure. Hence, it is again the experiment that has to fix the
terms that have to be added to the matter Lagrangian, e.g. if higher
curvature corrections have to be added or not. At the moment,
experiments indicate that the Lagrangian @xmath ( 2.2.13 ) is the right
combination ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 A different possibility would e.g. be the
untruncated MacDowell–Mansouri action (12) in [ 42 ] , for which there
is however no experimental evidence so far. , in which @xmath is called
the cosmological constant and torsion vanishes @xmath . The latter
constraint is the first example of a consistent constraint that
establishes a relation between the independent gauge fields @xmath and
@xmath ( 2.2.16 ).

#### 2.2.5 Teleparallel interpretation

In his quest for a “unified field theory”, Einstein [ 16 ] has also used
a different interpretation of General Relativity that I briefly want to
sketch. If some coordinate system is fixed, given any metric on an open
set, it is always possible to choose the contorsion tensor @xmath (
2.2.16 ) in the vielbein frame such that the Lorentz connection @xmath
is trivial on this open set:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This implies that the curvature tensor @xmath ( 2.2.11b ) vanishes. This
statement is not preserved under a change of the coordinate chart or
equivalently a general transformation @xmath , but this is not important
for the evaluation of experiments, because these are evaluated in a
fixed coordinate chart anyway. Given some arbitrary metric, @xmath can
be chosen to be trivial ( 2.2.20 ) implying non-trivial torsion @xmath
in general. Replacing @xmath by @xmath in the Einstein-Hilbert action (
2.2.11b , 2.2.19 ), one obtains a well-defined action that gives rise to
the same dynamics as General Relativity in the geometric interpretation
that I discussed in the previous section. Thus, the constraint of
vanishing curvature is a well-defined procedure locally. It is the
second example of a constraint that links the gauge fields @xmath and
@xmath .

The crucial ingredient to make this interpretation viable is the fixing
of some coordinate system a priori. If the manifold @xmath is
parallelizable, i.e. there is a global coordinate frame, as is the case
for Lie groups and Minkowski space, this procedure is globally
well-defined, too. If this is not the case, it is impossible to satisfy
( 2.2.20 ) on the overlap of two coordinate charts, because ( 2.2.20 )
is not preserved under a change of the coordinate chart with @xmath
being a tensor in contrast to @xmath . This may be the reason why the
teleparallel interpretation of general relativity is often ignored in
the physics literature. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 A nice historical survey on this theory
can be found in [ 20 ] . Hehl has extended this idea in his work on
metric affine geometry (MAG), in which the affine group @xmath ( 1.3.18
) is gauged. More details and further references can be found in his
review [ 22 ] .

#### 2.2.6 An aspect of quantization

In this section, I would like to push the analogy to quantizing internal
gauge symmetries a bit further. To phrase the content of section 2.2.3
in a different way, physical observations do not exclude that in the
same way as electromagnetic interactions can be interpreted as being
mediated by a non-trivial gauge field @xmath , gravitational
interactions can be interpreted as being mediated by the non-trivial
gauge fields @xmath of the Poincaré group. ¹² ¹² 12 Non-triviality for
the case of @xmath obviously means that the matrix @xmath is different
from the identity matrix.

I have already mentioned at the end of section 2.2.4 that the model that
is usually used to explain present observations assumes vanishing
torsion @xmath and hence explains the gravitational interaction by a
non-vanishing curvature of the universe. The teleparallel interpretation
shows however that it is locally possible to choose a torsion such that
the curvature vanishes without affecting the dynamics of general
relativity. At least locally, there appears to be a symmetry linking the
torsion to the curvature without affecting the dynamics. This
arbitrariness is usually fixed by imposing a constraint on the
connection @xmath ( 2.2.7 ) such that the torsion tensor @xmath (
2.2.11a ) vanishes, what immediately constrains the two gauge fields
@xmath and @xmath in the standard way ( 2.2.16 ) such that all
independent degrees of freedom of @xmath are eliminated.

Next, recall from the discussion of quantizing the electromagnetic
interaction in section 2.1.2 that it was the potential @xmath of the
force that was quantized. This was however only determined up to a gauge
symmetry. The fixing of this symmetry led to the constraint @xmath .
Finally, the argumentation showed that this constraint on the gauge
field must be imposed on the physical states after having performed the
quantization process, and not prior to it. Hence, if there was any
symmetry relating the torsion to the vielbein, it could as well turn out
to be inconsistent to impose vanishing torsion prior to quantization.

Therefore, I do not see any mathematical argument why one should not
quantize the entire Einstein-Cartan theory, which is described by
gauging the Poincaré group without the constraint of vanishing torsion
being fixed on the operator level. For the physical states however, this
constraint could be enforced in the same way as it is the case for the
Lorenz gauge in quantum electrodynamics (Gupta-Bleuler formalism). ¹³ ¹³
13 This analogy is not compelling, of course. Fixing the Lorenz gauge
@xmath in electrodynamics breaks the local @xmath gauge symmetry,
whereas fixing the torsion @xmath does not break the local Poincaré
symmetry. Only the additional symmetry linking the torsion to the
vielbein is broken.

It turns out that in @xmath , a symmetry indeed exists that relates the
torsion to the metric. Since I have restricted the class of manifolds
under consideration to manifolds with vanishing first and second
Stiefel–Whitney class [ 41 , 45 ] , it is possible to define a Graßmann
valued section @xmath of the tensor product of the cotangent bundle with
the spin bundle. By the following identification, the field @xmath
contains degrees of freedom of the torsion tensor

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The coefficients @xmath of the section @xmath are denoted with respect
to the vielbein frame ( 2.2.4 ) of the cotangent space. The matrices
@xmath are representations of the Clifford algebra ( 6.2.1 ). In @xmath
, there is a Majorana representation of the Clifford algebra. Hence, the
matrices @xmath are real objects, which is the reason why no complex
conjugation is involved in the definition ( 2.2.21 ). The spinor indices
of @xmath are kept implicit as in section 2.1.1 .

Since the torsion @xmath transforms as a Lorentz tensor under local
Poincaré transformations, the section @xmath also transforms as a tensor
modulo @xmath , following the discussion from section 1.2.5 . Hence any
Lorentz scalar that is bilinear in @xmath , is invariant under the
diffeomorphism group @xmath .

I want to construct a Lorentz scalar @xmath from the torsion degrees of
freedom encoded in @xmath . The standard choice is a Rarita–Schwinger
term [ 56 ] that can be added to the Einstein–Hilbert action ( 2.2.13 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The covariant derivative @xmath is the connection defined in ( 2.2.7 )
with the contorsion tensor @xmath ( 2.2.17c ). ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 In
contradistinction to the original version of this theory in [ 17 ] ,
@xmath are real matrices and @xmath is the standard connection with
contorsion acting on the physical field @xmath as defined in section 1.4
. The substitution @xmath and @xmath would restore the original
convention used in [ 17 ] that was motivated from quantum field theory.

The physical theory corresponding to the Lagrangian @xmath ( 2.2.13 )
with @xmath possesses a symmetry linking the vielbein @xmath to torsion.
This is provided by the supersymmetry variation @xmath [ 17 ] that
relates solutions @xmath and @xmath of the equations of motion by a
Graßmann valued spinor @xmath parametrizing the symmetry

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.23a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.23b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The infinitesimal variation @xmath defines a physical symmetry in the
sense of section 1.1.3 , because it provides a Lie algebraic structure.
A short calculation shows that the commutator of two supersymmetry
variations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

produces a third supersymmetry variation @xmath , a diffeomorphism
@xmath and a local Lorentz action @xmath . The parameters of the three
variations @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the same for both solutions
@xmath and @xmath of the equations of motion, but they explicitly
contain the fields @xmath and @xmath [ 17 ] . In other words, this
algebra does not have structure constants like a finite dimensional Lie
algebra. It has structure functions depending on the fields @xmath it
acts on. Therefore, it is not a gauged version of a global symmetry
algebra or superalgebra.

Chapter 4 will deal with a gravitational theory that is defined by
requiring maximal supersymmetry. Before presenting further details on
this theory in section 2.3 , I want to close this part with some
comments.

-   It is obvious from the definition of the gravitino @xmath ( 2.2.21 )
    that not all @xmath degrees of freedom of the torsion tensor @xmath
    can be covered by the @xmath degrees of freedom of @xmath . However,
    the vielbein @xmath in @xmath also has @xmath degrees of freedom
    prior to imposing the equations of motion and fixing the
    representative in the Lorentz orbit @xmath . Hence, supersymmetry
    appears to be the maximal symmetry that can be introduced to link
    the torsion tensor @xmath to the vielbein @xmath . ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 The
    degrees of freedom after imposing the equations of motion and fixing
    the gauges also coincide, of course, which follows from the closure
    of the supersymmetry algebra on the solutions @xmath and @xmath of
    the equations of motion.

-   The @xmath @xmath supergravity [ 17 ] provided by the Lagrangian
    @xmath ( 2.2.13 ) with ( 2.2.21 , 2.2.22 ) and @xmath possibly
    describes the free gravitational interaction that should be
    quantized. For the construction of propagators in such a quantum
    gravity, it is not important if a matter coupling to the system or
    @xmath breaks the supersymmetry or not. This is in analogy to the
    conformal symmetry of the free Maxwell system that is quantized in
    quantum electrodynamics: the vertices break the conformal symmetry
    due to the coupling to massive Dirac fermions, but not the
    propagators of the Maxwell field. I want to emphasize that in the
    present construction, neither the matter system has to be
    supersymmetric as suggested in [ 17 ] , nor that the Lorentzian
    manifold is elevated to some supermanifold. This would lead to a
    different theory [ 31 , 52 ] .

-   Since the connection @xmath ( 2.2.7 ) is Poincaré algebra valued and
    not @xmath valued, I refrain from calling the diffeomorphism group
    @xmath the gauge group of general relativity. This distinction is
    important for the discussion of Goldstone bosons in the context of
    non-linear realizations in section 3.3.4 , because with this
    interpretation, there only are finitely many Goldstone bosons in
    general relativity [ 3 ] , and not infinitely many [ 4 ] .

-   In the introduction to this chapter, I have already mentioned that
    the description of a physical force as a gauge theory offers the
    possibility to use the concept of a perturbation expansion in a
    coupling constant in its domain of validity to compare to
    experiments. For the gravitational interaction, the standard
    approach is an expansion of the gauge fields @xmath about the
    trivial case @xmath . Due to the semisimplicity of the Poincaré
    group, there is only one coupling constant for both gauge fields [ 9
    ] .

#### 2.2.7 Comments on the literature

Einstein orginally phrased General Relativity in the coordinate induced
frame @xmath , and not in the one induced by the repère mobile or
vielbein @xmath ( 1.4.10 ). The first interpretation of the
gravitational interaction as a gauge group is due to Utiyama [ 61 ] in
1954, who only gauged the Lorentz subgroup of the Poincaré group: in
order to obtain the dynamics of General Relativity he had to impose the
symmetry of the Christoffel symbols by hand. Sciama and Kibble [ 60 ]
gauged the entire Poincaré group in 1961, which yields an
Einstein-Cartan theory. ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 In 1976, Cho [ 9 ] claimed to have
discovered an alternative approach to describe General Relativity as a
gauge theory, by not identifying the translation operator with the
derivative operator a priori and gauging the subgroup of translations
alone. However, he requires the resulting theory to be independent of
the particular coordinate frame chosen. This becomes clearer in Hehl’s
review [ 22 ] , where it is referred to as “soft Lorentz covariance”. In
both cases, this is an additional constraint that is not provided by the
gauge theory, as long as not the entire Poincaré group is gauged.
However, I am not aware of any proposal in the literature that
elaborates a possibility to link the gauge fields @xmath and @xmath of
the two subgroups by a (super)symmetry relation.

### 2.3 Maximal supergravity

#### 2.3.1 Quantization, higher dimensions and more supersymmetry

In section 2.2.6 , I have argued that supersymmetry may be interesting
for the quantization of the gravitational interaction in @xmath
dimensions: as soon as one local coordinate system is fixed, there is a
symmetry transformation in these coordinates that generates torsion from
the metric. Hence, it is possible that there is a symmetry action that
maps curvature to torsion and vice versa in the fixed coordinate system.
Global aspects of the manifold are by definition not important for the
local physical theory which is why a restriction to parallizable
manifolds is not compulsory. As for the discussion of quantum
electrodynamics from section 2.1.2 , it is the experiment that will have
to decide if this interpretation with non-trivial torsion degrees of
freedom is relevant for a quantum theory of gravity or not.

In order to make contact to experiments, it looks promising to follow
the analogy to quantum electrodynamics, i.e. to compute expectation
values of a quantum theory of gravity by evaluating Feynman graphs.
These consist of vertices and propagators. I want to focus on the
propagators. In quantum electrodynamics, these correspond to the
solutions in the zero coupling limit, which is the free field theory,
described by the wave equation whose space of solutions is parametrized
by the Fourier decomposition.

In the case of gravity, the free field theory is described by the
Einstein equation, for which a parametrization of the space of solutions
is problematic. ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 Of course, one could formally introduce an
expansion @xmath and solve the wave equation for @xmath . This is
referred to as a gravitational wave. It would define a propagator for
the linearized theory, and the infinitely many terms of higher
polynomial order in @xmath could then be considered as interaction
terms. This is the way quantum chromodynamics is handled, but there are
only finitely many interaction terms in this case. One reason for this
is that these differential equations are weakly hyperbolic, which is
related to the diffeomorphism invariance of the theory.

The problem one is confronted with is similar to the one Perelman solved
in proving the Poincaré conjecture [ 53 ] . For this, Hamilton’s concept
of a Ricci flow was of crucial importance. I will not review it at this
point, but I content myself with stating that this is a one parameter
family of @xmath -dimensional metrics fulfilling a weakly parabolic
differential equation in @xmath dimensions. It is possible to establish
a correspondence between @xmath -dimensional diffeomorphisms and @xmath
-dimensional ones fulfilling a partial differential equation. This trick
of a lift to a higher dimension allows to modify the dynamics to be
strictly parabolic and hence solvable by introducing an additional
scalar field @xmath . ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 I am grateful to G. Huisken for
explaining the details.

Although Perelman only discussed particular diffeomorphisms in @xmath
and parabolic systems, the technical procedure could still be
interesting for the present discussion. Perelman mentioned in [ 53 ]
that the scalar field @xmath exactly is the dilaton used in string
theories. From a gravitational point of view, this results from a
reduction of a higher dimensional pure gravity theory on a torus à la
Kaluza–Klein. Thus, the scalar field can be interpreted as a part of a
metric in a higher dimensional space. I would like to suggest that this
procedure of “gauge fixing the diffeomorphism symmetry” by adding more
dimensions and thus more fields could also work for the Einstein
equation in @xmath , to transform them into strictly hyperbolic
equations. This programme does of course not tell in which way the
higher dimensional theory should be stated.

In this thesis, supersymmetry will serve as a guideline to construct a
candidate for such a theory. It is well known that the maximal
supergravity theory in @xmath has @xmath linearly independent
supersymmetry variations. These link additional bosonic and fermionic
degrees of freedom to the vielbein @xmath and the gravitino @xmath from
section 2.2.6 . That @xmath is indeed the maximal number of
supersymmetries results from a perturbative argument: given a theory
with more than @xmath supersymmetries in @xmath , consider the
linearized theory about Minkowksi background and constant transformation
parameter @xmath . In this setting, the supersymmetry algebra ( 2.2.24 )
reduces to the Super-Poincaré algebra with well-defined, spin valued
supercharges @xmath that result from splitting the constant parameter
@xmath from the supersymmetry variation @xmath ( 2.2.23 ) in complete
analogy to extracting the generators @xmath from the vector field in (
1.3.14 ). Hence, all fields of this theory build up a supermultiplet of
this superalgebra and for @xmath , the highest spin of the fields in
this supermultiplet is greater than @xmath . For this linearized theory,
the argumentation from [ 46 ] is valid that rules out supergravity
theories with @xmath . ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 I want to emphasize that this concept of
a Super-Poincaré algebra fails as soon as the restriction to the
linearized limit is lifted, which is obvious from equation ( 2.2.24 ).
Strictly speaking, supercharges @xmath as operators mapping fields to
fields are ill-defined in the non-linear domain of supergravity
theories.

This is my personal motivation for studying @xmath @xmath supergravity
and its possible relation to the gravitational interaction in @xmath
dimensions. The additional fields of @xmath supergravity would hence be
interpreted as some kind of Lagrangian multiplyers of the diffeomorphism
symmetry and not as measurable excitations. In this context, it is also
interesting to observe that @xmath supergravity is much better behaved
in a perturbation expansion than was originally expected and may even be
ultraviolet finite in perturbation theory [ 2 ] .

I have suggested that adding more dimensions might help to improve the
analytic behaviour of the Einstein equation in analogy to the discussion
of the Ricci flow. The additional bosonic fields would follow from a
higher dimensional vielbein by a reduction à la Kaluza–Klein. I will
partly prove in chapter 4 that this is indeed the case for @xmath @xmath
supergravity: the bosonic fields can be combined in a @xmath
-dimensional vielbein, if the transition functions @xmath are restricted
in a quite peculiar way. An intermediate step towards this goal is
provided by @xmath @xmath supergravity [ 10 ] that I will discuss next.

#### 2.3.2 Supergravity in @xmath

A result of major importance for this thesis is due to Cremmer, Julia
and Scherk [ 10 ] . They have shown that all solutions of @xmath @xmath
supergravity are the solutions of @xmath @xmath supergravity with @xmath
commuting Killing vectors. This is equivalent to stating that @xmath
@xmath can be constructed from @xmath @xmath by a reduction à la
Kaluza–Klein on a @xmath -dimensional hypertorus @xmath . This does not
falsify my claim that it can also be derived from a @xmath -dimensional
theory, because @xmath supergravity has an additional bosonic degree of
freedom apart from the vielbein @xmath , a three-form potential @xmath
which is only defined modulo the gauge transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with an arbitrary two-form @xmath . I am using the same letter @xmath as
for the electromagnetic potential, because the gauge transformation is
similar ( 2.1.5 ) and as the equations of motion only depend on the
corresponding field strength

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In contrast to the electromagnetic potential @xmath , there is no
obvious gauge group related to this transformation. In this thesis, I
will follow West’s argumentation [ 64 ] that this transformation should
be considered on the same footing as the diffeomorphism symmetry of the
vielbein. In chapter 4 , I will prove that the supersymmetry variation
is consistent with this interpretation for a @xmath -dimensional
subsector of the bosonic degrees of freedom. This suggests that all the
degrees of freedom of the vielbein in @xmath and of the three-form
potential @xmath exactly parametrize a vielbein in @xmath dimensions in
a restricted geometry, i.e. without any necessity to introduce new
bosonic degrees of freedom.

The guideline how to restrict the sixty-dimensional geometry is provided
by the hidden symmetries of @xmath @xmath supergravity. These are the
global symmetries @xmath of the theory, if the latter is reduced à la
Kaluza–Klein on a hypertorus @xmath for @xmath [ 34 , 35 , 48 ] . For
this thesis, I focus on @xmath . After stating the action in the
following section, I will briefly review the hidden symmetries in lower
dimensions and their remnants in @xmath , in particular the @xmath
-covariant formulation of @xmath supergravity à la de Wit–Nicolai [ 68 ]
, which will serve as the starting point for the final result of this
thesis, the @xmath -covariant supersymmetry variation presented in
chapter 4 .

#### 2.3.3 The @xmath supergravity action

As far as the conventions are concerned, I follow Cremmer, Julia and
Scherk [ 10 ] . The only difference to their original paper is that I
use the signature @xmath for the eleven-dimensional theory. This implies
that I can choose a Majorana representation of the Clifford algebra (
6.2.1 ) with real matrices @xmath . To simplify the notation, I have
absorbed the gravitational constant @xmath in the fields as suggested in
[ 11 ] .

Since higher order terms in fermions will not be discussed in the sequel
of this thesis, I refrain from stating them explicitly. In particular,
the torsion terms that are quadratic in fermions will be neglected.
Therefore, the covariant derivative @xmath is the standard Levi–Civita
connection. In the vielbein frame ( 2.2.1 ) the action hence has the
form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3.3)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The evaluation of the action of the Levi–Civita connection @xmath (
2.2.16 ) on the Graßmann valued section @xmath of the tensor product of
tangent and spin bundle follows the conventions from section 1.4 . ²⁰ ²⁰
20 I want to emphasize that @xmath differs from the “covariant
derivative” @xmath in [ 10 ] only by the torsion tensor that is of
higher order in fermions and hence neglected. In contrast to the @xmath
-dimensional theory ( 2.2.22 ), I keep the more conventional form of the
supergravity action with @xmath instead of @xmath . The Einstein–Hilbert
term @xmath follows the definition ( 2.2.11b , 2.2.12 ) with the @xmath
-dimensional vielbein @xmath . I have used the latter to transform the
three-form potential @xmath and its corresponding field strength @xmath
( 2.3.2 ) into the vielbein frame. As before, I am using the convention
to distinguish the different frames of the (co)tangent space by
different names for the indices: @xmath correspond to the coordinate
induced frame @xmath and @xmath to the vielbein frame @xmath ( 2.2.4 ).
Finally, the totally symmetric @xmath -tensor is normalized to @xmath .

The independent physical fields of @xmath supergravity are the vielbein
@xmath , the gravitino @xmath with implicit spin indices and the
three-form potential @xmath . These are linked by the supersymmetry
variations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.4b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.4c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The equations of motion of this theory follow from a variation of the
action @xmath ( 2.3.3 ) in the standard way. For this thesis, only the
equation of the three-form potential @xmath to zeroth order in fermions
will be important:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In a first order formalism, it is equivalent [ 64 ] to the two equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with an arbitrary normalization constant @xmath of the six-form
potential @xmath . It is standard to fix @xmath . The dual six-form
potential @xmath obviously is only defined up to an arbitrary five-form
@xmath in complete analogy to the three-form potential @xmath ( 2.3.1 ).
@xmath will be a crucial ingredient for the exceptional geometry of
chapter 4 .

Before reviewing hidden symmetries in the next section, I want to
mention that @xmath supergravity is invariant under the gauge
transformation ( 2.3.1 ) of the three-form potential. Since a gauge
transformation of the action @xmath ( 2.3.3 ) results in a total
derivative term, the equations of motion are invariant under this
symmetry transformation, i.e. they only implicitly depend on @xmath
through its gauge invariant field strength @xmath ( 2.3.2 ).

#### 2.3.4 Hidden symmetries

I have already mentioned that the guideline how to restrict the @xmath
-dimensional geometry is provided by the hidden symmetries of @xmath
@xmath supergravity that are global internal symmetries. They result
from a reduction à la Kaluza–Klein on a flat spacelike hypertorus @xmath
. I want to sketch briefly that this is equivalent to discussing the
subspace of solutions of @xmath supergravity with @xmath independent
commuting spacelike Killing vectors.

A reduction à la Kaluza–Klein on a flat spacelike hypertorus @xmath is
based on the statement that @xmath endowed with the flat Euclidean
metric @xmath can be embedded in the @xmath -dimensional Lorentzian
manifold @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

using the same coordinate chart on both sides. Since I do not discuss
non-local aspects in this thesis, it is sufficient to show that the
tangent space @xmath for every @xmath allows for this embedding, because
locally, the manifold is diffeomorphic to the tangent space. Next recall
from the sections 1.3.3 and 1.4.3 that the metric is flat if and only if
the coordinate induced frame and the vielbein frame coincide and that
this is the case if the coordinate induced basis vectors of the tangent
space are independent Killing vectors. As coordinate induced basis
vectors commute by definition, the presence of @xmath independent
commuting spacelike Killing vectors restricts the possible metrics
@xmath to the ones that allow for this embedding ( 2.3.6 ), which proves
the equivalence.∎

For a gravitational theory, the arbitrariness of the coordinate chart is
encoded in the diffeomorphism symmetry. Having fixed a coordinate chart,
the internal symmetry @xmath links one solution of the theory to another
one. Given one solution that fulfills the constraint ( 2.3.6 ), it is
obvious that a general diffeomorphism would not map it to another one
that fulfills ( 2.3.6 ). Therefore, only a subgroup of @xmath is a
symmetry of the space of solutions of @xmath supergravity with @xmath
commuting Killing vectors.

The interpretation with @xmath commuting Killing vectors shows that the
group of general coordinate transformations is restricted to @xmath : in
order to preserve the property of commutativity of Killing vector
fields, the Jacobian matrix @xmath of the diffeomorphism @xmath must be
constant. And I have shown in the sections 1.3.2 and 1.3.3 that this is
the characterizing property of the affine group @xmath ( 1.3.18 ).

The symmetry group @xmath hence is the internal symmetry of the space of
solutions of @xmath supergravity with @xmath independent commuting
Killing spinors. Performing a Fourier expansion in the coordinates of
the hypertorus @xmath and neglecting all non-trivial modes is known as a
compactification on @xmath . This procedure transforms the external
symmetry group @xmath of an @xmath -dimensional theory into an external
part @xmath and a global internal part @xmath of an @xmath -dimensional
theory. In accordance with the definitions of global internal symmetries
from section 1.1.2 , @xmath maps solutions to solutions without
affecting the coordinates. It is however obvious from the constraint (
2.3.6 ) that not all affine linear diffeomorphisms @xmath map a given
solution to a different one, because the isometry subgroup @xmath of
@xmath will not affect a given solution. This implies that the @xmath
scalars of the @xmath -dimensional theory resulting from the
eleven-dimensional metric, are parametrized by the coset

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For @xmath supergravity, this global symmetry @xmath is enlarged by the
degrees of freedom of the three-form potential @xmath to @xmath . ²¹ ²¹
21 For @xmath , the @xmath -dimensional @xmath tensor is used to combine
the bosonic degrees of freedom in the appropriate representation of
@xmath . The fermions transform as representations of the universal
cover of the maximal compact subgroup @xmath that I have introduced in
the sections 1.2.4 and 1.2.5 . In the following table, I have listed the
global symmetry groups @xmath , their maximal compact subgroups and the
dimension of the cosets parametrizing the @xmath scalars of the @xmath
-dimensional theories [ 34 , 35 , 48 ] . ²² ²² 22 Note in particular
that @xmath is not diffeomorphic to @xmath . Further information on
these topics can be found in [ 8 , 49 , 50 , 55 , 69 ] .

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Reduction of @xmath @xmath supergravity on @xmath                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|   --                                                                  |
| ------ ------------------------ ------------------------- ----------- |
|                                                                       |
| @xmath   Hidden symmetry @xmath   Compact subgroup @xmath   Dimension |
|   @xmath   @xmath                   @xmath                    @xmath  |
|   @xmath   @xmath                   @xmath                    @xmath  |
|   @xmath   @xmath                   @xmath                    @xmath  |
|   @xmath   @xmath                   @xmath                    @xmath  |
|   @xmath   @xmath                   @xmath                    @xmath  |
|   @xmath   @xmath                   @xmath                    @xmath  |
|   @xmath   @xmath                   @xmath                    @xmath  |
|   @xmath   @xmath                   @xmath                    @xmath  |
|   @xmath   @xmath                   @xmath                    @xmath  |
|   --                                                                  |
| ------ ------------------------ ------------------------- ----------- |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

I want to conclude this review with the remark that searching for higher
dimensional supergravity theories that give rise to a coset model for a
given semi-simple group @xmath is called group-disintegration or
oxidation, because it is the inverse process to reduction [ 12 , 34 , 37
] . @xmath supergravity is commonly referred to as the “oxidation end
point” of @xmath @xmath supergravity which is due to the following
argument. If the diffeomorphism symmetry @xmath is not restricted, the
parameter @xmath of the supersymmetry variation transforms as a spin
representation of @xmath . For maximal supergravity with @xmath real,
four component spinors in @xmath this leads to the restriction @xmath ,
because for any higher @xmath , the dimension of the irreducible spin
representation would be greater than @xmath . However, this restriction
can be circumvented if the diffeomorphism symmetry @xmath is restricted
in such a way that the induced action is only by a proper subgroup of
@xmath . Chapter 4 will provide an example with @xmath .

#### 2.3.5 Hidden symmetries in @xmath

It is still an up to date question in string theory to look for
consistent compactifications of @xmath supergravity to @xmath physical
dimensions. However, not on all manifolds with the correct dimensions,
compactifications are admissible [ 55 ] . Hence, @xmath supergravity
must possess some information about preferred manifolds on which a
compactification is possible. In proving the consistency of a
compactification on the sphere @xmath , de Wit and Nicolai showed that
there is indeed some remnant of a hidden symmetry in the
non-compactified theory:

@xmath supergravity has a local @xmath -symmetry [ 68 ] .

Guided by the @xmath gauged supergravity [ 11 ] , their ansatz reduced
the local Lorentz symmetry @xmath to @xmath . Then, in order to discuss
a linear problem, they focussed on the supersymmetry variations. They
were able to write these in a @xmath -covariant form in @xmath by
combining the degrees of freedom of the vielbein @xmath and the
three-form potential @xmath into @xmath representations with an even
number of @xmath indices. Finally, they proved that this covariance can
be extended to the equations of motion of @xmath supergravity. ²³ ²³ 23
There is no similar statement for @xmath up to now, because Nicolai did
not show the final step in [ 47 ] , which is the covariance of the
equations of motion under @xmath . There is no similar result for @xmath
either, whereas @xmath -covariance trivially follows from @xmath [ 69 ]
.

The @xmath -covariance serves as the starting point for my investigation
of a @xmath -dimensional exceptional geometry in chapter 4 . Focussing
on the bosons, the covariance group of the equations of motion of @xmath
supergravity is @xmath , which I have shown in section 1.2.5 to be the
maximal compact subgroup of @xmath . This nourishes the idea that a
theory that is invariant under an @xmath action on the coordinates may
have the same field content as @xmath supergravity. Representation
theory then fixes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the lowest possible dimension in which such a theory can be defined.
In chapter 4 , I will explicitly show that for a @xmath -dimensional
subsector of @xmath supergravity, the supersymmetry variations ( 2.3.4 )
can be consistently lifted to relations in @xmath dimensions, whose
reduction to @xmath dimensions does not introduce additional degrees of
freedom and that are strongly constrained by requiring an external
@xmath -symmetry. In constructing this theory, I will use the concept of
non-linear realizations, which will be the topic of the next chapter.

## Chapter 3 Non-linear realizations

The aim of this thesis is to construct a sixty-dimensional exceptional
geometry whose @xmath -dimensional vielbein exactly comprises the
bosonic fields of @xmath @xmath supergravity. The exceptional geometry
corresponds to the restriction of the symmetry group @xmath to a
subgroup that respects the fact that a @xmath -dimensional subvielbein
@xmath of the @xmath -dimensional vielbein is an @xmath matrix. The main
result of chapter 4 will be that it is possible to construct @xmath
-covariant supersymmetry variations that are the ones of @xmath
supergravity ( 2.3.4 ) after a compactification of @xmath dimensions
without adding further bosonic or fermionic fields, if the bosonic
degrees of freedom are restricted to the ones described by the
subvielbein @xmath and if only the corresponding @xmath dimensions are
taken into account.

The crucial ingredient for this to be consistent at all is the
restriction of the group of general coordinate transformations @xmath to
a subgroup. An adequate description of this procedure is provided by the
theory of non-linear realizations, which I briefly want to motivate.

I have shown in chapter 2 that the connection @xmath is the basic
building block of a gravitational theory. In particular, @xmath is
sufficient to construct the Lagrangian @xmath ( 2.2.13 ) of general
relativity. A result of section 2.2.1 was that considering the vielbein
@xmath as a gauge field implies that the Lagrangian may only depend on
it through gauge covariant Lorentz tensors like torsion or curvature (
2.2.11 ). A corollary to this statement is that there does not exist a
tensor that is of first order in derivatives and that only depends on
the vielbein degrees of freedom, if full @xmath -invariance for a theory
is required. This is in particular true for a torsion tensor. Hence, a
connection @xmath with @xmath -equivariance is uniquely determined to be
the Levi–Civita connection ( 2.2.16 ) modulo a torsion tensor that
cannot be linear in derivatives, if it exclusively depends on vielbein
degrees of freedom - a statement that I will prove explicitly in this
chapter.

Keeping in mind the necessity for the exceptional geometry to restrict
the diffeomorphism group @xmath to a subgroup, this chapter will deal
with the implications of such a restriction to this uniqueness result
for the connection @xmath .

I will start by constructing the general connection @xmath with
equivariance under the affine subgroup @xmath ( 1.3.18 ) of the
diffeomorphism group @xmath . In section 3.2 , I will prove that
requiring simultaneous equivariance under the abelian group @xmath of
conformal diffeomorphisms ( 1.3.26 ) restores the uniqueness result for
the connection @xmath . This has become known as the procedure of
Borisov & Ogievetsky [ 3 ] .

A guideline for the proof is provided by Ogievetsky’s theorem that I
have quoted in section 1.3.4 : any analytic vector field @xmath is in
the closure of the vector space generated by the conformal Killing
vector field of Minkowski space @xmath ( 1.3.22b ), the affine vector
field @xmath ( 1.3.11 ) and multiple commutators thereof.

I will conclude this chapter with highlighting the differences of my
presentation to the orginal one by Borisov and Ogievetsky [ 3 ] and to
related work in the literature [ 29 , 39 , 58 ] . I will also explain
why I do not share their original motivation to consider the
gravitational interaction on the same footing as internal symmetries in
quantum field theory, to quote Ogievetsky [ 51 ] :
“In deep analogy to the fact that pions are connected with non-linear
realizations of the dynamical chiral @xmath symmetry (see, e.g. [ 63 ] )
gravity field proves to be connected with common non-linear realizations
of the dynamical conformal and affine symmetries [ 29 ] .”

### 3.1 Connections with affine linear equivariance

In section 1.3.3 , I have defined the Poincaré group by the subgroup of
@xmath that preserves the metric tensor @xmath ( 1.3.3 ). This is the
coordinate invariant, geometric approach to describe subgroups of
diffeomorphisms which will be used to construct the exceptional geometry
in chapter 4 .

Since I am only interested in local properties of a theory in this
thesis, it was sufficient to focus on an arbitrary simply connected open
subset @xmath ( 1.3.1 ) of the manifold. This allowed to fix a
coordinate chart @xmath and basis vectors @xmath ( 1.1.4 ) in section
1.3.1 . In this setting, the group of general coordinate transformations
was further restricted to the analytic diffeomorphisms @xmath that form
a Lie group. Its corresponding Lie algebra is the space of vector fields
@xmath ( 1.3.4 ). A subgroup of diffeomorphisms can hence also be
defined by a subalgebra that is constructed from particular vector
fields. It is this algebraic approach that I have used to define the
affine linear diffeomorphisms in section 1.3.3 and that will be used in
this chapter. ¹ ¹ 1 Due to the Lie property, every subgroup of @xmath
can be defined by the algebraic approach, which is not obvious for the
geometric approach.

#### 3.1.1 Setup

The affine group @xmath consists of the diffeomorphisms @xmath that
correspond to the affine linear vector field @xmath ( 1.3.11 ) by the
exponential map ( 1.3.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Having fixed a coordinate chart, the matrix @xmath has the same form for
all points @xmath in the open set @xmath . ² ² 2 Changing the coordinate
chart alters this property of course, but for any coordinate chart there
exist diffeomorphisms in @xmath that have this form. This implies that
the Jacobian matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

is constant for all @xmath in the domain of validity of the coordinate
chart @xmath . Hence, the induced action of an affine linear
diffeomorphism @xmath on the vielbein @xmath has the form ( 2.2.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The matrix @xmath is the compensating local Lorentz rotation that is
needed to restore the arbitrary gauge fixing chosen for the vielbein
@xmath . Following the discussion from the sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.3 ,
the induced action of a diffeomorphism @xmath on the coefficients @xmath
( 1.4.1 ) of physical fields @xmath is provided by ( 2.2.1 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

I want to emphasize that the action on a fermion @xmath follows the
argumentation of section 1.2.5 and is hence well-defined, because all
physical expectation values are of even degree in fermions.

For the transformation of the vielbein ( 3.1.3 ), I want to introduce
the matrix notation that has already been suggested by the matrix
commutator ( 1.3.13 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In general, the vielbein @xmath is an @xmath -dependent @xmath matrix,
whereas @xmath is an @xmath -independent @xmath matrix and @xmath is an
@xmath -dependent @xmath matrix. @xmath is needed to restore the
arbitrary gauge fixing chosen for the vielbein. Therefore, the
transformation @xmath would correspond to a global left action with
@xmath on an @xmath -dependent coset @xmath , if and only if the
transformation @xmath was also induced by this global left action. I
will show in the next section that it is an affine coset @xmath that
exactly reproduces the (induced) action of an affine linear
diffeomorphism on the coordinates @xmath ( 3.1.1 ), the field
coefficients @xmath ( 3.1.1 ) and the vielbein matrix @xmath ( 3.1.5 ).

#### 3.1.2 The affine coset

To sum up the discussion at the end of the preceding section, the global
left action on the coset must affect the coordinates. Hence, I have to
extend the coset @xmath with the coordinates in such a way that a global
left action also changes them appropriately. The observation that
coordinates @xmath and one-forms @xmath transform with the same constant
matrix @xmath under affine linear diffeomorphisms @xmath leads to the
following ansatz for the coset

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The exponentiation is the homomorphism @xmath ( 1.2.3 ) that links the
affine group @xmath ( 1.3.18 ) to the affine algebra @xmath ( 1.3.16 ).
The coordinates @xmath are contracted with the generators of translation
@xmath ( 1.3.14 ) that belong to the algebra @xmath . Next, I will show
that a global left action with the affine group element

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

on the coset @xmath ( 3.1.6 ) exactly reproduces the action of an affine
linear diffeomorphism @xmath on the coordinates @xmath ( 3.1.1 ) and on
the vielbein @xmath ( 3.1.5 ).

In complete analogy to the Lorentz gauge fixing of the vielbein @xmath
from section 2.2.3 , I want to fix a representative of the coset @xmath
by requiring that the matrix form of @xmath ( 3.1.6 ) be preserved under
a global left action. This induces a right action on @xmath by a Lorentz
group element. Thus, the complete transformation of the coset ( 3.1.6 )
under the affine linear action ( 3.1.7 ) takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

To evaluate the action of the affine group element on the coordinates,
the following standard formula [ 36 ] is necessary

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is valid for any two Lie algebra elements @xmath . @xmath is the
standard exponential series and @xmath is the adjoint action familiar
from the Definition 1.4 . Using the same conventions for matrix products
as in ( 1.3.3 ), I obtain the identity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

This allows for a comparison of the transformation ( 3.1.8 ) with the
coset

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and thus determines the transformations of the two parameters @xmath and
@xmath of the coset under the global left action by a general @xmath
element ( 3.1.7 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.11b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

These exactly are the equations ( 3.1.5 ) and ( 3.1.1 ), which justifies
the notation @xmath for the compensating right Lorentz action on the
coset a posteriori.

The difference between the coset and the geometric point of view is the
origin of the transformation. For the latter, a diffeomorphism action on
the coordinates @xmath induces the action on the vielbein @xmath ,
whereas the reverse logic applies to the coset picture: the action on
the @xmath matrix @xmath induces the transformation of the coordinates
@xmath , because these form a @xmath representation.

Where an induced action on physical fields @xmath is concerned, the same
line of argumentation applies to both systems, because the action on
@xmath is provided by the compensating Lorentz rotation ( 3.1.1 ) that
is common for both transformations. ³ ³ 3 In particular, the induced
action of a global left @xmath transformation on a fermion is
well-defined, if the argumentation from section 1.2.5 is taken into
account that all physical expectation values are of even fermionic
degree.

The transformations induced by a general @xmath action ( 3.1.7 ) on the
coset @xmath ( 3.1.6 ) and by an affine linear diffeomorphism @xmath (
3.1.1 ) completely coincide

1.  on the coordinates @xmath ,

2.  on the vielbein matrix @xmath and

3.  on an arbitrary physical field @xmath .

Together with a glance at the definition of a connection @xmath acting
on phyical fields in section 1.4.2 , this fact implies that any @xmath
that is built from the affine coset @xmath ( 3.1.6 ) is an example for a
connection that is equivariant under the affine subgroup @xmath of
@xmath . This observation will be the most important ingredient for the
construction of the general connection @xmath with affine linear
equivariance in the following two sections.

#### 3.1.3 The minimal connection of the affine coset

In the theory of non-linear realizations [ 29 ] , there is a natural
candidate for a connection, which I am going to refer to as minimal
connection @xmath . Given any non-linear @xmath -model built on the
coset @xmath of Lie groups @xmath , the connection @xmath acting on
@xmath representations @xmath is characterized by its @xmath action
@xmath ( 1.4.7 ). The algebra element @xmath is defined as the
projection of the Maurer–Cartan form @xmath on the Lie algebra @xmath
that corresponds to the Lie group @xmath .

I will perform the construction of @xmath for the affine coset @xmath (
3.1.6 ). With the formula for any algebra element @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the Maurer-Cartan form splits into two components

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Keeping in mind from section 1.4.3 that all eigenvalues of the vielbein
matrix are positive, it is consistent to associate to the @xmath matrix
@xmath a corresponding Lie algebra element

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

in the basis spanned by the generators @xmath ( 1.3.17 ) of the @xmath
algebra. It is important to note that the names of the indices are
completely arbitary at this point. Only for the geometric picture, I
defined the abbreviation that Greek indices corresponded to the
coordinate induced frame @xmath of the cotangent bundle whereas Latin
indices were associated with the vielbein frame @xmath ( 2.2.4 ). If a
different distinction for these basis vectors is used, the vielbein will
simply be a matrix with arbitary names of the indices as in the present
case.

The definition ( 3.1.14 ) allows for an evaluation of both components of
the Maurer–Cartan form ( 3.1.13 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The first component follows the same calculation used in ( 3.1.10 ): it
is an adjoint action of a @xmath matrix on the Lie algebra generator
@xmath with @xmath being replaced by @xmath . The second components in (
3.1.13 ) and ( 3.1.15 ) coincide, because an action on an arbitrary
@xmath representation renders the same result.

In order to match the standard conventions in general relativity, I
replace the top right Greek index of the matrix @xmath by a Latin one. I
emphasize again that this is a mere relabeling from the coset point of
view. I further adopt the convention from section 2.2.1 to distinguish
the vielbein matrix from its inverse by a different position of the
indices

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.16a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.16b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

With the abbreviation @xmath ( 2.2.1 ), the Maurer-Cartan form ( 3.1.15
) takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For the construction of the minimal connection @xmath , I have to split
the @xmath generators @xmath from the ones of @xmath . To do this, I
define the symmetric generators @xmath in analogy to the antisymmetric
generators @xmath ( 1.3.28a ) ⁴ ⁴ 4 The generators @xmath and @xmath are
always defined with respect to the flat metric @xmath , whatever the
names of the indices may be. I will always mention it explicitly, if
different names of indices distinguish objects such as in the case of
@xmath ( 3.1.18 ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Using the vielbein frame ( 2.2.4 ) for the one-form indices

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

I obtain for the Maurer-Cartan form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath are the same objects ( 2.2.17 ) that
I have already defined in the context of general relativity in section
2.2.2

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.20a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.20b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Given any physical field @xmath in a @xmath representation, the minimal
connection @xmath acts on the coefficients @xmath with respect to a
basis @xmath of the representation space @xmath by ( 1.4.7 ) (in the
vielbein frame @xmath ( 2.2.4 ))

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

It is straightforward to show that this connection @xmath indeed is
equivariant under a global affine left action ( 3.1.7 ). The fact that
physical fields @xmath transform as @xmath representations is the reason
why I have chosen the vielbein frame ( 3.1.18 ) for the one-form
indices. Only in this frame, the coefficient @xmath of the derivative
field @xmath transforms as a Lorentz tensor with respect to the action
that is induced by the affine action ( 3.1.7 ) on the coset @xmath (
3.1.6 ).

To conclude, I want to summarize the two reasons why I had to include
the coordinates @xmath in the coset ( 3.1.6 ).

1.  One reason is to establish the complete equivalence of the coset
    transformation to the one of the coordinates @xmath under an affine
    linear diffeomorphisms and its induced action on the vielbein @xmath
    . Without an inclusion of @xmath in the coset, the @xmath
    -dependence of the vielbein would not be reproduced correctly:
    schematically, a global left action would map @xmath to @xmath and
    not to @xmath .

2.  The generators @xmath provide the vielbein frame for the coset (
    3.1.18 ), in which it is natural to denote the connection ( 3.1.21
    ).

#### 3.1.4 Connections with affine linear equivariance

In this section, I will determine the possible dependences of
connections @xmath with affine linear equivariance on the vielbein
@xmath . At the end of section 3.1.2 , I have already argued that every
connection that is built from the degrees of freedom of the affine coset
@xmath ( 3.1.6 ) provides an admissible choice. This is in particular
true for the minimal connection @xmath ( 3.1.21 ). The statement that
two connections may only differ by a tensor establishes the link between
a general connection @xmath with affine linear equivariance and @xmath :

###### Proposition 3.1

Let @xmath be a physical field in a representation of @xmath on which a
symmetry may act. Then any two connections @xmath and @xmath on @xmath
that are equivariant under this symmetry transformation may only differ
by a Lorentz tensor @xmath that is covariant with respect to the
symmetry.

###### Proof.

The proof starts by writing twice the definition of a connection on the
coefficients @xmath of a physical field following from section 1.4

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To simplify the notation, I have not fixed a basis of the cotangent
space and included the one-forms @xmath in the objects instead. To
complete the proof, I have to show that the one-form valued object

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

is covariant. In other words, @xmath has to transform as a Lorentz
tensor under the action induced by the symmetry. This is true, because
the definition of equivariance under a symmetry transformation from
section 1.1.3 implies that @xmath is covariant with respect to it.
Therefore, the difference

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

also is covariant and @xmath transforms as a Lorentz tensor under this
symmetry transformation.∎

The symmetry under consideration is the restriction of @xmath to its
affine subgroup @xmath ( 1.3.18 ). Thus, any connection @xmath with
affine linear equivariance may only differ from the minimal connection
@xmath ( 3.1.21 ) by a Lorentz tensor @xmath . Using the frame ( 3.1.18
), I obtain the identity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The class of all connections with affine linear equivariance is hence
parametrized by all possible Lorentz tensors @xmath under affine linear
diffeomorphisms @xmath . It will be important for the construction of
the exceptional geometry in chapter 4 to elaborate the possible
dependence of the tensor @xmath on the vielbein @xmath . I summarize the
answer in the following theorem whose proof can be found in appendix
6.3.1 .

###### Theorem 3.2

Given locality of the theory, a Lorentz tensor @xmath that is covariant
with respect to the affine subgroup @xmath ( 1.3.18 ) of the
diffeomorphisms may only depend on the vielbein @xmath implicitly:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

@xmath is defined in ( 3.1.20a ) and the second dependence is to be
understood in the following way: @xmath may depend on arbitrary powers
of the minimal connection @xmath ( 3.1.21 ) acting on arbitrary Lorentz
tensors that do not have to be constructed from the vielbein alone.

The tensors @xmath that are of first order in derivatives, will be of
particular importance for supergravity in the context of exceptional
geometry which is the topic of chapter 4 . It follows from theorem 3.2
that these tensors must be linear in @xmath ( 3.1.20a ). From a purely
group theoretic point of view however, there is no reason to restrict to
tensors @xmath that are linear in derivatives.

Since the affine group @xmath ( 1.3.18 ) is a subgroup of the
diffeomorphisms @xmath , all connections with @xmath -equivariance are
of the form ( 3.1.23 ). The converse is not true, however: it is obvious
that not all connections of the form ( 3.1.23 ) are @xmath -equivariant.
Requiring affine linear equivariance is only a necessary condition for
@xmath -equivariance. By Ogievetsky’s theorem from section 1.3.4 , the
necessary and sufficient condition should be to demand simultaneous
equivariance with respect to special conformal diffeomorphisms @xmath (
1.3.26 ). I will explicitly show this in the next section.

### 3.2 Connections with @xmath-equivariance

The proof of Ogievetsky’s theorem and the subsequent discussion from
section 1.3.4 led to the fact that the conformal Killing vector field
@xmath ( 1.3.22b ) is not the unique vector field with quadratic @xmath
-dependence that generates the algebra @xmath of all vector fields in
its Lie closure with the affine algebra @xmath . Nevertheless, it is
preferred due to its particular property: it forms the abelian
subalgebra @xmath ( 1.3.25 ) of the Lie algebra @xmath . This conformal
algebra @xmath is spanned by the conformal Killing vector fields of the
flat Minkowksi metric @xmath .

I will follow the same procedure as in the preceding section. I start
with introducing some conventions for the diffeomorphism under
discussion, in this case the conformal one @xmath ( 1.3.26 )
corresponding to the conformal Killing vector fields @xmath . Then, I
will prove that the induced transformation of the vielbein is related to
a global left action on a group coset @xmath . This will allow to
construct a minimal connection @xmath as in section 3.1.3 . An
application of proposition 3.1 to conformal equivariance implies that
@xmath may only differ from any connection with @xmath -equivariance by
a tensor with respect to a conformal transformation. Together with
theorem 3.2 , this will prove the statement that the Levi–Civita
connection is unique modulo a torsion tensor that cannot be linear in
derivatives, if it exclusively depends on vielbein degrees of freedom.

#### 3.2.1 Properties of @xmath

Following the definition from section 1.3.3 , a diffeomorphism with the
conformal Killing property preserves the metric tensor @xmath up to a
scalar function. A short calulation of the pullback of @xmath under the
conformal diffeomorphism @xmath ( 1.3.35 ) fixes this function to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.1b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and with the abbreviation @xmath for the contraction with the Minkowski
metric from equation ( 1.3.35 ). This is equivalent to stating that for
all @xmath , the Jacobi matrix multiplied with the scalar function is
orthogonal ⁵ ⁵ 5 Taking the determinant of ( 3.2.1a ) implies @xmath .
The determinant is @xmath , because @xmath and @xmath is continuous in
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the matrix notation from section 3.1.1 , the conformal
diffeomorphism @xmath induces the vielbein transformation ( 2.2.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Keeping in mind the special property ( 3.2.2 ) of the conformal
diffeomorphism @xmath , it looks appealing to split this matrix equation
in two by discussing the determinant part separately. With the
definitions ⁶ ⁶ 6 The definition of @xmath is the standard convention to
discuss the determinant of the vielbein [ 29 ] . It is only valid for
positive @xmath ( 3.2.1b ). This is no restriction due to the fact that
the integral curve to the conformal Killing vector field ( 1.3.22b ) is
only defined for values of @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is
positive, which I have explained in section 1.3.2 . In particular, there
is no need for absolute value signs.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

the transformation ( 3.2.3 ) can be written in the following way

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The induced action of a diffeomorphism @xmath on the unimodular vielbein
@xmath is hence a Lorentz action from the left ( 3.2.2 ) and from the
right.

#### 3.2.2 The vielbein gauge

In complete analogy to section 3.1.1 , the induced action of a conformal
diffeomorphism @xmath on the coefficients @xmath ( 1.4.1 ) of physical
fields @xmath is provided by the equation ( 2.2.1 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The special orthogonal matrix @xmath is determined by the transformation
of the unimodular vielbein @xmath ( 3.2.5b ). This is true for any
arbitrary, but fixed gauge for the vielbein matrix @xmath , as I have
discussed in section 2.2.3 .

In this context, it is important to keep in mind that the entire
argumentation from section 3.1 was indepedent of the particular choice
of the vielbein gauge, too. In particular, the theorem 3.2 comprising
the restrictions on connections with affine linear equivariance is
independent of the specific fixing of the local Lorentz gauge for the
vielbein matrix @xmath . It is natural to require this independence for
a connection with general @xmath -equivariance, too. This implies that
fixing the vielbein gauge in some way must not disturb the @xmath
-equivariance property of a connection @xmath .

For a general fixing of the Lorentz gauge, the compensating Lorentz
rotation @xmath ( 3.2.5b ) strongly depends on the unimodular vielbein
@xmath . However, if the Lorentz gauge for the vielbein is fixed in such
a way that the matrix @xmath transforms as a Lorentz representation
under @xmath , then the compensating Lorentz rotation does not depend on
@xmath : it must have the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

There is only one choice for the vielbein gauge such that @xmath
transforms as a Lorentz tensor: the matrix @xmath has to be symmetric
with respect to the Minkowski metric @xmath . ⁷ ⁷ 7 The (anti)symmetry
with respect to @xmath follows the definition ( 1.2.9 ). The polar
decomposition of @xmath guarantees that this choice of the vielbein
gauge locally is possible and unique for Euclidean and Lorentzian
signature [ 29 ] .

In the sequel, I will show that for this explicit fixing of the local
Lorentz gauge with @xmath being a symmetric matrix, it is possible to
extract specific connections @xmath from the class of connections with
mere affine linear equivariance ( 3.1.23 ) by a comparison with a
conformal coset. These extracted connections @xmath will have the
characteristic property to also be equivariant under conformal
diffeomorphisms @xmath and hence by Ogievetsky’s theorem under all
diffeomorphisms @xmath . This extraction procedure will not lead to the
empty set, because e.g. the @xmath -equivariance of the Levi–Civita
connection does not depend on the fixing of the vielbein gauge.

#### 3.2.3 The conformal coset

Using the generators of the conformal group defined in section 1.3.3 , I
parametrize the conformal coset @xmath by the Bruhat decomposition [ 14
, 58 ] ⁸ ⁸ 8 The proper conformal group in even dimensions is @xmath ,
which also is mentioned in section 1.3.3 and in [ 58 ] . In order to
keep the notation the least cumbersome, I will not emphasize this
difference in the sequel any more. This also is consistent with the fact
that I am only interested in local properties of diffeomorphisms close
to @xmath , which allows to use the parametrization ( 3.2.8 ) [ 14 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with space-time coordinates @xmath , a vector field @xmath and a scalar
field @xmath both depending on @xmath . Next, recall that the generators
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath of the conformal Lie algebra can be
interpreted as matrices in @xmath ( 1.3.30 ), i.e. as antisymmetric
matrices with respect to the metric @xmath in @xmath dimensions. This
implies that the parametrization ( 3.2.8 ) fixes the matrix form of
@xmath : the coefficients of the @xmath generators @xmath are set to
zero. ⁹ ⁹ 9 A similar fixing of the gauge for the affine coset @xmath (
3.1.6 ) would consist of replacing the @xmath generators @xmath in (
3.1.14 ) by the symmetric generators @xmath ( 3.1.17 ).

A global left action, e.g. with @xmath , will in general perturb this
matrix form of the conformal coset @xmath ( 3.2.8 ). ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 For the
construction of a connection, it is sufficient to discuss the effect of
the subgroup @xmath on the coset @xmath ( 3.2.8 ), because global left
actions of the conformal generators @xmath , @xmath and @xmath either
imply a constant compensating Lorentz rotation or none at all. In order
to restore it, one has to act by a compensating @xmath rotation @xmath
from the right in complete analogy to the discussion of the affine coset
in section 3.1.2 . The effect of @xmath on the coset parameters @xmath
can hence be obtained by evaluating the equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In contrast to the evaluation in the case of the affine coset, the
translation operators @xmath do not form a representation of the
generators @xmath , which complicates the procedure. However, the trick
from section 1.3.3 to lift the discussion to a @xmath -dimensional space
works in the same way as for the calculation of the integral curve to
the conformal Killing vector field ( 1.3.35 ). This calculation with
@xmath matrices was pioneered in [ 58 ] . With my conventions ( 1.3.30
), it leads to the following transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.10a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.10b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.10c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The function @xmath was defined in ( 3.2.1b ) and the indices of @xmath
were lowered with the Minkowski metric @xmath ( 1.3.19 ).

I have used the same name for the determinant of the vielbein @xmath (
3.2.4a ) in section 3.2.1 and for the parameter @xmath of the dilatation
operator @xmath in the coset @xmath ( 3.2.8 ). This identification is
admissible, because both objects transform in the same way under a
diffeomorphism @xmath ( 3.2.5a ) and a global left action @xmath ,
respectively. In the appendix 6.3.2 , I prove that the induced local
Lorentz rotations also agree, if and only if the vielbein gauge is fixed
to be symmetric

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

To sum up, a global left action with @xmath on the conformal coset
@xmath with the parametrization fixed by ( 3.2.8 ) exactly reproduces
the effect of a conformal diffeomorphism @xmath

1.  on the coordinate @xmath ,

2.  on the determinant of the vielbein or equivalently @xmath ( 3.2.4a )
    and

3.  on an arbitrary physical field @xmath ,

if the Lorentz gauge is fixed in such a way that the vielbein is
symmetric with respect to the Minkowski metric @xmath . ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 As in
the affine case, this statement strongly depends on the parametrization
of the coset: e.g. @xmath would not lead to the same result.

In the same way as the affine coset @xmath defined a minimal connection
@xmath ( 3.1.21 ) with @xmath -equivariance, the conformal coset @xmath
defines a connection @xmath with @xmath -equivariance. In the next
section, I will construct @xmath and I will also explain a consistent
reduction of the coset degrees of freedom, the so-called “inverse Higgs
effect” that allows to replace the coset parameter @xmath by the other
coset parameters @xmath and @xmath .

#### 3.2.4 The minimal connection @xmath of @xmath

In complete analogy to the affine case from section 3.1.3 , I want to
construct the minimal connection @xmath of the conformal coset @xmath (
3.2.8 ). The formulas ( 3.1.9 ) and ( 3.1.12 ) allow to elaborate the
explicit dependence of the Maurer–Cartan form on the parameters @xmath (
3.2.8 ). Decomposing the @xmath valued one-form @xmath with respect to
the conformal generators @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath defined in
( 1.3.29 ) results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the abbreviations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.13a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.13b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.13c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

where indices of @xmath have been lowered with the Minkowski metric
@xmath ( 1.3.19 ).

Physical fields @xmath transform as @xmath representations. Hence, it is
natural to use basis vectors to span the cotangent space that are
Lorentz tensors under the global left action ( 3.2.9 ). It is obvious
that the coordinate induced one-forms @xmath do not have this property.
As for the affine coset in section 3.1.3 , it is the coefficient of the
translation generator @xmath in the Maurer-Cartan form ( 3.2.12 ) that
provides the Lorentz covariant basis. This one-form transforms under
@xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The matrix @xmath indeed is in @xmath ( 3.2.2 ), which is the reason why
I have defined the coefficients of the Maurer–Cartan form ( 3.2.12 ) in
this frame. ¹² ¹² 12 In contrast to the affine case in section 3.1.3 ,
standard notations from general relativity do not provide a notational
difference à la ( 3.1.16 ) between the coordinate frame spanned by
@xmath and the @xmath -covariant frame for the conformal case. In other
words, there are no “flat” indices for the conformal case. Hence, in
discussing coefficients, one always has to pay attention to the relevant
frame.

Therefore, it is natural to define the minimal connection @xmath with
conformal equivariance acting on physical fields @xmath in the frame
@xmath ( 3.2.14 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Its definition follows the conventions from the sections 1.4.2 and 3.1.3
. This connection @xmath ( 3.2.15 ) is the last ingredient that is
necessary to extract connections @xmath with @xmath -equivariance from
the class of connections ( 3.1.23 ) with affine linear equivariance. I
have already stated in which way the parameter @xmath of the dilatation
generator @xmath is linked to gravity: it is identified with the
determinant of the vielbein by the relation ( 3.2.4a ). But what is the
role of the coefficient @xmath of the generator @xmath ?

##### The inverse Higgs effect

To answer this question, I need to discuss the transformations of the
objects ( 3.2.13 ) under a conformal left action ( 3.2.9 ) in more
detail. Before fixing the @xmath matrix form of @xmath , the
Maurer–Cartan form @xmath is invariant under a global left action by
@xmath . If the matrix form is fixed by e.g. ( 3.2.8 ), an in general
@xmath -dependent @xmath action from the right ( 3.2.9 ) is induced.
This spoils the covariance of the coefficient @xmath of the
Maurer–Cartan form along the Lorentz generators @xmath . Nonetheless,
the objects @xmath and @xmath defined in ( 3.2.13a , 3.2.13b ) transform
as Lorentz tensors under a global left action. This implies that setting
@xmath initially is invariant under a global action. Thus, one can
consistently reduce the degrees of freedom of the coset parametrization
by replacing the vector @xmath tantamount to the relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This reduction is known as the inverse Higgs effect [ 29 , 30 ] . ¹³ ¹³
13 Following Ivanov and Ogievetsky [ 30 ] , this name comes about as
follows. The standard Higgs effect can be interpreted in such a way that
there is a possibility to choose the “unitary” gauge for a one-form
@xmath in which the Goldstone field @xmath disappears from an invariant
Lagrangian [ 30 ] . The kinetic term for @xmath turns into the mass term
of @xmath . Hence, the Goldstone field is eliminated by absorption into
@xmath . For the inverse effect, it is the other way round: by ( 3.2.16
), the one-form @xmath is replaced by the field @xmath , whose
interpretation as a Goldstone field will be addressed in section 3.3.4
again. Substituting ( 3.2.16 ) in the formula for the minimal connection
( 3.2.15 ) with ( 3.2.13c ) provides a covariant derivative @xmath that
only depends on fields that are deducible from the vielbein @xmath .
This is the form in which I will use the connection @xmath to extract
@xmath -equivariant connections @xmath from the class of connections
with affine linear equivariance in the next section.

From a coset point of view, this reduction is not necessary. The field
@xmath has no natural interpretation in the context of general
relativity, however. Since I only discussed the conformal coset @xmath (
3.2.8 ) in order to construct the connection @xmath , I am free to
consistently restrict my parametrization of @xmath in such a way that
all degrees of freedom do have counterparts in gravity. Consistency
means in this case that a global left action ( 3.2.9 ) respects this
reduction. By definition, this is true for ( 3.2.16 ). It is nice to
observe that this reduction could also have been deduced by comparing
the transformations of @xmath and @xmath ( 3.2.10a , 3.2.10b ) to the
one of @xmath ( 3.2.10c ).

#### 3.2.5 Joint realizations of the symmetries

In this section, I will finally single out the connections @xmath with
@xmath -equivariance from the class of connections with affine linear
equivariance. The latter consists of all connections @xmath of the form
( 3.1.23 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath provided by ( 3.1.20b ) and @xmath constrained by theorem
3.2 . As I had discussed in section 3.2.2 , all @xmath -equivariant
connections in this class must in particular be equivariant with respect
to a conformal diffeomorphism @xmath for the symmetric gauge choice for
the vielbein.

Comparing the Lorentz covariant frame under @xmath transformations
@xmath of the affine coset ( 3.1.18 ) with the one of the conformal
coset ( 3.2.14 ) shows that they differ by a multiplication with the
unimodular vielbein @xmath . This however transforms as a Lorentz tensor
( 3.2.5b , 3.2.7 ) under conformal diffeomorphisms @xmath for this
particular choice of the vielbein gauge. This implies that the frame
@xmath inherits the property to transform covariantly under @xmath from
the frame ( 3.2.14 ), which is covariant under @xmath by construction.
If this was not the case, the question to extract a connection @xmath
with @xmath -equivariance from the class ( 3.1.23 ) would be ill-posed
from the beginning.

The actual procedure of extraction consists of simply rewriting the
general form of a connection ( 3.1.23 ) in a different way: splitting
the determinant from the vielbein and using the definition of the
minimal connection @xmath ( 3.2.15 ), I obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The following chain of arguments is the crucial part of the entire
procedure:

1.  The connection @xmath ( 3.2.15 ) is by definition equivariant with
    respect to global left actions on the conformal coset @xmath .

2.  If and only if the vielbein gauge is fixed such that @xmath
    transforms as a symmetric Lorentz tensor under a conformal
    diffeomorphism @xmath , the induced action on a physical field
    @xmath of such a diffeomorphism and of a global left action on the
    coset @xmath ( 3.2.9 ) coincide.

3.  If furthermore the conformal coset @xmath is restricted by the
    inverse Higgs effect ( 3.2.16 ), all parameters of the conformal
    coset can be consistently identified with objects in gravity.

4.  This in particular implies that the connection @xmath with the
    identification ( 3.2.16 ) and @xmath identified with the determinant
    of the vielbein ( 3.2.4a ) is a connection that is equivariant with
    respect to conformal diffeomorphisms.

5.  I want to extract connections @xmath with this property from the
    class ( 3.1.23 ).

6.  Since two connections with the same equivariance property may only
    differ by a tensor with respect to this transformation by
    proposition 3.1 , the following object must transform as a Lorentz
    tensor under the action induced by a conformal diffeomorphism @xmath
    :

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

##### Evaluating the constraint

In order to evaluate this constraint, I will first separate from it the
coefficients @xmath of the physical field. To do that, recall that I
have introduced the vielbein @xmath as an @xmath -dependent matrix
@xmath mapping the coordinate induced frame @xmath of the cotangent
space to the Lorentz covariant one ( 1.4.11b ). It is a convention in
the physics literature to distinguish these two different sets of basis
vectors only by their indices ( 3.1.18 ). It is this convention that I
will lift now: I introduce different names for the basis vectors and
hence treat all indices on an equal footing, which is more natural from
a linear algebra point of view. In doing so, I have to be careful with
the abbreviations from section 2.2 : I distinguished the inverse
vielbein, i.e. the inverse matrix @xmath , from @xmath only by a
different position of the indices. I am replacing this notation by
defining for the unimodular vielbein @xmath in analogy to ( 3.1.16 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.17b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

In the language of section 3.1.3 , I could also interpret the left hand
side as an exponentiated form of the Lie algebra element @xmath .
Furthermore, I have to substitute the original expression @xmath for the
abbreviation @xmath ( 2.2.1 ). Then, Greek and Latin indices are on an
equal footing. Both only denote a matrix multiplication.

After these redefinitions, a connection @xmath from the class ( 3.1.23 )
is equivariant with respect to conformal diffeomorphisms @xmath , if the
following object transforms as a Lorentz tensor under @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In this formula, I have used the explicit form of @xmath ( 3.2.13c )
with the identification ( 3.2.16 ). I want to emphasize that both
objects @xmath and @xmath are well-defined and invariant under a Lorentz
action, because all indices simply denote a matrix multiplication.

The question arises what could spoil the tensorial property of @xmath .
@xmath is completely determined by the vielbein degrees of freedom
@xmath and derivatives thereof ( 3.1.20b ). The induced action of a
conformal diffeomorphism @xmath on these shows that @xmath transforms as
a tensor, but @xmath does not ( 3.2.5a ): @xmath would have to be
invariant under a conformal diffeomorphism in order to be a Lorentz
tensor, because it is a scalar object. Hence, the dependence of @xmath
on the vielbein @xmath has to be fixed in such way that the object
@xmath only depends on Lorentz tensors, and in particular not on @xmath
explicitly.

Partial derivatives of tensors are not tensors in general, however. This
implies that the partial derivative acting on the Lorentz tensor @xmath
in @xmath ( 3.1.20b ) has to be replaced by a covariant one. The minimal
connection @xmath ( 3.2.15 ) provides such a derivative. Its evaluation
on the symmetric Lorentz tensor @xmath follows the rules of section 1.4
. The resulting object transforms as a Lorentz tensor under a conformal
diffeomorphism @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.2.19)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Substituting @xmath ( 3.1.20b ) into the equation ( 3.2.18 ) with the
identity ( 3.2.19 ) results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In order for @xmath to transform as a Lorentz tensor under a conformal
diffeomorphism @xmath , @xmath has to be chosen in such a way that the
last two lines in ( 3.2.5 ) are compensated for, because these do not
transform covariantly on their own ( 3.2.5a ). As these non-covariant
objects only depend on the vielbein degrees of freedom @xmath and as
they are of first order in derivatives, the theorem 3.2 restricts the
admissible compensating terms in @xmath to linear ones in @xmath . The
general ansatz for the @xmath valued Lorentz tensor @xmath is hence
provided by the following decomposition into irreducible representations
of the Lorentz algebra

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath being an arbitrary Lorentz tensor that is covariant under
both conformal diffeomorphisms @xmath and affine linear ones @xmath .
The constants @xmath are determined by substituting the general ansatz
for @xmath ( 3.2.5 ) into ( 3.2.5 ) and by replacing the partial
derivatives acting on the Lorentz tensor @xmath by covariant ones @xmath
( 3.2.19 ). The object @xmath ( 3.2.5 ) only transforms as a Lorentz
tensor under conformal diffeomorphisms @xmath for @xmath and @xmath ,
which is also shown in [ 3 ] .

To sum up, the additional constraint of equivariance with respect to
conformal diffeomorphisms in the symmetric vielbein gauge restricts the
class of admissible connections ( 3.1.23 ) to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and with a Lorentz tensor @xmath that is covariant under both affine
linear and conformal diffeomorphisms. By Ogievetsky’s theorem from
section 1.3.4 , @xmath is hence covariant under the diffeomorphisms
@xmath .

This is the same connection @xmath as the one defined by ( 2.2.16 ),
which I derived from gauging the Poincaré group in section 2.2 . Since
the tensor @xmath is in one-to-one correspondence to the torsion tensor
@xmath of this connection, the @xmath -equivariant connection @xmath
with vanishing torsion @xmath is the uniquely determined Levi–Civita
connection ( 2.2.16 ).

#### 3.2.6 Summary and corollaries

Following the procedure pioneered by Borisov & Ogievetsky, I started by
constructing the general class of connections with affine linear
equivariance ( 3.1.23 ). This was completely independent of the explicit
matrix form of the vielbein @xmath . In extracting the connections
@xmath with conformal equivariance from this class, I fixed the matrix
form of the vielbein to be symmetric. This does not imply a priori that
these @xmath are equivariant under conformal diffeomorphisms @xmath for
a different Lorentz gauge choice, too. However, since the result of the
procedure is the same as the manifestly gauge invariant connection
defined in ( 2.2.16 ), the @xmath -equivariance of @xmath is independent
of the choice of the Lorentz gauge. To sum up, the fixing of the
vielbein gauge was a technical procedure to construct this connection
@xmath . The result is independent of the vielbein gauge and @xmath
-equivariant.

A corollary to theorem 3.2 is the statement that the contorsion tensor
@xmath ( 3.2.23 ) cannot be linear in derivatives, if it exclusively
depends on vielbein degrees of freedom: requiring conformal covariance
rules out linear terms in @xmath , which is obvious from equation (
3.2.19 ). I will show in chapter 4 that this is not true any more, if
the symmetry group @xmath is restricted to a subgroup as in the case
appropriate for the discussion of @xmath supergravity.

In the context of this exceptional geometry, the restriction of the
conformal diffeomorphisms to a @xmath -dimensional submanifold with
@xmath will be important. Where local questions are concerned, it is
sufficient to discuss a @xmath -dimensional open subset @xmath of the
open set @xmath , on which the conformal diffeomorphisms are
well-defined as explained in section 1.3.2 . Then, the corollary 1.11 to
Ogievetsky’s theorem from section 1.3.4 is applicable. It implies that
any connection @xmath with affine linear equivariance in @xmath
dimensions and conformal equivariance in @xmath dimensions must be
@xmath -equivariant.

### 3.3 Other perspectives

The necessity of the fixing of the Lorentz gauge for the vielbein matrix
@xmath for the construction à la Borisov & Ogievetsky may appear
unnatural from a geometric point of view. Insisting on manifest Lorentz
gauge covariance throughout the construction leads to a unified coset
description of the diffeomeorphism group @xmath . Its minimal connection
is the Levi–Civita connection modulo a class of specific torsion
tensors. Since the torsion tensor of supergravity theories ( 2.2.21 ) is
not covered by this class, this description appears to be inappropriate
for the discussion of supergravity, however.

After reviewing this unified coset description in the first section, I
will comment on the original interpretation of Borisov & Ogievetsky [ 3
] motivated from the discussion of internal symmetries. In particular, I
will argue that the notion of Goldstone bosons may not be appropriate
for this setting.

I will conclude with a brief survey of West’s @xmath conjecture that
will serve as a guiding principle for the construction of the
exceptional geometry of supergravity in chapter 4 .

#### 3.3.1 A unified coset description

To start with, I want to emphasize that I only used the affine coset and
the conformal one as auxiliary objects in order to construct minimal
connections @xmath ( 3.1.21 ) and @xmath ( 3.2.15 ). These proved useful
to determine the general dependence of the @xmath -equivariant
connection @xmath on the vielbein @xmath . In particular, a dependence
of @xmath on an arbitrary torsion tensor @xmath , which is not part of
any coset, cannot be excluded.

A different approach would be to consider the coset as a fundamental
object and to insist on manifest Lorentz covariance throughout the
procedure of Borisov & Ogievetsky. A quick look at the discussion in
section 3.2.3 shows that the restriction to the symmetric gauge choice
for the vielbein matrix is only due to the absence of the unimodular
vielbein in the conformal coset @xmath ( 3.2.8 ). A global left action
by @xmath on the modified coset

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

would formally lead to the same compensating Lorentz rotation @xmath as
a conformal diffeomorphism @xmath for any gauge choice of the vielbein (
3.2.3 ). Ogievetsky’s theorem 1.10 implies however that this modified
coset does not close under a left action with all generators: it has to
be enlarged to a parametrization of the entire diffeomorphism group
coset @xmath . This introduces infinitely many new parameters for the
generators @xmath of @xmath with their representation @xmath as vector
fields ( 1.3.37 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The generalized coset would hence be of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the coefficients @xmath of the generators @xmath , whose vector
field representation ( 3.3.1 ) is of polynomial degree @xmath and with
the standard vielbein matrix @xmath in an arbitrary Lorentz gauge.

Since the action of @xmath on the coset @xmath is a global left one, the
corresponding minimal connection @xmath acting on physical fields @xmath
in @xmath representations is equivariant under @xmath by construction.
Following the definition of the minimal connection for a coset from
section 3.1.3 , the @xmath part of the Maurer–Cartan form @xmath is the
essential ingredient of @xmath . A short calculation in the vector field
representation ( 3.3.1 ) reveals that only two of the infinitely many
parameters contribute

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where I have used the abbreviation @xmath ( 3.1.20b ). Redefining the
coefficient @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

leads to the following form for the minimal connection

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This connection is @xmath -equivariant by construction, but it does not
have the standard form familiar from general relativity ( 2.2.16 ). To
achieve this, compare the conformal Killing vector field @xmath (
1.3.22b ) with parameter @xmath with the general vector field
representation of polynomial degree two ( 3.3.3 ). Switching to the
vielbein frame ( 2.2.1 ), I obtain the identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next recall that the inverse Higgs effect ( 3.2.16 ) related the
parameter @xmath of the quadratic generator @xmath ( 1.3.24 ) to the
parameter of the linear generator @xmath ( 1.3.14 , 1.3.28b ). This was
possible by setting the Maurer-Cartan form along the linear generator
@xmath to zero. The generalization is straightforward: the coefficient
of the Maurer–Cartan form along the linear symmetric generator @xmath
has to be set to zero. I want to introduce the following abbreviation
for this coefficient

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Global left invariance of @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

transforms as a Lorentz tensor under @xmath . Setting @xmath to zero is
hence a consistent reduction of the coset degrees of freedom, which is
tantamount to the identity

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

A substitution of @xmath in the ansatz ( 3.3.2 ) proves that the minimal
connection @xmath ( 3.3.4 ) is the Levi–Civita connection, i.e. ( 3.2.7
) with vanishing torsion.

Furthermore, the inverse Higgs effect allows to parametrize the entire
coset @xmath only with the coordinate @xmath and with vielbein degrees
of freedom @xmath in a consistent way. To see this, first observe that
the adjoint action of generators @xmath ( 3.3.1 ) of degree @xmath for
@xmath on the translation generators @xmath ( 1.3.6 ) maps to generators
@xmath of degree @xmath . Therefore, the coefficients of the
Maurer–Cartan form @xmath along the generators of degree @xmath will
have the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with an in general non-linear function @xmath of the components @xmath
of degree @xmath . In analogy to ( 3.3.5 ), @xmath transforms as a
Lorentz tensor under @xmath . Hence, @xmath can be consistently set to
zero. This fixes all @xmath for @xmath by induction.

This approach to construct the Levi–Civita connection from a coset of
the diffeomorphism group was pioneered by Kirsch [ 39 ] . In order to
keep the analogy to non-linear realizations of internal symmetry groups
[ 29 ] , he insisted on a symmetric gauge for the vielbein, however.

#### 3.3.2 What about torsion?

Since torsion is a possible part of the connection, it should be
included in the coset @xmath in such a way that it affects the minimal
connection. The equation ( 3.3.4 ) shows that it can only be a part of
the coefficient @xmath along the generator of degree @xmath . As torsion
is a tensor by definition, it would only change the tensorial part of
@xmath . As @xmath is not a tensor under @xmath , it is obvious from
equation ( 3.3.5 ) that possible torsion in this setting corresponds to
a non-vanishing @xmath . If I do not set @xmath , I can still substitute
( 3.3.5 ) in the formula for minimal connection @xmath ( 3.3.4 ). The
general ansatz for the coefficient

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

leads to the general @xmath -equivariant connection @xmath ( 3.2.7 )
with the following contorsion tensor

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This is however not a general expression for torsion, because it cannot
be inverted: not for any @xmath exists an @xmath such that this equation
holds. This is obvious from observing that any contorsion tensor of the
form ( 3.3.6 ) fulfills the equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which is not true for a general contorsion tensor. In particular, the
bifermionic torsion of @xmath supergravity ( 2.2.21 ) does not fulfill
this constraint. I want to remark that Kirsch did not discuss any
non-vanishing torsion in [ 39 ] . ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 He only conjectured that
non-vanishing torsion might be connected to a non-commutativity of the
space-time coordinates. Hence, this result exceeds his work.

To sum up, the unified coset model @xmath provides a nice way to discuss
@xmath -equivariant connections with a class of particular torsion
terms. It is not general however. As the torsion of supergravity is not
in this class, I will henceforth work with my interpretation that
considers the two finite dimensional cosets as auxiliary objects and not
as fundamental ones.

Concerning torsion, a comment on Borisov & Ogievetsky’s original
presentation [ 3 ] also is necessary. I proved in section 3.2.6 that the
contorsion tensor @xmath ( 3.2.23 ) cannot be linear in derivatives, if
it exclusively depends on vielbein degrees of freedom. An example for
@xmath of third order in derivatives is provided by @xmath with the
Riemann tensor defined in ( 2.2.11b ). Only an additional constraint,
such as a restriction on the power of derivatives, may exclude such
torsion terms. Since Borisov and Ogievetsky did not state anything like
that, their ansatz, eq. (28) in [ 3 ] , is incomplete. This is the
reason why they claim to obtain general relativity from @xmath
-covariance alone, without demanding vanishing torsion explicitly.

Torsion also is very interesting from another point of view: the
requirement of vanishing torsion for the general connection @xmath with
affine linear equivariance ( 3.1.23 ) uniquely singles out the Levi
Civita connection, without requiring the equivariance under conformal
diffeomorphism @xmath at all. ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 To see this, observe that the
non-vanishing torsion of the minimal connection @xmath ( 3.1.21 ) is
proportional to @xmath ( 3.1.20a ), which I show at the end of section
6.3.1 in the appendix.

#### 3.3.3 Goldstone bosons for internal symmetry groups

It’s obvious from the introduction to this chapter that Borisov &
Ogievetsky’s procedure [ 3 ] was strongly inspired by the theory of
non-linear realizations of internal symmetries [ 29 , 57 ] . In
particular, they linked their construction to the Goldstone phenomenon.
In this section that closely follows Salam’s and Strathdee’s original
work [ 57 ] , I want to recapitulate the original idea. In the following
section 3.3.4 , I will point out the problems with an extension of the
Goldstone phenomenon to external symmetries because of which I am not
going to follow this line of argumentation in this thesis.

To understand what is meant by a Goldstone boson, one first has to
recall the definition of a spontaneously broken symmetry @xmath , which
is a symmetry of the Lagrangian, but not of the ground state of a
quantum system. In order to translate this into the language used in my
thesis, I want to quote the example from [ 57 ] :

Consider the chiral symmetry group @xmath for @xmath . The chiral
Lagrangian contains pions @xmath only in the form @xmath . Therefore,
the spin-zero particles @xmath are massless. Hence, a vacuum state is
indistinguishable from a state with any even number of zero frequency
pions forming a representation of @xmath with isospin label @xmath . In
other words, the state with lowest energy (which is the ground state) is
physically degenerate. Although the chiral Lagrangian is invariant under
a @xmath -action, the triplet of pions @xmath does not form a
representation of @xmath . It only parametrizes the coset @xmath , which
implies that a @xmath -action on the pions is realized non-linearly. The
degeneracy of the ground state together with the non-linear realization
of the symmetry @xmath leads to a spontaneous break-down of the chiral
symmetry @xmath . The pions are the Goldstone bosons in this example.

Salam and Strathdee [ 57 ] generalized this procedure to arbitrary
groups @xmath . They introduced the notion of a preferred field. This is
a field that transforms in a constrained way under the action of a
global symmetry group @xmath . The particles associated to these
preferred fields are Goldstone bosons [ 21 ] .

Following Wigner’s interpretation of the momentum four-vector as a
Lorentz boost [ 67 ] , they identified these preferred fields as
particular components of a coset @xmath , the so-called reducing matrix.
The action of an element @xmath of the symmetry group @xmath on the
coset @xmath is then defined by a multiplication from the left by @xmath
and a right multiplication with an element of the subgroup @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The latter is fixed by requiring that the transformed reducing matrix
@xmath or equivalently, the transformed preferred fields, again satisfy
the constraint imposed on them. Thus, @xmath depends on @xmath in
general which implies a non-linear transformation of the preferred
fields under @xmath . This constraint is nothing but the choice which
representative in the @xmath orbit of @xmath has been fixed.

Let @xmath and @xmath denote the Lie algebras corresponding to the Lie
groups @xmath and @xmath . Then the projection of the Maurer–Cartan form
@xmath on @xmath is invariant under a global left action ( 3.3.7 ).
Since the preferred fields parametrize the coset @xmath , the
coefficient of @xmath along the vectors spanning @xmath defines a
derivative of the preferred field, a “covariant derivative”.

The quotation marks for “covariant derivative” were introduced in [ 29 ]
, because the preferred field itself does not transform as an @xmath
-tensor under a global left @xmath action, which is essential for a
covariant derivative in the setting of differential geometry or a
connection defined in section 1.1.3 .

In complete analogy to the gauging procedure I presented in chapter 2 ,
these “covariant derivatives” can be added to a Lagrangian, which is
invariant under a global @xmath action. If this global symmetry group
@xmath is gauged, the preferred fields disappear from the Lagrangian,
because they are included in the gauge fields of the local @xmath
symmetry. This is the standard Higgs effect.

#### 3.3.4 Problems with a generalization to external symmetries

Neglecting gravitational interactions, Salam and Strathdee investigated
in [ 58 ] if the locally experimentally observed Lorentz isometry @xmath
of our space time could result from a spontaneously broken conformal
symmetry @xmath of space-time. Their result is that all the preferred
fields parametrizing the coset @xmath turn out to be massive in
Minkowski space and some of them have spin. Hence, the interpretation as
“Goldstone bosons” is not as compelling as for the case of internal
symmetries, which is why they also used quotation marks in [ 58 ] . Only
the effect of the linearized @xmath action on preferred fields is the
characteristic one for Goldstone bosons: a constant displacement. ¹⁶ ¹⁶
16 Borisov & Ogievetsky mentioned in a footnote in [ 3 ] that strictly
speaking, the preferred field @xmath ( 3.2.8 ) is the only independent
one with this transformation behaviour. The other one @xmath is a
combination of @xmath and a tensor field.

In a later paper [ 29 ] , they reinterpreted one of these preferred
fields as part of the conformal Minkowski metric @xmath . For such a
curved space-time however, the standard description of a Goldstone boson
has to be treated with care: General coordinate covariance implies by
definition that all coordinate systems are equivalent. If one associates
to every coordinate system a vacuum state, the global symmetry group
@xmath distinguishes these ground states, because @xmath only consists
of the conformal Minkowski isometries, a subgroup of the
diffeomorphisms. Taking e.g. the Einstein-Hilbert action for this
particular metric @xmath as an action, the Lagrangian is invariant under
@xmath , whereas the ground state is not. Hence, the diffeomorphism
symmetry is spontaneously broken by the vacuum state, which merely is an
explicit choice of a coordinate system. As this symmetry however affects
the metric, it is not possible to measure the distance between these
vacuum states in terms of energy as for the case of an internal
symmetry. In other words, the question for the mass of this preferred
field @xmath in this setting is ill-posed.

To conclude, I want to summarize three problems in generalizing the
notion of Goldstone fields to external symmetries:

1.  Salam & Strathdee’s definition of the reducing matrix @xmath assumes
    that it transforms as a tensor under a left @xmath action (eq. (2.3)
    in [ 57 ] ). This is necessary for the preferred field to be an
    @xmath tensor under this transformation. In the present context,
    this is equivalent to fixing the symmetric gauge for the vielbein a
    priori, i.e. already in the affine coset @xmath ( 3.1.6 ). This is
    not natural from a geometric point of view.

2.  Borisov and Ogievetsky argue that the preferred field @xmath (
    3.1.14 ) of the affine coset @xmath corresponds to a Goldstone
    boson, because @xmath must not appear explicitly in an invariant
    action. This refers to the case of internal symmetries again, where
    this is only true for the gauged version, i.e. @xmath , however. It
    is important to note that gauging the affine group produces a
    structure that is different from the diffeomorphism group @xmath :
    although all diffeomorphisms induce a transformation of the vielbein
    @xmath by a matrix multiplication with the Jacobian, which is an in
    general @xmath -dependent @xmath matrix, not all @xmath -dependent
    @xmath matrices in @xmath correspond to diffeomorphisms due to the
    integrability constraint.

3.  Most importantly, the question if the preferred field of the affine
    coset @xmath qualifies as a massless Goldstone boson is ill-posed,
    because different ground states cannot be compared, as there is no
    gauge invariant definition of energy in an arbitrarily curved space
    time.

Hence, although the transformation behaviour of the preferred fields of
the affine coset show the characteristic transformation behaviour of
Goldstone bosons, I do not share the point of view of Borisov &
Ogievetsky that this formal association is compulsory. As far as
experimental physics is concerned, there is no sign of a particle like
the pion associated to these preferred fields @xmath so far.

For internal symmetries, non-linear models with spontaneously-broken
symmetry often are non-renormalizable. This is taken as an indication
that they only describe low energy phenomena [ 30 ] . At higher
temperatures or energies, more symmetry might be restored [ 39 ] . Due
to the problematic definition of energy in the case of external
symmetries, I do not agree with the conclusion in [ 4 , 39 ] either: the
authors argued that the spontaneous breakdown of @xmath to @xmath , with
gravity corresponding only to the @xmath part, should lead to a
modification of gravity by introducing new interaction particles, just
as in particle physics. They conjectured that these “higher spin fields”
corresponded to the other preferred fields of the coset @xmath [ 4 ] .

#### 3.3.5 Technical aspects

I concluded the section 3.1.3 with the reasons why it was necessary to
include the coordinates @xmath in the coset for the case of external
symmetries. Since internal symmetries do not act on the coordinates by
definition, there is no need to include them in a coset of an internal
symmetry group. I emphasize this point, because for external symmetries
both the coordinate indices and the gauge group indices transform in
representations of the same group. This allowed to construct an
antisymmetric Lorentz tensor from the symmetric Lorentz tensor @xmath (
3.1.20a ) that I could then add to the minimal connection @xmath in (
3.2.23 ). It is important to note that this possibility does not exist
for an internal symmetry: there is no way to modify the minimal
connection by the extra part of the Maurer–Cartan form, because the
indices do not transform under the same group.

The definition of a “covariant derivative” from the theory of non-linear
realizations is problematic in the procedure of Borisov & Ogievetsky.
Considering @xmath ( 3.1.14 ) as the preferred field, the definition
reviewed in section 3.3.3 leads to the definition (eq. (26) in [ 3 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the abbreviation @xmath as in ( 3.1.20a ). Note that the important
point is hidden in this definition: the @xmath -covariant Lorentz tensor
@xmath is symmetric in @xmath by construction independently of the gauge
of the vielbein @xmath , whereas @xmath is symmetric only for the
special case of a symmetric vielbein gauge, which is necessary for the
interpretation of @xmath as a preferred field. My first reason not to
use this notation of a ‘‘covariant derivative’’ is that it obscures the
fact that the procedure of Borisov & Ogievetsky is independent of the
explicit choice of the vielbein gauge. ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 This independence has
already been observed by West [ 64 ] .

The second reason is related to the extraction procedure of the @xmath
-equivariant connection from the class of connections with affine linear
equivariance in section 3.2.5 . To do so, I had to replace the partial
derivative @xmath acting on the unimodular vielbein @xmath by the
minimal connection of the conformal coset @xmath ( 3.2.19 ). This
defines an action of the Lorentz connection @xmath on the symmetric
traceless matrix @xmath by the exponential series ( 3.1.14 ). In
complete analogy, the action of the Lorentz connections @xmath ( 3.1.21
) or @xmath ( 3.2.23 ) on @xmath is defined, too. ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Strictly
speaking, @xmath does not transform as a Lorentz tensor under the affine
group @xmath ( 1.3.18 ), but under its Poincaré subgroup, it does. Any
connection @xmath with @xmath -equivariance canonically induces by
projection a connection with @xmath -equivariance for any subgroup
@xmath . It is however standard in the physics literature, not to
distinguish these two connections by notation. This can be compared with
the definition ( 3.3.8 ) by a direct evaluation of @xmath in terms of
@xmath with the formula ( 3.1.12 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

At the first non-trivial order in @xmath , the two objects disagree.
Therefore, the definition ( 3.3.8 ) used in [ 3 ] is ambiguous.

#### 3.3.6 Related work in the literature and @xmath

Borisov & Ogievetsky’s procedure has been generalized by Ivanov and
Niederle [ 31 ] to superspace in the same quantum field theory inspired
way. They applied it to the Ogievetsky-Sokatchev formulation [ 52 ] of
@xmath minimal Einstein supergravity by discussing finite dimensional
superextensions of the affine group @xmath and the conformal one @xmath
.

I will follow a different approach in this thesis. As I have already
discussed in chapter 2 , supergravity can be understood as a special
case of Einstein–Cartan theory, which naturally arises from gauging the
Poincaré isometry group of Minkowski space @xmath . In particular, there
is no need to introduce a super Poincaré group on a superspace.

Where @xmath supergravity is concerned, it is the particular
self-interaction of the three-form potential @xmath ( 2.3.1 ) by a
Chern–Simons term ( 2.3.3 ) that together with the vielbein @xmath
allows for a completion to a supersymmetric theory. Hence, it is very
likely that this coupling is distinguished from others in some group
theoretic way, which might also explain the hidden symmetries reviewed
in section 2.3.4 .

West was the first to connect @xmath supergravity to the procedure of
Borisov & Ogievetsky. In [ 64 ] , he proposed to extend the group @xmath
in the affine coset @xmath ( 3.1.6 ) by a normal subgroup to @xmath in
order to also include the degrees of freedom of the three-form potential
@xmath . In the sight of the chain of hidden symmetries, he further
enlarged @xmath to the group corresponding to the infinite dimensional
Kac–Moody algebra @xmath [ 65 ] . To obtain a consistent global left
action by this group on the coordinates in analogy to the coset
description of section 3.1.2 , he had to generalize the @xmath
representation @xmath of translations to a representation of @xmath .
This formally introduces infinitely many additional coordinates that
might be associated to brane charges [ 66 ] .

West’s algebraic approach will be the guiding principle for the
construction of the exceptional geometry in the next chapter. I will
also combine the degrees of freedom of the vielbein @xmath and of the
three-form potential @xmath into a single coset. To establish the
contact to the dynamics of @xmath supergravity, I will content myself
with discussing the finite dimensional exceptional algrebra @xmath
instead of @xmath . Since the fundamental representation space of @xmath
is @xmath -dimensional, I will also have to introduce additional
coordinates to obtain a consistent left action by the group @xmath on
the coset.

In contradistinction to the algebraic approach used by West, I will
follow a geometric approach, however. In analogy to the definition of
the Poincaré subgroup of @xmath from section 1.3.3 , I will require the
invariance of certain tensors. This will restrict the diffeomorphisms of
a higher dimensional space-time to the appropriate subgroup that
corresponds to the global left action on the coset. In this sense, the
entire coset will have a natural interpretation as a higher dimensional
vielbein in this restricted or exceptional geometry.

## Chapter 4 Maximal supergravity in @xmath

I have concluded chapter 2 with the observation that a @xmath
-dimensional geometry appears to be adequate for the treatment of a
theory that is invariant under an @xmath action on the coordinates and
that contains the dynamics of @xmath supergravity. The @xmath symmetry
of this theory has to be restricted in some way for two reasons.

1.  The degrees of freedom of a sixty-dimensional vielbein without
    further restriction exceed the ones of @xmath supergravity. A
    Kaluza–Klein reduction of an unrestricted @xmath geometry would
    hence imply a coupling to additional physical fields.

2.  A supersymmetry variation in @xmath dimensions would lead to more
    than @xmath supersymmetries in a compactification to @xmath
    dimensions, which is inconsistent as explained in section 2.3 .

This is the reason why I will restrict to an exceptional geometry by
requiring the invariance of a degenerate symplectic form @xmath and a
totally symmetric quartic tensor @xmath of codimension @xmath in the
@xmath -dimensional geometry. This reduces the symmetry group @xmath to
a subgroup, which allows to restrict the degrees of freedom of the
@xmath vielbein and of the supersymmetry parameter in an appropriate
way.

To relate the @xmath vielbein to the bosonic degrees of freedom of
@xmath supergravity, recall from section 2.3.3 that these consist of the
@xmath vielbein @xmath and the three-form potential @xmath ( 2.3.1 ).
West pioneered the idea [ 64 ] to put both fields @xmath and @xmath into
a single coset of @xmath , which I have already discussed in the final
section 3.3.6 of the chapter on non-linear realizations.

An important ingredient in West’s approach is manifest Lorentz
covariance in @xmath dimensions. This is where the present discussion
differs. Following Nicolai and de Wit [ 68 ] , I reduce the covariance
group to @xmath by fixing a block-triangular form for the @xmath
vielbein matrix @xmath , where the @xmath part corresponds to the
codimension @xmath of the tensors @xmath and @xmath .

Since the calculations are quite involved, I have chosen to focus on the
@xmath -dimensional subsector of the exceptional geometry in this
thesis, on which both tensors @xmath and @xmath are non-degenerate. This
will correspond to the @xmath -covariant part of @xmath supergravity. I
will show in section 4.1 that imposing the invariance of @xmath and
@xmath restricts the remaining symmetry group @xmath to @xmath and
@xmath -dimensional translations in accordance with Cartan’s theorem [ 6
] . This fact allows to reduce the degrees of freedom of the @xmath
subvielbein @xmath to the ones of an @xmath matrix.

It also establishes the link to the algebraic approach used in chapter 3
and by West in [ 64 ] . Since the resulting subgroup of @xmath is a
subgroup of the affine group @xmath ( 1.3.18 ), the coset description of
section 3.1.2 can be used without loss of generality. This description
will be the most appropriate one to control the independent degrees of
the vielbein @xmath in a comparison with @xmath supergravity.

Of further importance for the dynamics and for the construction of
supersymmetry variations will be the @xmath -dimensional connection
@xmath , which is the basic building block of any physical theory with a
symmetry. Therefore, I will follow the fate of the result from chapter 3
that the Levi–Civita connection is the unique @xmath -equivariant
connection, whose contorsion @xmath is linear in derivative operators,
if @xmath may only contain vielbein degrees of freedom. An important
insight is that this result does not hold any more, if the equivariance
property of @xmath is restricted to the subgroup of @xmath respecting
the invariance of the tensors @xmath and @xmath . It is this observation
that will allow to define a connection @xmath in @xmath dimensions that
can consistently act on @xmath representations, such as the
transformation parameter @xmath of supersymmetry.

I will proceed as follows. I will start by proving the restriction of
@xmath to a subgroup, if the invariance of the tensors @xmath and @xmath
is imposed. Furthermore, I will also discuss the effect on possible
connections @xmath in section 4.1 . Then, I will parametrize the @xmath
generators by @xmath representations in section 4.2 that is tailored for
a comparison of the @xmath -dimensional vielbein @xmath and of the
connections @xmath with @xmath supergravity in the sections 4.3 and 4.4
. Finally, I will introduce supersymmetry variations on the @xmath
-dimensional exceptional geometry in section 4.5 that exactly reproduce
the ones of @xmath supergravity to the extent that can be expected in
this restriction to the @xmath -dimensional subsector.

I will conclude with remarks on the dynamics and why it looks probable
that all solutions of @xmath supergravity exactly correspond to the ones
of a theory in this sixty dimensional exceptional geometry with @xmath
spacelike Killing vectors.

### 4.1 Exceptional geometry

#### 4.1.1 The symplectic form @xmath

In the sequel, I will focus on the @xmath -dimensional Euclidean
subsector of the exceptional geometry. In a first step, I restrict the
symmetry group @xmath to the subgroup @xmath that is defined by
preserving the antisymmetric, non-degenerate two-form @xmath that I
denote in coordinates as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Due to Darboux’s theorem [ 43 ] , there always is a coordinate chart
@xmath ( 1.3.1 ) on the manifold @xmath such that the symplectic form
@xmath has canonical form in the coordinate induced basis of the
cotangent space @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath , @xmath and the Kronecker @xmath in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, the non-degeneracy of @xmath induces a canonical
isomorphism between the tangent and the cotangent space at every point
@xmath in the domain of the coordinate chart @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As in the case of the non-degenerate metric tensor @xmath ( 1.4.8 ),
this isomorphism allows to identify the dual vector spaces @xmath and
@xmath for all points @xmath . There is one big difference to the
discussion of the non-degenerate metric tensor @xmath from section 1.4.3
: the basis of the cotangent space in which @xmath has canonical form,
is coordinate induced . Since the coefficients @xmath ( 4.1.2 ) are
constant, it is hence possible to “integrate” the canonical isomorphism
( 4.1.3 ) to the coordinates @xmath that parametrize the open set @xmath
with @xmath . This leads to dual coordinates that are well-defined under
coordinate transformations @xmath that preserve @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence, both sets of @xmath parameters @xmath and @xmath parametrize the
open subspace @xmath . Due to the particular form of @xmath ( 4.1.2 ),
the set of coordinates and dual ones @xmath with @xmath also have this
property, with @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The notation is of course borrowed from classical mechanics: the @xmath
are the conjugate momenta to the coordinates @xmath . The different
position of the indices of @xmath and @xmath is a reminder that these
coordinates are dual to each other. The canonical transformations then
correspond to the symplectic coordinate transformations @xmath on phase
space. These will be the topic of the next section.

#### 4.1.2 Symplectic vector fields

The subgroup @xmath of @xmath was defined by the coordinate
transformations @xmath that preserve the symplectic form @xmath ( 4.1.1
)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the present case of constant coefficients @xmath ( 4.1.2 ), this is
equivalent to the constraint on the corresponding vector field @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For the special case of affine linear vector fields @xmath ( 1.3.11 ),
equation ( 4.1.7 ) constrains the matrices @xmath to be antisymmetric
with respect to the tensor @xmath ( 1.2.10 ), what I used for the
definition of the symplectic Lie algebra @xmath in section 1.2.4 .

In the appendix 6.4.1 , I prove that the general solution of the
constraint ( 4.1.6 ) is provided by the vector field @xmath with @xmath
( 4.1.5 ) and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.8b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.8c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with an arbitrary analytic scalar function @xmath of the @xmath real
coordinates @xmath that I chose to parametrize by @xmath . In the
language of Classical Mechanics, @xmath is the generating function of
canonical transformations, the Hamiltonian. It is nice to observe that
this special class of vector fields in @xmath dimensions contains
general vector fields @xmath ( 1.3.4 ) in @xmath dimensions by setting
@xmath . This implies that the subgroup @xmath of @xmath is infinite
dimensional. ¹ ¹ 1 This feature of symplectic geometry is in sharp
contrast to Riemannian geometry: asking for the isometries of e.g. the
Minkowski metric @xmath ( 1.3.3 ), i.e. diffeomorphisms @xmath with
@xmath , leads to the finite dimensional Poincaré group that I showed in
appendix 6.1.2 .

At the beginning of this thesis in 1.1.1 , I defined physical fields
@xmath as sections of a tensor bundle over a Lorentzian manifold. This
implies that the action of a general coordinate transformation @xmath on
@xmath is provided by a multiplication with the Lorentz action @xmath
that is induced by the Jacobian matrix @xmath after having fixed an
arbitrary Lorentz gauge for the vielbein ( 2.2.3 ). For the @xmath
-dimensional subsector under consideration in this thesis, the signature
is Euclidean. Therefore, the induced Lorentz action @xmath is via the
compact group @xmath .

The additional structure of a conserved symplectic form @xmath allows to
restrict the induced action @xmath to a proper subgroup of @xmath . To
show this, start with expanding the Jacobian of an arbitrary
symplectomorphism @xmath to linear order in its associated vector field
@xmath . With the equations ( 4.1.8 ), it has the form

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath         (4.1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ---------

It is obvious that not all entries in this matrix are independent.

Next, observe that the matrix @xmath is @xmath valued for a general
vector field in @xmath . Since the antisymmetric matrices @xmath form a
subalgebra of @xmath ( 1.2.9 ), I can always decompose @xmath into
compact generators @xmath ( 1.3.28a ) and noncompact ones @xmath (
3.1.17 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with respect to the Euclidean metric @xmath . In order to better handle
the independent components of the real matrix @xmath ( 4.1.9 ) in this
splitting, I perform the following change of coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.10a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.10b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

with @xmath ( 4.1.2 ) and @xmath . Substituting these coordinates (
4.1.10 ) in the definition of the symplectic form @xmath ( 4.1.1 ), I
obtain for the real tensor @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In analogy to the definition of dual coordinates @xmath from the
coordinates @xmath by the non-degenerate form @xmath ( 4.1.5 ), I can
lower the index of the coordinate @xmath with @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In these coordinates, the compact and the non-compact part of the matrix
@xmath ( 4.1.9 ) take the simple form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.13a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.13b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

This defines the vector field representation @xmath of the generators
@xmath and @xmath in the coordinates @xmath ( 4.1.10 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.14a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.14b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The Hamiltonian @xmath in ( 4.1.13 ) is real and the abbreviation
“+c.c.” implies that the complex conjugate has to be added. With the
vector field representation ( 4.1.14a ), it is straightforward to prove
the commutation relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

These generators are compact by definition ( 4.1.13 ). Since they
fulfill the commutation relation of the complex Lie algebra of all
@xmath matrices, they span its real compact form @xmath . This also is
the reason why I chose the same symbol @xmath for the generators of both
real forms @xmath and @xmath of the same Lie algebra. It should be clear
from the context and from the different indices, which real form is
referred to. Using the symplectic form @xmath to raise and lower the
indices @xmath ( 4.1.12 ), the vector field representation @xmath (
4.1.14a ) implies that the generators @xmath of @xmath are
anti-hermitean

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

I want to emphasize that the appearance of the complex unity @xmath does
not mean that I have complexified the coordinates @xmath . The matrix
equations in ( 4.1.13 ) are still real valued. This is just a more
efficient way to write the generators. To put it in other words, the
compact generators of @xmath form a real representation of the unitary
group @xmath . This is most easily seen by a decomposition of the
algebras @xmath and @xmath in @xmath representations.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.17b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.17c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Before explaining why the @xmath -action induced by a symplectomorphism
@xmath on a physical field @xmath can be chosen to be in @xmath , I want
to add comments concerning the holomorphic coordinates @xmath ( 4.1.10
).

#### 4.1.3 Comments on the holomorphic frame

The appearance of the complex coordinates @xmath ( 4.1.10 ) should not
be confused with a complex structure on a manifold [ 27 ] . Their
introduction only is a reparametrization of the coordinates that suits
best the real vector fields of @xmath . The underlying manifold is not
complex, because the symplectomorphisms with non-compact Jacobian do not
preserve @xmath and hence perturb a possible complex structure @xmath .
I emphasize that @xmath is not the metric in the coordinate frame, it
merely is the Euclidean form that distinguishes compact generators from
non-compact ones.

Nonetheless, it is clear from the definition of the holomorphic frame (
4.1.10 ) that the holomorphic one-forms @xmath and the antiholomorphic
ones @xmath do span the real cotangent space to the @xmath -dimensional
real manifold

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

A last comment concerns the normalization of the dual coordinate @xmath
( 4.1.12 ). From the point of view of symplectic geometry, the
normalization of the dual coordinates should follow the one used for
@xmath ( 4.1.5 ), which was deduced from the explicit form of @xmath (
4.1.1 ). With the equation ( 4.1.11 ), this would lead to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From the point of view of complex geometry however, it appears to be
natural to define the dual object of the holomorphic coordinate @xmath
simply by a complex conjugation. This is the reason why I have used the
normalization ( 4.1.12 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This will explain the appearance of the factor @xmath in the relation of
the vielbein @xmath to its inverse ( 4.3.10 ).

#### 4.1.4 Connections with symplectic equivariance

For any physical theory with a symmetry @xmath , a connection @xmath
with @xmath -equivariance is an essential building block. In this
section, I will discuss the implications on @xmath of softening the
constraint of @xmath -equivariance to @xmath or symplectic equivariance.

To commence, recall from section 4.1.2 that restricting the
diffeomorphisms @xmath to symplectomorphisms @xmath implies that the
Jacobian matrix is symplectic ( 4.1.6 ). The transformation of the
vielbein @xmath ( 2.2.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

reveals that it is consistent to restrict the vielbein matrix to be an
@xmath -dependent @xmath element. The orthogonal right action that
compensates for the left action by the Jacobian, must hence also be a an
element in @xmath . Since it also has to be orthogonal, the comparison
of the corresponding Lie algebra generators ( 4.1.17 ) proves that it
has to be unitary

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In section 1.2.5 , I showed that a general physical field @xmath
transforms as a representation of the Lorentz algebra. For the subsector
under consideration, this implies that all fields @xmath must transform
as @xmath representations. If the vielbein matrix @xmath is an element
of @xmath with arbitrary @xmath -dependence, restricting @xmath to the
symplectomorphisms @xmath implies that the induced action on @xmath is
by the covering group of @xmath . Hence, a general symplectomorphism
does not link irreducible @xmath representations to each other. It is
therefore consistent to treat all @xmath representations as independent
physical fields. This is the first important message of this section:

Restricting the diffeomorpisms @xmath to symplectomorphisms @xmath
allows to restrict the vielbein matrix to be symplectic @xmath . Then,
it is admissible to interpret @xmath representations as physical fields
in @xmath . These do not have to be @xmath representations.

If the vielbein @xmath is symplectic, the symplectic form @xmath has the
same constant coefficients ( 4.1.2 ) in both the coordinate induced
frame @xmath and the vielbein frame @xmath ( 2.2.4 ), because the two
frames differ by a multiplication with a matrix in @xmath , whose
definition is the invariance of @xmath ( 1.2.10 ). Then, the definition
of the holomorphic coordinates @xmath ( 4.1.10 ) induces a holomorphic
vielbein frame

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.19a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.19b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

with the indices @xmath and @xmath and the sympletic form @xmath to
change their position @xmath ( 4.1.2 ). The frame @xmath spans the
cotangent space in the same way as the coordinate induced frame ( 4.1.18
). I want to emphasize that this definition only is possible, if the
vielbein is an @xmath matrix.

In this frame, a general connection ( 1.4.7 ) has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.20a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.20b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Next, recall from chapter 3 that the Levi–Civita connection in the
vielbein frame ( 3.2.23 ) is constructed from the Maurer–Cartan form (
3.1.20 ) involving the vielbein matrix @xmath . For the case of @xmath ,
the compact and the non-compact parts of the Lie algebra valued coset
@xmath follow the same decomposition as the one used in ( 4.1.13 ).
Without loss of generality, I can fix the normalization for the
coefficients of the @xmath generators @xmath and of @xmath ( 4.1.14 ) to
the canonical ones by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.21a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.21b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

With these normalizations, it is a straightforward computation to obtain
the @xmath valued one-form @xmath of the Levi–Civita connection in the
vielbein frame ( 3.2.23 ) with @xmath . It is important to observe that
@xmath is not @xmath valued, as one might have guessed. Recalling the
antisymmetric generators @xmath from the decomposition of @xmath under
@xmath ( 4.1.17b ), whose vector field representation is normalized to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

@xmath has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.23a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.23b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

with the pair of forms @xmath and @xmath ( 4.1.21 ) in the frame @xmath
( 4.1.19 ). ² ² 2 I want to point out a subtlety in the notation: @xmath
. The bar in @xmath only corresponds to the frame @xmath ( 4.1.19 ).

The observation that @xmath representations may be treated as physical
fields in @xmath also has an implication for the covariant derivative.
Starting with a physical field @xmath which transforms as an @xmath
representation, the action of a symplectomorphism on @xmath is by a
@xmath rotation in the vielbein frame. This implies that the partial
derivative of the field @xmath can be covariantized by adding a @xmath
action alone. The Levi–Civita connection for an @xmath valued vielbein
is not @xmath valued, because it also contains the generators @xmath (
4.1.23 ). On the other hand, the Levi–Civita connection is @xmath
-equivariant by construction, which implies in particular @xmath
-equivariance for @xmath . Therefore, the coefficients @xmath and @xmath
of the generators @xmath of @xmath in ( 4.1.23 ) must transform as a
tensor. This can also be shown explicitly by using the fact that the
vielbein is a symplectic matrix.

Hence, @xmath is a @xmath tensor under the action induced by a
symplectomorphism @xmath . It is of first order in derivatives and is
constructed from vielbein degrees of freedom alone ( 4.1.21 ). Note that
this is a first example for the case mentioned in section 3.2.6 in which
symplectic equivariance is strictly weaker than @xmath -equivariance. It
also implies that there is a one-parameter family of connections on
@xmath representations @xmath that are characterized by their @xmath
valued one-form @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.24a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.24b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

For the definition of the supersymmetry transformations, it will be of
vital importance to obtain a connection that does not have to act on
@xmath representations. A first step is to restrict to @xmath
representations. However, these can only be interpreted consistently as
physical fields @xmath , if the connection does not contain any
generators in @xmath , because @xmath is a simple Lie algebra.
Therefore, there is only one @xmath -equivariant connection in the
family ( 4.1.24 ) that preserves @xmath representations, which is the
one with @xmath . Equivalently, it is the projection of the Levi–Civita
connection in the vielbein frame on the generators in @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

With this connection @xmath , it is consistent to describe physical
fields as @xmath representations. It is not free of torsion, however. A
calculation analogous to the one performed in appendix 6.2.2 with the
definition ( 4.1.20 ) results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.26a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.26b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.26c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The curvature tensors in this expression have to be @xmath valued,
because they result from a commutator of one @xmath valued connection
with another one, which again maps to @xmath .

The standard way to describe the dynamics of a theory with @xmath
-invariance is to construct an action from an invariant scalar object.
Following the discussion from section 2.2.1 , the curvature tensor can
always be interpreted as an endomorphism of the vector space @xmath .
Since the three tensors @xmath in ( 4.1.26 ) are @xmath valued, this map
has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As in the case of @xmath -invariance ( 2.2.12 ), its trace is an
invariant scalar

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

with the Killing norm @xmath introduced in section 1.2.4 . It is
important to note that this scalar is not @xmath -invariant, because it
differs from the Ricci scalar ( 2.2.12 ) by terms proportional to the
@xmath -covariant tensor @xmath that is not @xmath -covariant.
Furthermore, the parts @xmath and its complex conjugate ( 4.1.26 ) do
not contribute to the invariant scalar @xmath in this trace. In
contradistinction to the @xmath -invariant case, there is hence no
unique action for the vielbein that is of second order in derivatives in
the restricted case.

Before discussing the final constraint on the geometry by imposing the
invariance of a symmetric quartic tensor @xmath , I would like to
address the question of symmetry enhancement. This is related to the
algebraic point of view of chapter 3 , but there are subtleties to
observe: if the affine coset from section 3.1.2 is taken as a starting
point with a symplectic vielbein @xmath , it would be difficult to
obtain the Levi–Civita connection ( 4.1.23 ) directly, because the
generator @xmath ( 4.1.22 ) is not present in the affine coset at all.
Furthermore, the joint realization of conformal and affine symmetries in
section 3.2.5 crucially depended on the fact that @xmath was not simple:
it was the determinant of the vielbein that was used to single out the
connections with @xmath -equivariance from the class of connections with
affine linear equivariance ( 3.1.23 ). Since @xmath is simple, an
analogous procedure to the one of Borisov & Ogievetsky that only
discusses finite dimensional subgroups of @xmath , is impossible.

Nevertheless, there is one important argumentation related to the
procedure of Borisov & Ogievetsky that still holds. There is a
connection @xmath acting on @xmath representations @xmath with
equivariance under the finite dimensional group @xmath that allows for a
symmetry enhancement. If and only if the constant relating the
antisymmetric matrices @xmath to the symmetric ones @xmath ( 4.1.21 ) is
fixed as in ( 4.1.24 ), then the equivariance group is enlarged to the
infinite dimensional group @xmath , which is analogous to the symmetry
enhancement of @xmath to @xmath in section 3.2.5 . ³ ³ 3 Another
coupling than the one in ( 4.1.24 ) can be ruled out, because the
objects @xmath and @xmath do not transform as @xmath tensors.

It is this symmetry enhancement that is the reason why the connection
@xmath ( 4.1.25 ) is in a way preferred to other connections with mere
@xmath -equivariance. After imposing the invariance of the quartic
tensor @xmath , a similar enlargement of the equivariance group will not
be possible any more. Hence, there will be no preferred connection from
a symmetry point of view in the exceptional geometry of the following
sections.

#### 4.1.5 The quartic symmetric tensor @xmath

In the preceding sections, I restricted the Lie group @xmath to the
subgroup @xmath by requiring that an antisymmetric two tensor @xmath be
conserved ( 4.1.6 ). In the same way, I want to restrict @xmath to a
subgroup that preserves a totally symmetric quartic tensor

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

in addition to the symplectic form @xmath . Before I state this tensor
explicitly, I want to adapt the notation to this task. Recall that for
the discussion of the symplectic two-form @xmath ( 4.1.1 ), it was a
good choice to split the @xmath coordinates @xmath into two sets of
@xmath coordinates @xmath in section 4.1.1 . In the same way, I want to
split both sets of @xmath coordinates into @xmath each @xmath , which
will turn out to be suitable for this quartic tensor. The identification
is as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The same decomposition is used for the dual coordinate @xmath . In this
notation, the quartic tensor with the symmetric tensor product @xmath
has the form ⁴ ⁴ 4 @xmath is the completely antisymmetric tensor in
@xmath dimensions with the normalization @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In constructing the class of connections with affine linear equivariance
from the affine coset in the procedure of Borisov & Ogievetsky of
chapter 3 , I needed to split compact from non-compact generators. This
split was the reason for introducing the (anti)holomorphic coordinates
@xmath ( 4.1.10 ) in section 4.1.2 . These naturally induce the
definition of (anti)holomorphic coordinates for the real ones @xmath
defined in ( 4.1.29 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.31a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.31b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

It will prove sensible for a better understanding of @xmath ( 4.1.5 ) to
recombine these coordinates again by defining with @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath matrices @xmath that I introduced in the appendix 6.2.1 ,
fulfill the Clifford property @xmath . For a Euclidean signature of
@xmath in @xmath , the matrices @xmath have to be purely imaginary.
Therefore, the coefficients of @xmath and @xmath in ( 4.1.32 ) are real.
Hence, the antiholomorphic coordinate @xmath follows from complex
conjugation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Next recall from the definition ( 4.1.12 ) that the position of the
@xmath indices @xmath and @xmath of @xmath are lowered with the
symplectic form @xmath . I also want to use @xmath to lower the indices
of @xmath . For this to work, the symplectic form @xmath ( 4.1.11 ) has
to have canonical form in this frame, which is with the Kronecker @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Substituting the definition ( 4.1.32 ) in @xmath ( 4.1.11 ) only leads
to the form ( 4.1.34 ) with the Clifford completeness relation ( 6.4.8
), if the coefficients @xmath and @xmath are related by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Hence, the constant @xmath is fixed by requiring that @xmath has
canonical form in the coordinates ( 4.1.32 ). This allows to define in
complete analogy to the lowering of the indices of the antihomorphic
coordinate @xmath in ( 4.1.12 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In this frame, the Hamiltonian vector fields ( 4.1.8 ) take the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.37a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.37b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.37c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Before resuming the discussion of the quartic tensor @xmath , I want to
comment on the role of the constant @xmath introduced in ( 4.1.32 ). It
is a global factor that links the two holomorphic frames. I have already
mentioned in section 4.1.3 that there is a discrepancy between natural
choices of complex geometry and of symplectic geometry. For this thesis,
I chose the conventions of complex geometry. Therefore, dual indices of
the tangent space differ from cotangent space indices by a constant
factor that is proportional to the factor @xmath relating the
coefficients of the symplectic form @xmath in the frames ( 4.1.1 ) and (
4.1.34 ). This will be the factor relating the vielbein @xmath to its
inverse in ( 4.3.10 ). In order to match the standard conventions of
@xmath supergravity and to obtain simple formulas for the supersymmetry
variations, I will fix @xmath in section 4.5 .

The introduction of the coordinates ( 4.1.32 ) also leads to a nicer
form for the quartic tensor @xmath ( 4.1.5 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.38a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.38b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.38c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

In the last line, the symmetry implies the interchange of pairs. It is
obvious that this tensor is real. ⁵ ⁵ 5 The normalization of the
completely antisymmetric tensor @xmath is @xmath . In this form @xmath
may look more familiar: it is the invariant quartic tensor of the Lie
group @xmath as it is also stated in [ 69 ] . This will become clear in
the following two sections.

#### 4.1.6 Vector fields preserving @xmath and @xmath

I want to determine all @xmath that fulfill

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In complete analogy to the discussion of the symplectic form @xmath (
4.1.7 ) in section 4.1.2 , equation ( 4.1.39 ) leads the constraint

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

for the Hamiltonian vector field @xmath . In the appendix 6.4.2 , I
prove that the general solution is provided by the Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the Hamiltonian @xmath is real, the arbitrary complex coefficients
@xmath are subject to the following constraints

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.42a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.42b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

and the obvious relation between @xmath and @xmath . I want to emphasize
that the symmetric object @xmath is the Kronecker delta, which is part
of the symplectic form ( 4.1.2 ) and not a metric: the indices are hence
raised and lowered as defined in ( 4.1.36 ). The computation of the
corresponding vector field follows the general rule ( 4.1.37 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.43)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

This is the general vector field that preserves the tensors @xmath and
@xmath . The striking fact is that it is linear in the coordinates. This
implies that the subgroup of @xmath preserving @xmath and @xmath is
isomorphic to a subgroup of the affine group @xmath . In the next
section, I will show that this subgroup is @xmath .

#### 4.1.7 The vector field representation of @xmath

In chapter 1 , I showed that simple, finite dimensional, complex Lie
algebras are determined by their Dynkin diagrams or equivalently, by
their commutation relations. In order to find out which real Lie group
is provided by the vector fields ( 4.1.43 ), the first task is to
extract the commutation relations that are induced by the ones of @xmath
. Following the same logic as in section 1.3.3 , I separate the
parameters @xmath from the algebra generators in the vector field
representation @xmath by defining

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

A comparison with the general vector field @xmath ( 4.1.43 ) preserving
@xmath and @xmath implies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.45a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.45b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.45c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

and the obvious identifications for the complex conjugated operators.
Note that the reality constraints of the components @xmath ( 4.1.42 )
are also fulfilled for the vector field representation @xmath of the
generators @xmath . Hence, it is natural to lift these to the abstract
generators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.46a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.46b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

with the Kronecker @xmath from the symplectic form @xmath to raise and
lower indices as in ( 4.1.36 ). A short calculation with the vector
field representations ( 4.1.45 ) provides the commutation relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.1.47a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.47b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.47c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.47d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.47e)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The commutation relation ( 4.1.47a ) are the same ones as used for
@xmath in ( 1.3.15a ). This is the reason why I have used the same
letter @xmath and the awkward normalization in ( 4.1.45a ).

It is well known [ 69 ] that the commutation relations ( 4.1.47 )
uniquely determine the complex Lie algebra @xmath together with a normal
subalgebra corresponding to the @xmath -dimensional Abelian group of
translations @xmath . Since I have constructed this Lie algebra as a
subalgebra of the matrix algebra @xmath , the @xmath generators @xmath
are compact and the @xmath generators @xmath are not compact. Following
the definition from section 1.2.4 , the real form has to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Comparing with the discussion from section 1.2.5 , the subgroup of
diffeomorphisms preserving the two tensors @xmath and @xmath is
isomorphic to @xmath with its compact subgroup @xmath . I want to close
this section with a comment on the invariant tensor @xmath ( 4.1.28 ).
In a fixed coordinate chart, @xmath is a quartic tensor of the @xmath
-dimensional vector space on which @xmath acts as a matrix
representation. It should not be confused with a quartic tensor of the
@xmath -dimensional vector space @xmath . In [ 23 ] , it is shown that
the quartic tensor @xmath of the fundamental representation @xmath can
be related to the Cartan–Killing form or quadratic Casimir invariant of
@xmath .

#### 4.1.8 Connections @xmath for supergravity

This section discusses the implications on physical fields @xmath and on
connections @xmath , which is due to the restriction of @xmath to the
diffeomorphisms that also preserve the quartic tensor @xmath ( 4.1.28 ).
The argumentation strongly follows the one for symplectic equivariance
of section 4.1.4 .

The first observation is a technical one: for the choice @xmath ( 4.1.35
), the symplectic form has canonical shape ( 4.1.34 ) in the coordinates
@xmath ( 4.1.32 ). This implies that it is consistent to lower the index
of the antiholomorphic forms in the vielbein frame in the same way as
for the purely symplectic case ( 4.1.19 ). In analogy to ( 4.1.18 ), the
cotangent space of the real @xmath -dimensional manifold with preserved
tensors @xmath is therefore spanned by the one-forms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.48a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.48b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

In this frame, the general form of a connection @xmath ( 4.1.20 ) acting
on @xmath representations @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As in section 4.1.4 , the restriction of the group of diffeomorphisms to
a subgroup allows for the possibility to cast the vielbein in a
particular matrix shape. For the case of the preserved quartic tensor
@xmath ( 4.1.28 ), it is consistent to restrict the vielbein matrix
@xmath in @xmath to be an @xmath group element with arbitrary coordinate
dependence.

This implies that the diffeomorphisms @xmath induce an @xmath rotation
in order to restore the arbitrary vielbein gauge ( 2.2.3 ). To phrase
this in other words, a diffeomorphism @xmath does not link irreducible
@xmath representations to each other. It is therefore consistent to
interpret every irreducible @xmath representation as an independent
physical field @xmath in the vielbein frame.

As for the symplectic case in section 4.1.4 , such a restriction of the
physical fields is only possible, if the action of the connection @xmath
preserves this structure, i.e. if the connection form @xmath does not
contain any generator that links different irreducible @xmath
representations to each other. ⁶ ⁶ 6 The standard Levi–Civita connection
did contain these generators @xmath for the symplectic case ( 4.1.23 ).

However, there is a big difference to the symplectic case presented in
section 4.1.4 : for the latter, there is a connection @xmath with @xmath
-equivariance that allows for a symmetry enhancement. By adding a tensor
@xmath ( 3.1.20a ) with respect to affine linear diffeomorphisms, the
@xmath -equivariance of @xmath was enhanced to the bigger symmetry group
@xmath . This is the same mechanism that is used in the procedure à la
Borisov & Ogievetsky in chapter 3 : the affine linear equivariance,
provided by the minimal connection @xmath ( 3.1.21 ) alone, was enhanced
to @xmath -equivariance of @xmath by adding an @xmath -covariant Lorentz
tensor @xmath ( 3.1.20a ).

The situation is different in the present case. Since the subgroup
@xmath of @xmath preserving both @xmath and @xmath is a subgroup of the
affine group @xmath , the possibility to enlarge the symmetry group does
not exist. Hence, there is no connection @xmath in the class ( 3.1.23 )
provided by the theorem 3.2 that is preferred due to a symmetry
enhancement. In particular, the minimal connection @xmath ( 3.1.21 ) is
completely sufficient to guarantee equivariance under all
diffeomorphisms that preserve @xmath and @xmath .

For the comparison to the supersymmetry variations of @xmath
supergravity in section 4.5 , it will be important construct the general
connection @xmath acting on @xmath representations @xmath in this
exceptional geometry, which is linear in derivatives and only depends on
vielbein degrees of freedom. For the application of theorem 3.2 , I have
to identify the components ( 3.1.20 ) of the Maurer–Cartan form @xmath
with an @xmath valued vielbein matrix @xmath . In analogy to ( 4.1.21 ),
I obtain ⁷ ⁷ 7 Note that there is no need to add the complex conjugate
to the symmetric generator due to the reality constraint ( 4.1.46b ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.49a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.49b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

where I have used the same normalizations of the generators @xmath and
@xmath as in ( 4.1.7 ). In order to construct a connection @xmath acting
on @xmath representations @xmath that is linear in derivatives and only
depends on vielbein degrees of freedom, I have to investigate which
connection one-forms @xmath can be constructed from the @xmath tensor
@xmath ( 4.1.49 ).

I want to follow the argumentation that I used to derive the equation (
3.2.5 ) during the joint realization of symmetries of section 3.2.5 . It
was the decomposition of the tensor product @xmath and the projection on
possible antisymmetric tensors that led to the general form for the
Lorentz tensor @xmath in ( 3.2.5 ). In the present case, the tensor
product is @xmath and the decomposition should be performed into
irreducible @xmath representations. Following the definition of a
general connection ( 1.4.7 ) from section 1.4 , the general form of
@xmath is hence provided by the one-form valued @xmath action @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with a @xmath generator @xmath whose action on a field @xmath
corresponds to a simple multiplication. In section 4.5 , I will fix the
real constants @xmath in the appropriate way for a comparison with
@xmath supergravity.

As a side remark, I want to mention that the Levi–Civita connection
@xmath in @xmath again defines a connection in the class ( 4.1.8 ) by
projection onto @xmath , in analogy to ( 4.1.25 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Starting with the @xmath -covariant form of ( 4.1.24 ), a comparison of
the vector field representations ( 4.1.14 ) and ( 4.1.45 ) implies that
the connection @xmath corresponds to the choice @xmath and @xmath . I
want to emphasize again that this choice is not related to a symmetry
enhancement. Therefore, there is no reason why it should be preferred in
the context of exceptional geometry. ⁸ ⁸ 8 The equations ( 4.1.26 )
indicate that the torsion does not vanish for any values @xmath . Hence,
this is not a suitable connection @xmath to discuss the holonomy of the
underlying manifold. I want to conclude this section with a short
summary of the results.

1.  In the context of exceptional geometry, the symmetry group @xmath is
    restricted to @xmath by requiring the invariance of the symplectic
    form @xmath ( 4.1.6 ) and the symmetric quartic tensor @xmath (
    4.1.28 ).

2.  Therefore, it is consistent to restrict the @xmath -dimensional
    vielbein @xmath to be an @xmath valued matrix with arbitrary
    dependence on the @xmath coordinates.

3.  Having fixed the Lorentz gauge of the vielbein, the induced Lorentz
    action in this setting is an element of @xmath .

4.  It is consistent to consider irreducible @xmath representations as
    independent physical fields @xmath in the @xmath -dimensional
    exceptional geometry, because a restricted diffeomorphism @xmath
    does not link these to each other.

5.  Since @xmath is a subgroup of the affine linear group @xmath (
    1.3.18 ), it is not possible to modify the minimal connection @xmath
    ( 3.1.21 ) in such a way that the equivariance group is enlarged. In
    particular, the Levi–Civita connection is not preferred in the
    general class of connections @xmath acting on @xmath representations
    @xmath ( 4.1.8 ).

### 4.2 Decomposition of @xmath under @xmath

#### 4.2.1 The algebra @xmath

After having defined the exceptional geometry, I need to establish a
parametrization of @xmath that is appropriate for the comparison with
@xmath supergravity. This will be achieved by a decomposition of the
generators of @xmath into @xmath representations, which is natural from
the point of view of the @xmath split used by de Wit and Nicolai [ 68 ]
. The compact subalgebra @xmath of @xmath is the part of the Lorentz
algebra @xmath of @xmath supergravity that is relevant for the @xmath
-dimensional sector of the @xmath -dimensional exceptional geometry
under consideration.

For the decomposition, I will use the @xmath subalgebra of @xmath whose
vector field representation on the seven coordinates @xmath ( 4.1.29 )
has the standard form ( 1.3.14 ). In order to obtain this vector field
representation, I start with the observation that the vector fields (
4.1.45 ) preserving both tensors @xmath and @xmath , are written in the
holomorphic frame @xmath ( 4.1.32 ). This is related to the standard
coordinates @xmath by Clifford matrices. These were defined in the
appendix 6.2.1 to be the purely imaginary @xmath matrices @xmath that
fulfill the Clifford property @xmath ( 6.2.1 ) for the Euclidean metric
@xmath in seven dimensions. It is a standard result that the @xmath
traceless matrices

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that follow the definition ( 6.2.3 ), span the complex vector space of
traceless @xmath matrices. ⁹ ⁹ 9 To prove this, observe that the
standard norm of the space of matrices is the trace and that the trace
of the product of any two matrices in ( 4.2.1 ) vanishes, if and only if
the two are different ( 6.2.1 , 6.4.4 , 6.4.6 ). The matrices @xmath and
@xmath are antisymmetric, whereas @xmath is symmetric.

I will show next that this parametrization ( 4.2.1 ) induces a
decomposition of @xmath into @xmath representations, for which the
vector field representation @xmath of @xmath has the standard form (
1.3.14 ). Since the vector field representations of the non-compact
generators @xmath and of the compact ones @xmath ( 4.1.45 ) provide the
one of @xmath , I have to decompose these @xmath representations into
@xmath representations at first. Then, I will recombine them into @xmath
representations.

I start with the compact generator @xmath ( 4.1.45a ) of @xmath . Due to
its reality property ( 4.1.46a ) and its tracelessness, I can without
loss of generality decompose @xmath into @xmath representations @xmath
as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2.2)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The normalization parameters @xmath will be fixed in the sequel, partly
by a comparison with @xmath supergravity. The symmetry properties of the
@xmath -matrices imply that the decomposition ( 4.2.2 ) respects the
fact that the generators @xmath are antihermitean ( 4.1.46a ), keeping
in mind that @xmath is purely imaginary. Therefore, the generators
@xmath are real. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 It is obvious from the relation ( 6.4.5 ) that
@xmath could be replaced by @xmath . To keep the notation as simple as
possible, I will keep the purely imaginary unit @xmath , however.

With the relations ( 6.4.4 ) from the appendix 6.4.3 , it is easy to
check that the following identities hold:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.3a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.3b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.3c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This allows to construct the explicit vector field representation @xmath
of the @xmath subalgebra of @xmath with the equations ( 4.1.32 ) and (
4.1.45a ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is the advantage of the algebraic approach presented in chapter 3
that I do not have to use the complicated expression ( 4.2.1 ) in order
to compute the connection @xmath ( 4.1.8 ) in the @xmath decomposition
suitable for @xmath supergravity. In analogy to the discussion of the
affine coset from section 3.1.2 , I can work with the abstract
generators that are simpler to handle. However, one should always keep
in mind that all these generators correspond to real vector fields in
@xmath dimensions, whose explicit action on the @xmath real coordinates
@xmath can be constructed in complete analogy to ( 4.2.1 ). It is nice
to observe that an evaluation of the explicit formula ( 4.2.1 ) on the
@xmath coordinates @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is the standard vector field representation of the @xmath algebra that
has already been used in chapter 1 ( 1.3.14 , 1.3.28a ). For the
normalizations to coincide, I have to fix

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This explains why I have used the letter @xmath for this generator in
the decomposition of the @xmath element @xmath ( 4.2.2 ). Since @xmath
is a subalgebra of @xmath , all generators @xmath are compact: they are
presented as antisymmetric matrices in @xmath dimensions. Therefore, it
is natural to also use the same letter @xmath for the generators @xmath
in ( 4.2.2 ) and for @xmath in ( 1.3.28a ).

Since the generators @xmath ( 4.2.2 ) merely are a different
parametrization of the @xmath generators @xmath ( 4.1.47a ), the
commutation relations of these compact elements of @xmath can be derived
by substituting the parametrization ( 4.2.2 ) in the ones of @xmath (
4.1.47a ).

As I am interested in the commutation relations of @xmath in the @xmath
decomposition, I have to discuss the non-compact generators, too. These
are provided by the @xmath -dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath
, defined by its vector field representation @xmath ( 4.1.45b ) in
section 4.1.7 . The letter @xmath reminds of its origin, because the
elements @xmath are presented as symmetric matrices in their action on a
@xmath -dimensional vector space.

The fact that the vector space of traceless @xmath matrices is spanned
by the @xmath -matrices ( 4.2.1 ) also induces an @xmath decomposition
of the @xmath representation @xmath . With the relation ( 6.4.3 ) from
the appendix 6.4.3 , the symmetry properties of the @xmath -matrices
imply that the complex vector space of antisymmetric four-tensors with
@xmath is spanned by the following @xmath matrices:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This leads to the @xmath decomposition of the @xmath representation
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The normalization constants @xmath will be fixed in the sequel. I want
to emphasize that the Clifford algebra of @xmath -matrices does not
distinguish, if an index @xmath is lowered or raised, i.e. if the
associated space is the vec- tor space or its dual. Since the
non-degenerate symplectic form @xmath provides a canonical isomorphism
between the tangent space and its dual as used in ( 4.1.36 ), it is
obvious from the vector field representations ( 4.1.45 ) of the two
@xmath generators that the position of the indices of @xmath and @xmath
is not important, if the bar denoting the complex conjugation is kept
explicitly as in ( 4.1.46 ). In order to stress that complex conjugated
@xmath representations are dual to the original ones, I adopt the
convention to denote them with raised indices. The standard relations
for @xmath matrices ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 To prove them, recall that all @xmath
-matrices have entries of norm @xmath . Computing e.g. @xmath and @xmath
for arbitrary @xmath shows that they have the same sign. Due to the
normalization @xmath , the coefficients also coincide.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.8b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.8c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

allow to evaluate the reality condition ( 4.1.46b ) of the non-compact
generator @xmath . Keeping in mind that the matrices @xmath are purely
imaginary, the parametrization ( 4.2.1 ) implies

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

I refrain from calling the real generators @xmath the self-dual part and
@xmath the anti self-dual part of the tensor @xmath , because firstly,
the @xmath tensor links complex conjugated tensors in ( 4.1.46b ) and
secondly, indices are raised and lowered with the symplectic form @xmath
and not with a metric. ¹² ¹² 12 As for the case of @xmath in ( 4.2.2 ),
I do not eliminate the @xmath in the parametrization ( 4.2.1 ) in order
to avoid a cumbersome notation.

With the formulæ from the appendix 6.4.3 , I obtain the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

These allow to deduce the explicit vector field representation @xmath of
the non-compact generators of @xmath from ( 4.1.45b ). In analogy to (
4.2.1 ), I am interested in the part that is relevant for the @xmath
subalgebra, which is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

An evaluation of this formula on the @xmath coordinates @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is the standard vector field representation of symmetric generators
@xmath that I have already introduced in chapter 3 ( 1.3.14 , 3.1.17 ),
if and only if the constants @xmath and @xmath are fixed by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.12a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.12b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

I want to add a remark concerning the constant @xmath . As an @xmath
representation, only the symmetric traceless matrices are irreducible.
Since I did not separate the trace from the symmetric generators @xmath
in ( 4.2.1 ), I had to introduce the constant @xmath for the ansatz (
4.2.1 ) to be general. @xmath has now been fixed by requiring that the
vector field representation @xmath of @xmath in its evaluation on the
@xmath coordinates @xmath has the standard form ( 1.3.14 , 3.1.17 ). ¹³
¹³ 13 From an algebraic point of view, this constant @xmath is nothing
but the different way, in which a @xmath subalgebra can be embedded in
@xmath . It is interesting to note that the so-called “gravity subline”
of the Dynkin diagram, used e.g. in [ 13 ] , corresponds to a different
choice for @xmath .

Hence, I have succeeded in finding a @xmath subalgebra of @xmath , whose
vector field representation on the first @xmath coordinates @xmath (
4.1.29 ) has the standard form ( 1.3.14 ). I will denote its generators
( 1.3.28a , 3.1.17 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the letter @xmath as usual. The different indices should be
sufficient to distinguish the @xmath generators from the ones of @xmath
.

For the relation to @xmath supergravity, it will be important to
decompose the @xmath algebra into @xmath representations. Therefore, I
have to reassemble the non-compact @xmath representations @xmath and the
compact ones @xmath into @xmath representations. The necessary ones for
the comparison to @xmath supergravity will be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.14a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.14b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

In the context of @xmath representations, the position of the indices is
not important, because the seven-metric @xmath is a conserved tensor.
For the @xmath representations @xmath ( 4.2.14 ), this is not the case:
lowered indices correspond to the contragredient representation, which
is not equivalent to the original one with raised indices. Since I
insisted on the standard vector field representation @xmath of the
@xmath generators @xmath ( 1.3.14 ), the position of the indices in (
4.2.13 ) is fixed. Requiring that the @xmath representations @xmath (
4.2.14 ) are @xmath representations, uniquely determines the value of
the normalization constants @xmath in ( 4.2.1 ) to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.15a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.15b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

To obtain the explicit @xmath commutation relations of the @xmath
representations @xmath ( 4.2.13 ) and @xmath ( 4.2.14 ), I have to
substitute the parametrizations of @xmath ( 4.2.2 ) and @xmath ( 4.2.1 )
into the commutation relations ( 4.1.47 ). The result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.16a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.16b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

In particular, note that the non-standard trace subtractions are
uniquely determined by the present choice of @xmath ( 4.2.12b ).

I have chosen the name @xmath for the generators on purpose. These
correspond to the Chevalley generators @xmath I have introduced in
section 1.2.2 . ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 The corresponding dual generators @xmath would
have lowered @xmath indices and they would correspond to the differences
@xmath and @xmath . Together with the generators @xmath ( 4.2.14 ) and
with @xmath , these span the entire Lie algebra @xmath . The dual
nilpotent generators @xmath will not be important in the sequel. In
particular for the finite dimensional case considered here, the Serre
relations ( 1.2.7 ) imply that there is an integer number @xmath such
that the @xmath fold adjoint action of any @xmath on any other generator
vanishes. That this is indeed the case, follows from the commutation
relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.17b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.17c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

that are uniquely determined by the relations ( 4.1.47 ), too.

#### 4.2.2 Action of @xmath on the coordinates

In this dissertation, I will only use the action of the @xmath generator
@xmath ( 4.2.13 ) and of the nilpotent generators @xmath and @xmath (
4.2.14 ) on the @xmath coordinates @xmath . To describe this action,
recall that the vector field representation @xmath of the @xmath
generator @xmath ( 4.2.13 ) had the canonical shape ( 1.3.14 ) in its
action on the first @xmath coordinates @xmath of @xmath ( 4.1.29 ).

Since I want to use the algebraic approach of chapter 3 for a comparison
of the connection @xmath ( 4.1.8 ) to @xmath supergravity, it is natural
to also split the dual generators @xmath ( 1.3.6 ) accordingly. Their
vector field representation @xmath is tantamount to the derivative
operator @xmath ( 1.3.6 ) and hence, the split of @xmath into @xmath (
4.1.29 ) induces

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      @xmath      
     @xmath      @xmath      (4.2.18)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ----------

I have used the letter @xmath in order to distinguish the coordinate
vectors for the @xmath coordinates @xmath from the ones for the @xmath
dual coordinates @xmath .

A comparison of these vector field representations ( 4.2.2 ) with the
one of the holomorphic generator @xmath ( 4.1.45c ) leads with the
definition of the holomorphic coordinate @xmath ( 4.1.31 , 4.1.32 ) to
the following identity:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.20a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.20b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Next, I substitute the relation ( 4.2.19 ) into the commutation
relations ( 4.1.47d ) and ( 4.1.47e ), together with the
parametrizations of the generators @xmath ( 4.2.2 ) and @xmath ( 4.2.1 )
of @xmath . The resulting commutation relations uniquely determine the
action of the @xmath generators @xmath ( 4.2.13 ) and of @xmath ( 4.2.14
) on the generators @xmath and @xmath ( 4.2.2 ). The action of the
nilpotent generators @xmath follows the sequence: ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 I have listed
the explicit commutation relations in the appendix 6.4.4 .

  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------- --------
                    @xmath                              @xmath                   
           @xmath            @xmath            @xmath            @xmath          
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath          @xmath
                             @xmath            @xmath            @xmath @xmath   
                                      @xmath                     @xmath          
  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------------- --------

Before parametrizing the @xmath valued vielbein with the help of the
generators @xmath ( 4.2.13 ) and @xmath ( 4.2.14 ), I want to review the
origin of the different coordinates I have used.

1.  I started by evaluating the effect of preserving the symplectic form
    @xmath in section 4.1.1 , which led to the restriction of the
    diffeomorphisms @xmath to symplectomorphisms @xmath . To write these
    in a nice way, I split the @xmath coordinates @xmath into the pair
    @xmath with @xmath .

2.  It was essential for the construction of the general connection with
    affine linear equivariance in chapter 3 to separate symmetric
    generators @xmath from antisymmetric ones @xmath . For the Euclidean
    case, this is equivalent to the separation into non-compact
    generators @xmath and compact ones @xmath . This was the reason for
    substituting the complex coordinates @xmath for @xmath in section
    4.1.2 , because in these coordinates, the vector field
    representations of both the compact and the non-compact generators
    preserving @xmath had a particularly simple form ( 4.1.13 ).

3.  In section 4.1.5 , I refined the original splitting of the @xmath
    real coordinates in @xmath to @xmath with @xmath . In these
    coordinates, I specified a real symmetric quartic tensor @xmath (
    4.1.5 ) whose preservation is imposed as an additional constraint on
    the symplectomorphisms. This constraint is solved in the
    (anti)holomorphic frame @xmath that I introduced in ( 4.1.32 ).

4.  The class of diffeomorphisms that preserve the two tensors @xmath
    and @xmath is isomorphic to the subgroup @xmath of the affine group
    @xmath , what I proved in section 4.1.7 .

5.  Finally, I parametrized the Lie algebra of @xmath by @xmath
    representations and I evaluated its action on the @xmath coordinates
    @xmath .

I want to conclude with a group theoretic argument why labelling the
@xmath coordinates in the form @xmath ( 4.1.29 ) is in a way preferred
in this exceptional geometry. I defined the latter by imposing the
invariance of the two tensors @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the group
of admissible coordinate transformations is restricted to @xmath . This
statement is independent of the labelling of the coordinates.

Next observe that a theory of unrestricted Euclidean gravity in the
formulation of chapter 3 needs a vielbein matrix that is @xmath valued.
Since I restricted the @xmath -dimensional vielbein to an @xmath matrix,
it is natural to ask for @xmath subgroups of @xmath that correspond to a
lower dimensional geometry with general coordinate invariance @xmath .
The maximal one is @xmath , whose action on @xmath coordinates @xmath
can be fixed in the canonical way. This induces the labelling @xmath (
4.1.29 ). ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Even though @xmath also is a subalgebra of @xmath ,
it cannot be extended to @xmath .

Finally, it is important to recall that not all @xmath subgroups of
@xmath are subgroups of @xmath . A very prominent counterexample is
@xmath . After having fixed the supersymmetry variations of the @xmath
-dimensional theory by a comparison to @xmath supergravity, it would be
very interesting to decompose the @xmath valued vielbein and the @xmath
coordinates @xmath with respect to this subgroup. It is likely that
these coincide with the supersymmetry transformations of @xmath
supergravity in ten dimensions for the common subsector of fields
contained in the @xmath -dimensional vielbein @xmath .

This leads to the possibility that all solutions of both @xmath
supergravity in @xmath and @xmath supergravity exactly correspond to the
solutions of the complete theory in the @xmath -dimensional exceptional
geometry that do not depend on the @xmath dimensions, on which the
corresponding @xmath subgroup acts in a non-canonical way, with @xmath
respectively. This investigation is beyond the scope of this thesis,
however.

### 4.3 Vielbein and connection in @xmath decomposition

#### 4.3.1 The vielbein of the exceptional geometry

At the end of the preceding section 4.2.2 , I explained that the @xmath
subgroup of @xmath induces the split of the @xmath coordinates @xmath
into @xmath ( 4.1.29 ). This can also be phrased in other words: it
corresponds to the decomposition of the @xmath representation @xmath
into irreducible @xmath subrepresentations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The representations @xmath and @xmath are spanned by the generators
@xmath and @xmath , respectively, whereas the contragredient or dual
representations @xmath and @xmath correspond to the generators @xmath
and @xmath that are associated to the dual coordinates @xmath and @xmath
by ( 4.2.2 ).

Locally, these @xmath vectors @xmath parametrize the open set @xmath of
the @xmath -dimensional submanifold of @xmath under discussion.
Therefore any point @xmath is associated to the coefficients @xmath (
4.1.29 ) by a relation analogous to ( 1.1.5 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The obvious @xmath -covariance of the first line is obscured to obvious
@xmath -covariance and hidden @xmath -covariance in the second line by
this parametrization. I emphasize that the @xmath -covariance is not
broken by this parametrization.

Furthermore, recall two implications of the statement from section 4.1.8
that the external symmetry group @xmath is restricted to @xmath by
requiring the invariance of the tensors @xmath and @xmath :

1.  It is consistent to restrict the vielbein matrix in @xmath
    dimensions to an @xmath matrix. Then, the orthogonal matrix that
    restores an arbitrary fixing of the vielbein gauge, is in @xmath .

2.  Since @xmath is a subgroup of the affine group @xmath ( 1.3.18 ),
    the analysis from the sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 reveals that it is
    sufficient to discuss the affine coset @xmath . In contradistinction
    to the unrestricted geometry of chapter 3 , there is no further
    constraint, because there is no symmetry enhancement.

Therefore, I can without loss of generality focus on the affine coset (
3.1.6 ) in @xmath dimensions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with a restricted vielbein matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

With the split of the coordinates ( 4.3.1 ), this leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Since the coordinates commute ( 1.3.15c ), the Maurer–Cartan form takes
the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the definitions of the @xmath valued expressions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.4b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.4c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.4d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

These are abbreviations for the adjoint Lie group action of @xmath on
the basis vectors of the representation @xmath ( 4.3.1 ).

A comparison with the discussion of the affine coset in section 3.1.3
reveals that the expressions ( 4.3.4 ) comprise the degrees of freedom
of the vielbein in @xmath dimensions. In order to determine the entries
of the vielbein matrix, I have to calculate the coefficients of the
basis vectors that span @xmath . I will use the holomorphic generators
@xmath ( 4.2.19 ) for this task:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.5b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.5c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.5d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In the remaining part of this section, I will explain why this choice to
use the holomorphic generators @xmath ( 4.2.19 ) is preferred. A general
admissible diffeomorphism in the exceptional geometry induces a global
left action by @xmath on the vielbein matrix @xmath . Having fixed the
vielbein gauge in an arbitrary way, the global left action on @xmath
induces an orthogonal right action by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the vielbein matrix @xmath links the coordinate induced frame of
the tangent space to the vielbein frame by definition, the induced
action on the former is by @xmath , whereas the action on the latter is
by @xmath . The important fact is that the irreducible @xmath
representation @xmath is reducible with respect to its @xmath
subalgebra:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is obvious from the commutation relation ( 4.1.47e ) that the
holomorphic generators @xmath form this irreducible representation
@xmath of @xmath . Hence, this is also true for their coefficients

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the reason why the choice of @xmath for the basis of the
tangent space in the vielbein frame is preferred. Since the coordinate
induced frame transforms under @xmath in an irreducible way, a similar
decomposition of @xmath into complex coordinates is not preserved. ¹⁷ ¹⁷
17 This would only be true, if the manifold allowed for an integrable
complex structure [ 33 ] , which is not the case in general.

#### 4.3.2 The explicit form of the vielbein

At the end of section 4.2.1 , I mentioned that the Lie algebra @xmath is
spanned by the @xmath generators @xmath ( 4.2.13 ), by the nilpotent
generators @xmath ( 4.2.14 ) and their dual generators @xmath . This
implies in particular that the vielbein coset

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

can be parametrized by these vectors in the same way, as the standard
vielbein was parametrized by the @xmath generators @xmath in equation (
3.1.14 ) of section 3.1.3 . As long as no particular matrix form for the
vielbein @xmath is fixed, the invariance of the theory under the @xmath
-dimensional Lorentz group is manifest.

Since the @xmath -covariance of the bosonic part of @xmath supergravity
is not manifest, I will partly fix the vielbein gauge freedom by
requiring that the matrix @xmath be of the following form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This parametrization is consistent, because it follows the Iwasawa
decomposition keeping in mind that the generators @xmath are nilpotent
generators as discussed in section 4.2.1 . In the following section, I
will show that this choice ( 4.3.6 ) corresponds to a block-diagonal
form of the vielbein matrix with the blocks corresponding to the
irreducible @xmath subrepresentations of @xmath ( 4.3.1 ).

Since I have parametrized the vielbein @xmath by @xmath representations,
the remaining vielbein gauge freedom has to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It corresponds to the undetermined form of the @xmath valued matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is important to note that this parametrization does not break the
@xmath symmetry. It only hides it in the same way as it was obscured by
the parametrization of the coordinates ( 4.3.1 ). This implies that the
theory is still invariant under @xmath , but it is not a manifest
invariance as before, because the @xmath representations that I used for
the parametrization ( 4.3.6 ) are linked to each other by a general
@xmath action.

This is the same argumentation familiar from a Kaluza–Klein reduction of
a @xmath -dimensional theory on a circle: the theory is invariant under
@xmath , but the parametrization is by @xmath representations. Only if
the dependences on the @xmath coordinate, i.e. the “non-trivial modes”,
are neglected, the symmetry is broken to @xmath . As long as the
dependences on all coordinates are kept, the symmetry is still the
original one. In constructing the vielbein, I do keep all the
dependences on the @xmath coordinates and hence the entire symmetry
group.

The decomposition of the @xmath -bein @xmath into @xmath representations
( 4.3.6 ) allows to state the explicit dependence of @xmath ( 4.3.5 ) on
the parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . With the formula ( 3.1.9 )
and the commutators from appendix 6.4.4 , an analogous computation to
the one in section 3.1.3 evaluates the adjoint actions of ( 4.3.4 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.8b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

I introduced the abbreviations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.9b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.9c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.9d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the last definition follows the one of @xmath in ( 3.2.4a ).
Furthermore, I used the standard convention for the residual vielbein
@xmath ( 3.1.16 ) to separate it from its inverse only by a different
naming of the indices. ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 This implies @xmath etc. I want to
emphasize again that it is only this convention that associates
different meanings to the same symbol @xmath with different indices.

#### 4.3.3 Matrix form and inverse vielbein

The matrix form of the vielbein @xmath is obtained by spanning both
vector spaces that are linked by the linear map @xmath , with the @xmath
standard basis vectors @xmath ( 1.1.5 ). In section 4.3.1 , I showed
that the @xmath decomposition of the @xmath representation @xmath
induces a relabelling of the vectors @xmath by @xmath . This leads to
the block notation for the vielbein matrix @xmath , in which the top
left block corresponds to a @xmath submatrix etc.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Obviously, this vielbein matrix is real. The appearance of the complex
unity @xmath in the presentation ( 4.3.8 ) only is due to the
holomorphic frame @xmath ( 4.2.19 ).

Apart from the @xmath generators @xmath ( 4.2.13 ), I have only used
nilpotent generators @xmath ( 4.2.14 ) for the parametrization of the
vielbein @xmath ( 4.3.6 ). This may have already led to the expectation
that the corresponding vielbein matrix is of block-triangular shape.
Since these matrices form a group, its inverse also has this shape.

In the sections 3.1.3 and 3.1.4 , it has become clear that I need the
inverse vielbein matrix @xmath for the construction of connections
@xmath in the vielbein frame. The easiest way to obtain @xmath is to use
the fact that the vielbein is a symplectic matrix @xmath , which leads
to the relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath .

Since the symplectic form @xmath has the same coefficients ( 4.1.2 ) in
both the vielbein and the coordinate induced frame, a short calculation
provides the identity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.10a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.10b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.10c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.10d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

where I used the canonical isomorphism between tangent and cotangent
space again to change the position of the indices, which is provided by
the symplectic form @xmath ( 4.1.36 ). The factor @xmath in these
relations is the one that I have already mentioned in section 4.1.5 : it
is due to the fact that I chose the canonical normalizations of complex
geometry that are not canonical from the point of view of symplectic
geometry. Changing from the holomorphic frame @xmath ( 4.2.19 ) to the
standard coordinates ( 4.3.1 ) provides the matrix form of @xmath .

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

I needed the inverse vielbein @xmath for the construction of connections
@xmath acting on Lorentz representations, because it provided a Lorentz
covariant basis for the tangent space. Technically, I have to multiply
the partial derivative @xmath by @xmath to switch to this basis ( 2.2.1
)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath . As in the definition of the holomorphic frame @xmath (
4.1.48 ), I have introduced the convention to distinguish the objects in
the @xmath -dimensional vielbein basis from the ones in the coordinate
induced frame by an underline. I will explain next, why this is
necessary to avoid a possible confusion.

At first, I switch to the holomorphic frame @xmath ( 4.2.19 ) and split
the @xmath coordinates @xmath in the four @xmath representations @xmath
( 4.3.1 ). The definition of @xmath ( 4.3.11 ) is thus equivalent to
defining the holomorphic derivative in the vielbein frame

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

A complex conjugation provides the antiholomorphic derivative operator
in the vielbein frame @xmath , whose indices are raised with the
symplectic form @xmath ( 4.1.36 ).

Next, I want to recall that the parametrization of the vielbein @xmath
is explicitly stated in @xmath representations ( 4.3.8 ). Therefore, it
is natural to define the real valued abbreviations for derivative
operators in the @xmath -dimensional vielbein frame in analogy to the
decomposition of @xmath into the real generators @xmath and @xmath (
4.2.19 , 4.2.20 ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.13a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.13b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.13c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.13d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

This definition finally allows to determine the dependences of the
partial derivatives in the @xmath -dimensional vielbein frame on the
@xmath representations @xmath , @xmath and @xmath parametrizing the
vielbein @xmath ( 4.3.6 ), in an easy way. A standard matrix
multiplication with @xmath provides

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.14a)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.14b)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.14c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.14d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----------

It is the first line that could cause a problem. Since it is natural to
consider @xmath as a vielbein in seven dimensions, the object @xmath
might be confused with @xmath , if the underline in the definitions of
the partial derivative in the vielbein frame @xmath ( 4.3.11 , 4.3.12 ,
4.3.13 ) was dropped. In particular for a comparison to @xmath
supergravity, it is sensible to keep the underline, because the vielbein
in eleven dimensions also induces an abbreviation @xmath .

#### 4.3.4 The Maurer–Cartan form @xmath

In section 4.1.8 , I stated the general form of a connection @xmath (
4.1.8 ) that is equivariant under all diffeomorphisms preserving the
tensors @xmath and @xmath , that entirely depends on vielbein degrees of
freedom and that is linear in derivatives. It was uniquely determined up
to two constants @xmath .

To relate this result to @xmath supergravity, I parametrized the @xmath
vielbein matrix @xmath in terms of @xmath representations @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath ( 4.3.6 ). Since the general form of the connection
@xmath was provided by the compact and the non-compact parts @xmath of
the Maurer–Cartan form @xmath ( 3.1.20 ) in ( 4.1.8 ), it is necessary
to decompose @xmath into @xmath representations, too. With the general
formulæ ( 3.1.12 , 3.1.9 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the commutation relations ( 1.3.15a , 4.2.16 , 4.2.17 ), I obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the abbreviations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.16)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The components @xmath of the @xmath generators @xmath are similarly
defined to the ones ( 3.1.20 ) of chapter 3 . They depend on the
unrestricted subvielbein @xmath ( 4.3.7 ). This was expected, because
the embedding of the @xmath subalgebra in @xmath was determined in
section 4.2 by requiring the standard form @xmath ( 1.3.14 ) for @xmath
action on the coordinates.

This requirement also was the reason to fix @xmath ( 4.2.12b ), which is
responsible for the non-standard form of the commutation relations in (
4.2.16 ) and hence for the occurence of the determinant @xmath ( 4.3.9d
) of @xmath in the expressions @xmath and @xmath ( 4.3.4 ).

To establish the contact to the general form of the connection @xmath in
( 4.1.8 ), I have to decompose the Maurer–Cartan form @xmath into
compact and non-compact parts @xmath . In section 4.1.8 , I explained
that these are parametrized by the @xmath representations @xmath and
@xmath ( 4.1.49 ), respectively:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

If I recall the decomposition of the @xmath generators @xmath ( 4.2.13 )
and of @xmath ( 4.2.14 ) into compact and non-compact parts, I can
identify the @xmath representations @xmath in ( 4.3.17 ) by a comparison
with ( 4.3.4 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The decomposition of the generators @xmath ( 4.2.3 ) and @xmath ( 4.2.1
) into @xmath generators allows to relate the coefficients, taking into
account the fixing of the parameters @xmath ( 4.2.5 , 4.2.12 , 4.2.15 )
and the symmetry properties of the @xmath matrices:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.18a)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.18b)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----------

In a final step, I switch to the holomorphic vielbein frame @xmath (
4.1.48 ) of the cotangent space, because this is the one that is used in
the general formula for the connection @xmath ( 4.1.8 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.19a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.19b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The antiholomorphic objects follow from a complex conjugation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

after adjusting the position of the indices with the symplectic form
@xmath as defined in ( 4.1.36 ). I want to emphasize that the objects
@xmath in the @xmath -dimensional vielbein frame ( 4.3.18 ) contain the
derivatives that are denoted with an underline @xmath ( 4.3.11 ).

This completes the @xmath decomposition of the vielbein @xmath in @xmath
dimensions and of its Maurer–Cartan form @xmath that provides the
ingredients to relate the general connection @xmath ( 4.1.8 ) to @xmath
supergravity. I will start with this task in the next section.

### 4.4 A first comparison to @xmath supergravity

#### 4.4.1 The bosonic fields

In the introduction to this chapter, I have restricted the exceptional
geometry in @xmath dimensions to a @xmath -dimensional subsector. This
was defined by focusing on the part on which the symplectic form @xmath
was non-degenerate. Its codimension @xmath corresponds to the @xmath
dimensions that are singled out in the @xmath split of de Wit & Nicolai
[ 68 ] reviewed in section 2.3.5 . Hence, only the seven dimensions are
expected to be contained in the @xmath -dimensional subsector.

This implies that the @xmath submatrix @xmath of the vielbein matrix
@xmath in @xmath dimensions has to be present in this subsector. Guided
by the parametrization of the @xmath -dimensional vielbein matrix @xmath
( 4.3.6 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

it is natural to relate the subvielbein @xmath to the @xmath generators
@xmath .

The next relation that catches the eye is connected to the three-form
potential @xmath ( 2.3.1 ): it looks promising to identify the
coefficients @xmath in @xmath with the coefficents of @xmath in the
eleven-dimensional three-form @xmath with @xmath .

To complete the identification of the bosonic degrees of freedom
contained in @xmath with the ones of @xmath supergravity, I have to
establish a relation for the coefficient @xmath in @xmath . The
canonical candidate is the dual six-form potential of @xmath
supergravity that I have introduced in equation ( 2.3.5 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.2b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

There is a subtlety to observe. By the very definition of exceptional
geometry, all degrees of freedom are independent, if they are contained
in the @xmath -dimensional vielbein that is restricted by the invariance
of the tensors @xmath and @xmath . ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 An additional restriction on
the vielbein would have to be accompanied by a further restriction of
the geometry, e.g. by imposing the invariance of an additional tensor.
In particular, this is true for the coefficients @xmath and @xmath in
the subvielbein @xmath .

In the context of @xmath supergravity, however, the three-form potential
and the six-form potential are related by the duality ( 4.4.2 ). Hence,
they do not correspond to independent degrees of freedom in general.

The striking fact is that I have not associated all degrees of freedom
of the three-form potential @xmath to the vielbein @xmath so far. Only
for the coefficients of @xmath with @xmath , this is the case. The other
degrees of freedom could be associated to the six-form potential. In
particular, it is possible to associate the degrees of freedom of @xmath
with @xmath to @xmath in seven dimensions by the duality relation (
4.4.2 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.3a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.3b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the degrees of freedom contained in @xmath and in @xmath are
independent indeed. Thus, the entire subvielbein @xmath in @xmath
dimensions is associated to bosonic fields of @xmath supergravity. My
restriction of the @xmath -dimensional exceptional geometry to the
subsector of fields comprised by @xmath hence implies that I set the
remaining bosonic fields of @xmath supergravity to zero. In the complete
theory, it is likely that they correspond to the degrees of freedom of
the @xmath vielbein that are not contained in @xmath .

To complete the identification, I have to fix the relation between the
subvielbein @xmath of the @xmath -dimensional vielbein @xmath and the
degrees of freedom of @xmath that are associated to the @xmath generator
@xmath ( 4.4.1 ). This is achieved by recalling the definition of the
four form field strength @xmath ( 2.3.2 ) in eleven dimensions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Restricting the range of the indices to @xmath and switching to the
vielbein frame with @xmath ( 2.2.1 ) results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From the point of view of exceptional geometry, this is a derivative
acting on the coefficient @xmath of the coset @xmath ( 4.4.1 ). For this
derivative to be equivariant under a restricted diffeomorphism in @xmath
dimensions, i.e. in particular under a left action by @xmath , it must
be related to the invariant coefficient ( 4.3.4 ) of the Maurer–Cartan
form @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is possible, if I identify the @xmath valued matrix @xmath ( 4.3.7
) in @xmath with the subvielbein @xmath in the following way

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.4b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.4c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Then, I obtain the relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

if I use the abbreviation @xmath ( 2.2.1 ) in the definition of @xmath (
4.3.4 ). It was to distinguish this notation @xmath from the derivative
@xmath ( 4.3.13 ) in the @xmath -dimensional vielbein frame that I
introduced the underline in ( 4.3.11 ).

The fact that a derivative acting on coset degrees of freedom must be
@xmath -equivariant also applies to the definition of the seven form
field strength ( 4.4.3b ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The corresponding coefficient ( 4.3.4 ) of the Maurer–Cartan form @xmath
has the form after substituting the subvielbein @xmath for @xmath (
4.4.4 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

A comparison provides the relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

if the normalization constant @xmath of the generator @xmath ( 4.2.2 )
is fixed by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is obvious from the first order form of the field equation for the
three-form potential @xmath ( 2.3.5 ) that @xmath corresponds to the
normalization constant @xmath of the six-form potential @xmath in @xmath
dimensions. It was fixed to @xmath in order to write the equation (
2.3.5a ) in canonical form.

Since a seven form field strength in seven dimensions is equivalent to a
scalar, I can without loss of generality introduce the notation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

before I conclude this section with two comments on the rescaling (
4.4.4 ) of the vielbein.

-   The Weyl rescaling with the determinant of the vielbein ( 4.4.4 )
    exactly is the one used by de Wit and Nicolai in [ 68 ] .

-   It corresponds to a different choice of the constant @xmath that
    fixed the embedding of @xmath in @xmath . If I had worked with
    @xmath instead of @xmath ( 4.2.12b ), I would have encorporated this
    rescaling in the @xmath decomposition of @xmath . Setting @xmath
    corresponds to the so-called “gravity subline”, used e.g. in [ 13 ]
    .

    I did not adopt this choice in section 4.2.1 , because the @xmath
    action on the coordinates would have a non-standard form, which
    would imply a non-standard form of the vielbein matrix @xmath in
    section 4.3.3 .

#### 4.4.2 The connection

In the preceding section, I have identified fields of @xmath
supergravity with @xmath representations that parametrize the vielbein
@xmath ( 4.3.6 ). In order to extend this relation to the dynamics in an
exceptional geometry, it has become clear in chapter 2 that the
covariant derivative @xmath is the fundamental object to discuss. For
any physical field @xmath that transforms as a representation of @xmath
, the general form of @xmath is defined by ( 1.4.7 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the action of the @xmath valued one-form @xmath ( 4.1.8 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and the abbreviation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.4.10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The @xmath representations @xmath in this action are related to the
fields of @xmath supergravity by the equations ( 4.3.18 ) and ( 4.3.19
). It is this form of the connection in the @xmath -covariant vielbein
frame @xmath ( 4.1.48 ) that will be used for a comparison to the
supersymmetry transformations in section 4.5 .

Nevertheless, it also is interesting to state the connection @xmath in
the @xmath -covariant vielbein frame ( 4.3.13 ), because I decomposed
@xmath with respect to @xmath to establish the contact to the fields of
@xmath supergravity. This change of basis in the vielbein frame follows
the one in ( 4.2.19 ) and leads to the definition

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For a comparison to @xmath supergravity, it is sensible to assume
trivial dependence of the fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath on the
@xmath coordinates @xmath ( 4.3.1 ) of the exceptional geometry, because
these directions do not exist in the @xmath theory. A brief look at the
expressions for partial derivatives in the @xmath -dimensional vielbein
frame ( 4.3.13 ) reveals that these formulæ take a very simple form in
this truncation: only one derivative is non-trivial

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The covariant derivative @xmath ( 4.4.9 ) along the common directions
@xmath of the @xmath -dimensional sector of the exceptional geometry and
of @xmath supergravity is provided by the @xmath representation @xmath (
4.4.2 ) in the vielbein frame

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

For general constants @xmath , the abbreviation @xmath is related to the
fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In order to establish the contact to @xmath supergravity, it seems to be
natural to fix @xmath , which leads with the definition of the field
strengths @xmath ( 4.4.5 , 4.4.1 ) and with the one of the torsionfree
spin connection @xmath ( 2.2.16 ) to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This expression coincides with the covariant derivative defined in
equation (3.32) of de Wit & Nicolai’s publication [ 68 ] in which they
proved the @xmath -covariance of @xmath supergravity.

I want to emphasize that @xmath is the standard form of the Levi–Civita
connection in the spin frame ( 2.2.16 ) for the rescaled vielbein @xmath
( 4.4.4 ). It is obvious from the general form of a connection with
@xmath -equivariance ( 4.4.2 ) that it is impossible to obtain the spin
connection for the unrescaled vielbein @xmath instead. Following the
discussion of section 4.4.1 , the approach to consider @xmath instead of
@xmath ( 4.4.4 ) as the subvielbein of @xmath supergravity is in
conflict with the definition of the field strengths @xmath . ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 A
different choice for @xmath in ( 4.2.12b ) would not alter this fact,
because the explicit formula ( 4.4.2 ) would also have to be modified.

De Wit & Nicolai’s @xmath split of @xmath supergravity [ 68 ] obscured
the @xmath symmetry of @xmath supergravity, only its @xmath subgroup was
manifest in their formulation. This is in accordance with the fact that
the derivatives of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath appear as @xmath
-covariant field strengths @xmath ( 2.3.2 , 2.3.5b ).

However, the connection @xmath ( 4.4.9 ) is defined in the @xmath
-dimensional exceptional geometry. This implies that the covariant
derivative @xmath along the @xmath coordinates @xmath ( 4.3.1 ) cannot
be neglected. The assumption that the physical fields @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath do not depend on these coordinates only implies that
the three @xmath representations @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ( 4.4.2 )
have to transform as tensors under the symmetry group.

It is obvious that this is not the case, if the symmetry group was
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Recapitulating the construction of the exceptional geometry in this
chapter, this does not come as a surprise. The symmetry group of general
coordinate transformations @xmath was restricted by imposing the
invariance of the two tensors @xmath and @xmath to the finite
dimensional symmetry group @xmath . Hence, @xmath is not a symmetry
group of the exceptional geometry and there is no reason for the objects
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ( 4.4.2 ) to transform as tensors under
@xmath , if the dependence on the @xmath coordinates @xmath ( 4.3.1 ) is
neglected.

It is important to observe that this does not falsify the claim that all
solutions of @xmath supergravity are special solutions of a theory in a
@xmath -dimensional exceptional geometry. Solutions are characterized by
their equations of motion and not by the symmetry group of these
equations. The dependence on the additional @xmath coordinates is
similar to the dependence on the mass of a scalar field in flat
Minkowski space that is subject to the massive version of the
Klein–Gordon equation. All fields with the same mass form
representations of the Poincaré isometry group. Only the special fields
with vanishing mass allow for an extension of this symmetry group to
include the scaling symmetry. In the present setting of @xmath truncated
coordinates, the special fields allow for an extension of the @xmath
part of @xmath to @xmath . ²¹ ²¹ 21 In both cases, the equations of
motion impose an additional constraint, of course.

For the proof of @xmath -covariance of @xmath supergravity in [ 68 ] ,
this subtlety is not of importance. De Wit and Nicolai did not claim
that the @xmath -covariance of the equations of motion is related to a
higher dimensional exceptional geometry. They decoupled the right action
on the vielbein from the left one and discussed a general @xmath action
on physical fields @xmath that is not induced by a diffeomorphism. This
fact may have led to the “fixing” of the @xmath gauge of the generalized
inverse vielbein @xmath that they defined in equation (3.5) of [ 68 ] .
It is nice to observe that this object coincides with the corresponding
part @xmath ( 4.3.10 ) of the vielbein in the exceptional geometry.

### 4.5 Supersymmetry

The analysis of section 4.4.2 showed that it is not an appropriate
guideline for fixing the constants @xmath in the general form ( 4.4.10 )
of the connection @xmath ( 4.4.9 ) in the truncation to the seven
coordinates @xmath to require abstract @xmath -equivariance. In this
section, I will show that it is possible to fix @xmath in such a way
that a particular way to act with @xmath on a @xmath representation
@xmath is @xmath -covariant. The result reproduces the supersymmetry
variation of the fermion in @xmath supergravity that corresponds to the
bosonic degrees of freedom @xmath , @xmath , @xmath discussed in section
4.4.1 .

#### 4.5.1 The equivariant supersymmetry variation

A characteristic feature of @xmath supergravity is its invariance under
the supersymmetry transformation ( 2.3.4 ). To lift this to the
exceptional geometry, I have to define a supersymmetry variation @xmath
in @xmath dimensions with the following properties ²² ²² 22 As @xmath
does not have an index, there should not arise any confusion with the
notation for the @xmath -covariant basis @xmath that I defined in (
4.3.13 ).

1.  @xmath is a derivation, i.e.

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                       
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.1a)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.1b)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

    with arbitrary @xmath representations @xmath and @xmath .

2.  @xmath is equivariant under the diffeomorphisms that preserve the
    tensors @xmath and @xmath defined in section 4.1 .

Since it is beyond the scope of this thesis to discuss the entire theory
in @xmath , I focussed on the subsector that corresponds to the @xmath
submatrix @xmath of the vielbein in @xmath . Next recall from section
4.3.1 that the independent degrees of freedom of @xmath can be
parametrized in the holomorphic frame @xmath ( 4.2.19 ) by @xmath (
4.3.5 ) with @xmath . Therefore, it is sufficient to discuss the two
objects

  -- -- -------- -- -- ----------
                       
        @xmath         (4.5.2a)
        @xmath         (4.5.2b)
  -- -- -------- -- -- ----------

In section 1.1.3 , I defined a derivation to be equivariant if it maps
covariant objects to covariant objects under a symmetry transformation.
Since @xmath ( 4.5.2 ) transforms in the vielbein frame, the induced
action of a diffeomorphism @xmath is by the Lie group action of @xmath .
This is further constrained to @xmath due to the invariance of the
tensors @xmath and @xmath . The transformation of @xmath that is induced
by @xmath hence has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is important to observe that the equivariant derivation @xmath does
not have the same explicit form in the original and the transformed
frame in general, i.e. for a general @xmath representation @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is in complete analogy to the one-form valued connection @xmath (
1.4.7 ) acting on @xmath representations @xmath : even if the indices of
the cotangent space are contracted with the basis forms @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

it is only the Cartan differential @xmath that is invariant under a
symmetry transformation, which is of course the reason why @xmath is not
equivariant in general.

The same argumentation that allows to decompose a general connection
@xmath acting on @xmath representations @xmath into a Cartan
differential @xmath and a one-form valued @xmath action @xmath , can be
applied to the case of the equivariant derivation @xmath . Hence, I can
always decompose an equivariant derivation @xmath acting on @xmath
representations @xmath in the following way

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In a next step, I will fix the @xmath valued parameters @xmath by the
action of @xmath on the vielbein @xmath . There is a subtlety to
observe: I have defined the equivariant derivation @xmath on arbitrary
@xmath representations @xmath . The vielbein matrix @xmath transforms by
a multiplication with @xmath from the right and with @xmath from the
left. Hence it is not clear a priori whether both indices of the
vielbein matrix are affected by the @xmath action.

To answer this question, recall that the @xmath action @xmath is
introduced in order to guarantee covariance ( 4.5.3 ). In other words,
@xmath compensates the effect of the “naked” derivation @xmath on the
transformation matrices, which are the Jacobian and the compensating
Lorentz rotation @xmath .

If the action of @xmath on these matrices is trivial, then it is not
necessary to add a compensating @xmath transformation. In section 4.1.7
, I proved that the general diffeomorphisms preserving the tensors
@xmath and @xmath form a subgroup of the affine group @xmath ( 1.3.18 ),
whose associated Jacobians are constant matrices. Hence, the definition
of a derivation ( 4.5.1 ) implies that the action of @xmath on the
Jacobian is trivial. The compensating Lorentz rotation @xmath depends on
the @xmath -dependent vielbein @xmath , however. Therefore, it is
necessary and sufficient to define the action of @xmath on the vielbein
by a right action alone.

Following the conventions from section 1.4 , I obtain for the @xmath
action on the vielbein @xmath (with the commutation relation ( 4.1.47e )
after fixing the norm of the @xmath generator @xmath by @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Due to the standard relations between the vielbein and its inverse in
the holomorphic frame

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

the equation ( 4.5.5 ) leads to the identities for derivations of the
vielbein ( 4.5.2 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath is a derivation, @xmath is an @xmath valued Maurer–Cartan
form. This allows to make use of the analysis of the Maurer–Cartan form
@xmath of section 4.3.4 , which shows that I can without loss of
generality identify @xmath ( 4.5.4 ) with the compact part of @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, the non-compact part of the Maurer–Cartan form @xmath is
restricted to @xmath , which is the totally antisymmetric four-tensor
representation of @xmath . Adopting the choice ( 4.5.6 ), the
equivariant supersymmetry variations @xmath of the @xmath vielbein
@xmath have the particularly nice form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.7b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

#### 4.5.2 Fermions

Imposing the invariance of the tensors @xmath and @xmath reduced the
covariance group @xmath in the vielbein frame from @xmath to @xmath .
The covering group @xmath is hence restricted to the simply connected
group @xmath .

In section 1.2.5 , I have explained that it is consistent for fermions
@xmath to transform as representations of the double cover @xmath of the
covariance group @xmath , because all physical expectation values are of
even degree in @xmath . In most physical theories, fermions @xmath are
associated to the representations of @xmath that are not representations
of @xmath .

For the case of the exceptional geometry defined in this chapter, the
compact group is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The representations of its double cover @xmath that are not @xmath
representations, are characterized by the fact that they have an odd
number of @xmath indices. Therefore, it is natural to associate fermions
to these @xmath representations, which leads with @xmath to the
definitions of the Graßmann odd holomorphic fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.8b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The generators @xmath and @xmath span the complex vector spaces @xmath
and @xmath . In section 4.5.5 , I will explain the way these holomorphic
fermions @xmath and @xmath are related to real sections of the spin
bundle over the @xmath -dimensional Lorentzian manifold @xmath with
preserved tensors @xmath and @xmath .

The antiholomorphic fields @xmath and @xmath follow by complex
conjugation. For consistency with the @xmath action, it is natural to
raise the index of the corresponding abstract generators @xmath in
analogy to the definition ( 4.1.36 , 4.1.45c )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.9b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This is an @xmath -covariant definition on the level of the abstract
generators. A comment concerning the Kronecker @xmath is necessary. At
first, recall that only in the vector field representation @xmath , the
lowering of an even number of @xmath indices is related to the
symplectic form @xmath by the definition ( 4.1.36 ). In the equations (
4.1.46 ), I have lifted this definition to the level of the abstract
generators. The holomorphic generators @xmath ( 4.5.8 ) with an odd
number of indices do not have a vector field representation @xmath ,
however. This is due to the fact that the fields @xmath and @xmath are
not sections of a tensor product of the (co)tangent bundle. Their
definition involves the spin bundle. Therefore, there does not exist a
natural definition of the antiholomorphic generators @xmath with an odd
number of @xmath indices that is canonically induced by the vector field
representation @xmath .

Nevertheless, the definitions ( 4.5.9 ) of @xmath on the level of
abstract generators is not completely arbitrary. A tensor product of two
generators @xmath with an odd number of @xmath indices maps to vectors
@xmath with an even number of indices, e.g.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath ( 4.2.19 ), there is a vector field representation @xmath (
4.1.45c ) and the canonical isomorphism ( 4.1.36 ) provided by the
symplectic form @xmath has to be applied. Therefore, the definiton of
lowering an odd number of @xmath indices may only differ from ( 4.5.9 )
by a sign. ²³ ²³ 23 At this point, it is important to keep in mind the
discussion of section 4.1.3 : I explained the different natural
conventions of symplectic and of complex geometry, where the definition
of the complex conjugated coordinate @xmath is concerned. Since I chose
the one of complex geometry ( 4.1.12 ), the symmetric tensor product
@xmath has to be related to the hermitean form @xmath of the abstract
unitary generators @xmath for consistency with complex conjugation (
4.1.46a ).

Due to the relation of the tensor product of odd generators @xmath and
@xmath to @xmath ( 4.5.10 ), the commutor of @xmath with @xmath (
4.1.47e ) induces

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.11b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

These commutation relations allow to apply the definition of an @xmath
action on a physical field from section 1.4 to the holomorphic fields
@xmath and @xmath , which is the last ingredient to specify the
supersymmetry variations ( 4.5.7 ) of the vielbein @xmath in @xmath
dimensions.

#### 4.5.3 The supersymmetry variations in @xmath

Since I focussed on the bosonic degrees of freedom of the @xmath
vielbein that correspond to the @xmath valued submatrix @xmath , the
supersymmetry variation @xmath ( 4.5.1 ) of all bosonic degrees of
freedom under consideration are comprised by the relations ( 4.5.7 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the objects in the last line parametrize @xmath . This @xmath
representation space is spanned by the generators @xmath that are
subject to the reality constraint ( 4.1.46b )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This circumstance has to be taken into account when relating the
variation of the vielbein @xmath to the fermions @xmath and @xmath (
4.5.8 ). Thus, it is natural to define

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

such that a contraction of this equation with @xmath is equivalent to a
complex conjugation.

Since it is essential for a physical symmetry to map the set of
solutions of the equations of motion to itself, I have to define an
action of the variation @xmath ( 4.5.1 ) on the fermions @xmath and
@xmath . To establish the connection to supergravity, I will interpret
@xmath as the parameter of the supersymmetry transformation. Therefore,
I can without loss of generality set

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

It is important to observe a difference to the standard definition of
supergravity theories: I have to use the equivarant variation @xmath
instead of the invariant one @xmath ( 4.5.4 ), because otherwise, the
relation ( 4.5.12 ) would not be preserved under an action induced by a
diffeomorphism of the exceptional geometry.

In particular, the equation ( 4.5.12 ) together with the decomposition (
4.5.4 ) of the equivariant derivation @xmath into an invariant variation
@xmath and a @xmath action implies that @xmath does not vanish:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The action of @xmath on the @xmath representation @xmath follows the
same rules that were used to obtain ( 4.5.5 ). The fact @xmath may be
important for the evaluation of the supersymmetry algebra, whose general
form is provided by ( 2.2.24 ). As I stated in the introduction, this is
beyond the scope of my thesis, however.

To complete the set of supersymmetry variations, I have to define an
action of @xmath on @xmath . Since @xmath is the transformation
parameter of a symmetry algebra, @xmath has to be linear in @xmath . By
@xmath -covariance, the canonical choice is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the connection @xmath ( 4.4.9 ) in the antiholomorphic
vielbein frame @xmath of the cotangent space that I also used in section
4.3.4 . The variation of the antiholomorphic section @xmath hence
contains the connection @xmath in the holomorphic vielbein frame @xmath
:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To conclude, I repeat all independent supersymmetry variations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The remaining degrees of freedom @xmath in the connection @xmath (
4.4.10 ) and the normalization constants @xmath will be fixed by a
comparison to the supersymmetry variations of @xmath supergravity. To do
this, I have to perform an @xmath decomposition of the @xmath
representations similar to the one of section 4.4.1 .

#### 4.5.4 Decomposition into @xmath representations

I want to start with the variation of the bosonic degrees of freedom
@xmath ( 4.5.3 ), in which I can without loss of generality substitute
@xmath for the equivariant derivation @xmath ( 4.5.7 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath valued matrix @xmath in this relation was decomposed into
@xmath representation by ( 4.3.6 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is important that the @xmath representations @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath have only been used in the vielbein frame so far. Therefore, I
can without loss of generality define the following objects with the
rescaled vielbein @xmath ( 4.4.4 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.17b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

I have shown in section 4.4.1 that it is the rescaled vielbein @xmath
and not @xmath that is identified with the corresponding subvielbein of
@xmath supergravity. Therefore, this definition ( 4.5.17 ) is consistent
with the standard definition of @xmath supergravity in which the
potentials @xmath are considered as three- and six-form potentials,
respectively that have a natural definition in the coordinate induced
frame. From the point of view of exceptional geometry, the bosonic
degrees of freedom @xmath and @xmath do not correspond to three- or
six-forms and hence, the statement ( 4.5.17 ) indeed is a definition.

Since @xmath also is a derivation, I can use the evaluation of the
Maurer–Cartan form @xmath from section 4.3.4 in terms of @xmath
representations. A comparison of the abbreviations ( 4.3.4 ) with the
definition ( 4.5.17 ) while keeping in mind the rescaling of the
vielbein ( 4.4.4 ) then leads to the equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5.18)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Together with equation ( 4.5.16 ), this defines the supersymmetry
variation of the vielbein @xmath ( 4.4.4 ) as well as the ones of the
@xmath representations @xmath and @xmath . It is important to use the
derivation @xmath at this point, because the @xmath action of the
equivariant derivation @xmath would not close on @xmath representations.

The variations of the @xmath representations can be cast in a
particularly simple form by defining

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath and @xmath . Since the degrees of freedom of @xmath and
@xmath match

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

it is possible to invert this relation. A short calculation reveals

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The relation for the antiholomorphic fields @xmath follows by complex
conjugation keeping in mind that the Clifford matrices @xmath are purely
imaginary

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

I want to stress that this is a mere relabelling of the degrees of
freedom. Hence, the @xmath -covariance is not broken, it is only
obscured in complete analogy to the @xmath -covariance of @xmath in the
@xmath decomposition of section 4.3.2 .

Substituting the relation ( 4.5.20 ) in ( 4.5.16 ) allows to separate
the linearly independent @xmath representations in equation ( 4.5.18 )
with the @xmath -matrix relations from appendix 6.4.3 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.21a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.21b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

These relations already look quite similar to the ones ( 2.3.4 ) of
@xmath supergravity, in which the @xmath -covariance is obvious. Having
fixed the normalization of @xmath in ( 4.4.7 ), the @xmath -covariance
is only enhanced to @xmath for the present ratio of prefactors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Before I continue with the supersymmetry variation of the fermion @xmath
, I want to fix the @xmath action @xmath ( 4.5.4 ) that distinguishes
the standard supersymmetry variation @xmath from the covariant one
@xmath . In equation ( 4.5.6 ), I determined @xmath in terms of the
compact part of the Maurer–Cartan form @xmath . Hence, I can use the
results from section 4.3.4 and obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

A substitution with the explicit form ( 4.5.21 ) of the variations of
the @xmath representations finally leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.5.22)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------

Since @xmath is a part of the equivariant derivation @xmath , it does
not transform as an @xmath tensor under the induced action of a
diffeomorphism. This is due to the same reasoning showing that the
Christoffel symbols or the spin connection are no tensors, either.

The final variation to discuss is the one of the holomorphic fermion
@xmath ( 4.5.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The first observation is that the @xmath action @xmath on @xmath is not
trivial. With its definition ( 4.5.4 ), I obtain in analogy to the
computation of ( 4.5.5 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Together with the explicit form of @xmath ( 4.5.22 ), it is obvious that
the @xmath action @xmath results in a quadratic expression in @xmath .
Hence, I drop it for the present calculation, because I have also
neglected higher order terms in fermions in the definition of @xmath
supergravity in section 2.3.3 .

To compare the remaining part to @xmath supergravity, I can without loss
of generality truncate the @xmath additional dimensions of the
exceptional geometry as I have explained in section 4.4.1 . Furthermore,
it will prove convenient to also substitute the definition of @xmath (
4.5.20 ) in the supersymmetry variation. Then, I obtain after some
algebraic manipulations with the formulæ from appendix 6.4.3 and with
the connection @xmath ( 4.4.10 ) and the abbreviation @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.5.23)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------

I want to emphasize that the equation ( 4.5.23 ) provides the general
form of a connection @xmath in the exceptional geometry that is linear
in derivatives and that only depends on vielbein degrees of freedom. In
particular, the constants @xmath uniquely fix the connection with these
properties in @xmath dimensions as explained in section 4.1.8 .

I have only neglected the dependence on the additional @xmath dimensions
in the equation ( 4.5.23 ), because these do not correspond to
directions in @xmath supergravity. The constants @xmath and @xmath are
normalization constants that are related to the @xmath decomposition of
the @xmath valued vielbein @xmath : @xmath fixes the norm of the
generators @xmath ( 4.2.2 , 4.2.14 ) that is associated to the field
@xmath , whereas @xmath scales the relation between the real coordinate
chart @xmath and the holomorphic one @xmath ( 4.1.32 ).

For a comparison to the supersymmetry variations of @xmath supergravity,
I adopt the following choice

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.24a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.24b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.24c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Then the variation ( 4.5.23 ) of the holomorphic field @xmath takes the
nice form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.5.25)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------

The variation of the antiholomorphic field @xmath follows from complex
conjugation. Before I relate these fields @xmath to the real gravitino
@xmath in the next section, I want to add some comments concerning the
choice of constants ( 4.5.24 ).

-   The general coordinate invariance of @xmath supergravity reduces to
    @xmath for the fields under consideration. Therefore, all
    derivatives of the three- and six-form potentials @xmath have to be
    @xmath -covariant @xmath tensors. It is obvious from the relation (
    4.5.23 ) that this is only possible, if the constants are fixed by (
    4.5.24 ).

-   A joint realization with the conformal subgroup of diffeomorphisms
    as introduced in section 3.2.5 cannot be applied to this theory. I
    proved in section 4.1.6 that this subgroup does not preserve the
    quartic tensor @xmath , which directly implies that it would not
    respect the restriction of the vielbein matrix @xmath to be @xmath
    valued.

-   Finally, the resulting connection @xmath with the conventions (
    4.5.24 ) does not coincide with the projection ( 4.1.51 ) of the
    Levi–Civita connection @xmath on @xmath as explained in section
    4.1.8 . Therefore, the procedure of Borisov & Ogievetsky is not even
    related to this @xmath in an indirect way, i.e. by an application to
    the four-dimensional part of the @xmath -dimensional geometry with
    @xmath symmetry.

#### 4.5.5 Comparison to @xmath supergravity

In section 4.4 , I have identified the bosonic fields of @xmath
supergravity that correspond to the subsector of the exceptional
geometry in @xmath which is parametrized by the subvielbein @xmath in
@xmath dimensions. These fields are the unrestricted @xmath subvielbein
of the @xmath -dimensional one @xmath , the part of the three-form
potential parametrized by @xmath and the dual six-form potential @xmath
with the indices ranging over @xmath . The latter was related to the
part of the three-form potential @xmath along the remaining four
directions @xmath by the duality relation ( 4.4.3a ). For the comparison
to the subsector @xmath of the exceptional geometry, I have set the
remaining bosonic degrees of freedom to zero. Therefore, the relevant
supersymmetry transformations of the bosons in @xmath supergravity (
2.3.4 ) have the form (with @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.26a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.26b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Since the identification of the degrees of freedom of the six-form
potential @xmath in seven dimensions with the ones of the three-form
potential @xmath relies on an equation of motion, the supersymmetry
variation of @xmath cannot be deduced easily from the ones of the @xmath
supergravity in the standard form ( 2.3.4 ). ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 As soon as the
dynamics of the complete theory in the sixty-dimensional exceptional
geometry are established, the action of @xmath on the equation of motion
( 4.4.3a ) may provide a non-trivial consistency check for the
definitions of the variations @xmath and @xmath .

It catches the eye in formula ( 4.5.26 ) that only the part @xmath of
the gravitino with @xmath is related to the degrees of freedom of the
subsector of exceptional geometry parametrized by @xmath . Hence, it is
sufficient to focus on the supersymmetry variation ( 2.3.4 ) of these
components. Due to the restriction to the degrees of freedom of @xmath ,
it takes the following form in the vielbein frame to lowest order in
fermions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5.27)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

As defined in section 2.3.3 and in appendix 6.2.1 , the real @xmath
matrices @xmath with @xmath form a Majorana representation of the
Clifford algebra. Therefore, I can without loss of generality drop the
complex conjugation in the definition of the Dirac conjugate @xmath of a
spinor @xmath that was used in section 2.1.1 . In order to avoid a
confusion with the complex conjugation of the holomorphic fields @xmath
and @xmath from section 4.5.2 , I substitute the following notation for
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

It is important to note that choosing the Majorana representation for
the Clifford matrices does not imply that the spinors @xmath and @xmath
are real objects. A complex conjugation of the supersymmetry variations
of bosons ( 4.5.26 ) and fermions ( 4.5.27 ) reveals that this choice
would even be inconsistent.

Choosing the Majorana representation only allows to rescale the fermions
@xmath and @xmath in such a way that the rescaled fermions @xmath and
@xmath are real objects:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.29a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.29b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

This rescaling was also performed by de Wit & Nicolai in [ 68 ] . It
only changes the prefactor of the supersymmetry tranformation of the
bosons, whose manifestly real form hence is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.30a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.30b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The variation of the rescaled fermion @xmath has the same form as the
one of @xmath ( 4.5.27 ), if @xmath is substituted for @xmath .

Next, recall that it was essential for the proof of the @xmath
-covariance of @xmath supergravity [ 68 ] to reduce the Lorentz gauge
group @xmath to @xmath by fixing an explicit ansatz for the vielbein
matrix. Since the @xmath -covariance was the major motivation to discuss
the exceptional geometry, it is natural to perform this @xmath split in
the present case, too. The appropriate decomposition of the eleven real
matrices @xmath has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.31a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.31b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The Clifford matrices @xmath in @xmath are real and @xmath . Therefore,
I had to introduce the imaginary unit @xmath in the line ( 4.5.31b ),
because @xmath is purely imaginary by definition. ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 More details
on these Clifford matrices can be found in appendix 6.2.1 .

The @xmath split of the Clifford algebra ( 4.5.31 ) induces a
decomposition of its @xmath -dimensional representation space into the
product @xmath . I have explained in section 4.4 that the focus of this
thesis is on the seven-dimensional part. Therefore, I want to state the
index corresponding to the spin representation @xmath of @xmath
explicitly. The rescaled supersymmetry parameter @xmath and gravitino
@xmath are hence labelled by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The indices corresponding to the spin representation @xmath of @xmath
are kept implicit. In this notation, the definition of the conjugated
spinor @xmath ( 4.5.28 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In particular, the transposition @xmath only affects the @xmath part,
which is obvious from the decomposition of @xmath ( 4.5.31 ). The
supersymmetry variations of the bosons ( 4.5.30 ) hence have the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.33a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.33b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

where I have used the fact that @xmath squares to the negative identity
@xmath on the @xmath part ( 6.2.9 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This fact is of crucial importance. It canonically induces an
endomorphism of the @xmath -dimensional representation vector space with
matrix representation @xmath . Hence, there is an endomorphism of a real
vector space that squares to the negative identity. This defines a
complex structure.

Following the standard procedure that is for example performed in
Hitchin’s article [ 27 ] , I define the holomorphic objects by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.35a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.35b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

With the simple calculation

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

I can evaluate the endomorphism @xmath on these holomorphic fields (
4.5.35 ) to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.36a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.36b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Hence, I can without loss of generality restrict the real @xmath
-dimensional representation space to a complex @xmath -dimensional
vector space, on which the action of @xmath is well-defined. Due to the
interpretation of @xmath as an imaginary unit, this representation of
@xmath is also referred to as chiral @xmath [ 68 ] .

A comment should be added concerning the position of the spinor indices.
Cremmer and Julia [ 11 ] have already observed that lowered and raised
indices are equivalent before the action of the chiral @xmath is
introduced. Furthermore, they mentioned that the canonically associated
complex version @xmath of the Dirac conjugate of a real spinor @xmath
also is holomorphic. This fact directly follows from the calculation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which uses @xmath and the antisymmetry of @xmath . Therefore, it is
consistent and necessary to denote the conjugated spinor @xmath of the
holomorphic one @xmath with raised indices, too.

The corresponding antiholomorphic spinor follows from complex
conjugation and lowering the index with the Kronecker @xmath as in
equation ( 4.5.9 ). The antiholomorphic supersymmetry transformation
parameter @xmath is hence associated to the real parameter @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

keeping in mind that the position of the index of the real spinor @xmath
was arbitrary. As a last step, I perform a chiral rescaling and multiply
by the determinant of the vielbein ( 4.4.4 ) in complete analogy to [ 68
] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.38a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.38b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The conjugate spinor transforms with the same matrix @xmath from the
right.

Finally, this shows that the supersymmetry variation of the siebenbein
@xmath in @xmath supergravity ( 4.5.33 ) and in the exceptional geometry
( 4.5.21 ) exactly coincide. It should be noted that there is no
distinction between spinors and conjugated spinors in the subsector of
exceptional geometry that corresponds to @xmath . For the
transformations in this subsector, it was sufficient to reduce the
tensor product of @xmath with the four-dimensional space @xmath to the
real sixteen-dimensional space @xmath with the complex structure @xmath
.

Furthermore, the supersymmetry variations of the three-form potential
@xmath ( 4.5.33 , 4.5.21 ) in both theories can be identified, if the
normalization constant @xmath of the generator @xmath ( 4.2.2 , 4.2.14 )
is fixed to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This was the last normalization constant remaining. Therefore, the
comparison of the numerical factors in the supersymmetry variation of
the fermion poses a highly non-trivial consistency check. To perform
this, recall the identity @xmath for Minkowskian signature @xmath .
Then, the first order equation of motion of the three-form potential (
4.4.3a ) takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the abbreviation @xmath introduced in ( 4.4.1 ). Together with the
decomposition of the @xmath matrices ( 4.5.31 ) and the relations (
6.2.9 ) from appendix 6.2.1 , this identity transforms the supersymmetry
variation of the fermion in @xmath supergravity ( 4.5.27 ) to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As I mentioned before, it does not make a difference if the spinor
indices are raised or lowered, before @xmath -covariant objects are
introduced. And this can be achieved with the redefinitions ( 4.5.29 ,
4.5.35 , 4.5.38 ) that commute with each other, of course. Hence, the
supersymmetry variations of the fermions @xmath and @xmath can be
combined into a holomorphic one, which has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Together with the equation ( 4.5.36 ) and the fixing of @xmath ( 4.5.39
), this exactly agrees with the supersymmetry variation of the fermion
of exceptional geometry ( 4.5.25 ). Since I have neglected non-linear
terms in fermions for this calculation, I can without loss of generality
drop the term that results from a variation of @xmath ( 4.4.4 , 4.5.21
).

I will conclude with some remarks:

-   The holomorphic supersymmetry parameter @xmath does not introduce
    additional supercharges to the theory. The sixteen real dimensions
    that are spanned by this complex eight-dimensional vector, are
    contained in the @xmath -dimensional real space that is spanned by
    the supercharges of supergravity.

-   Furthermore, I want to address the different representations of
    @xmath that have been used in this thesis: I started with a
    diffeomorphism in the @xmath -dimensional subsector of the
    exceptional geometry. Due to the restricted form of the vielbein and
    the arbitrarily fixed vielbein gauge, this induces an @xmath action
    on the vielbein frame. Hence, the @xmath action on the bosons can be
    presented in terms of real @xmath matrices as used for the explicit
    form of the vielbein in section 4.3.3 . In particular, there is no
    necessity to introduce an imaginary unit @xmath for the bosons. I
    only introduced it in order to make the notation less cumbersome. I
    want to stress that there is no complex structure on the underlying
    manifold.

    The situation is different for the fermions. The endomorphism @xmath
    of the @xmath -dimensional representation space of the Clifford
    algebra in eleven dimensions provides a complex structure. This
    allowed to use the chiral representation of the covering group
    @xmath to define an action on the fermions.

-   The geometric description of the fermions for this subsector of
    exceptional geometry follows the same line of argumentation. A
    fermion @xmath is hence defined as a section of the tensor product
    of a real eight-dimensional vector bundle with the spin bundle in
    four dimensions that provides the complex structure. To obtain a
    full understanding of the geometric interpretation, it is essential
    to discuss the complete theory in the sixty-dimensional exceptional
    geometry.

-   I want to stress that it is not necessary to describe fermions as
    representations of @xmath or @xmath at any stage, because there are
    no diffeomorphisms in the exceptional geometry that would induce an
    action on the vielbein frame that is not in @xmath . Since the
    chiral @xmath action on the fermions @xmath and @xmath includes an
    action on the spin bundle in four dimensions, it is in fact unlikely
    that there is a canonical relation of @xmath and @xmath to @xmath
    representations, because these would not affect the four-dimensional
    spin bundle in general.

## Chapter 5 Conclusion and outlook

West’s idea [ 64 ] to link the formalism of non-linear realization to
supergravity in eleven dimensions proved useful for a construction of an
exceptional geometry. I showed that this formalism provides a natural
tool to describe the independent degrees of freedom of the vielbein in a
restricted geometrical setting.

In this thesis, I focussed on a @xmath -dimensional subsector of the
sixty-dimen- sional exceptional geometry. For the comparison with @xmath
supergravity, it was essential to discuss @xmath representations as
physical fields. In this setting, the class of equivariant connections
@xmath in @xmath was essentially parametrized by two constants @xmath (
4.1.8 ). I used @xmath to define supersymmetry transformations in @xmath
dimensions that link the vielbein to fermions. After a restriction to
the seven common coordinates of the @xmath -dimensional subsector of
exceptional geometry and @xmath supergravity, these supersymmetry
transformations of the fields in this subsector exactly coincide with
the ones of @xmath supergravity, if the constants @xmath are fixed by (
4.5.24 ).

Concerning the @xmath -dimensional dynamics, the fermionic Lagrangian in
this subsector is fixed by @xmath -covariance modulo quartic terms in
@xmath to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From a technical point of view, it is highly probable that the same
constants ( 4.5.24 ) for @xmath in @xmath will lead to the fermionic
Lagrangian of @xmath supergravity in a truncation to the common seven
coordinates and fields. For the dynamics of the bosons, the natural
candidate would be the invariant scalar @xmath ( 4.1.27 ) that is
constructed from this connection @xmath by taking the @xmath trace of
its curvature tensor.

The final step to show that all solutions of @xmath supergravity are in
fact special solutions of a sixty-dimensional theory that does not
contain additional fields, would consist in coupling the remaining four
dimensions to the @xmath -dimensional subsector in a consistent way. The
remaining degrees of freedom of supergravity would have to be included
in the sixty-dimensional exceptional vielbein, which may involve further
dualisations.

Another interesting aspect is that the possible appearance of non-linear
terms in fermions is highly restricted. Due to @xmath -covariance, the
following term is the unique choice for a holomorphic contorsion tensor
that is quadratic in @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence, the higher order terms in fermions provide a further consistency
check, if the solutions of @xmath supergravity [ 10 ] are equivalent to
the solutions of a supergravity in a sixty-dimensional exceptional
geometry.

Since the constants @xmath of the @xmath -dimensional subsector of the
theory are uniquely fixed by a comparison to @xmath supergravity, it
would further be interesting to perform a decomposition of @xmath with
respect to its @xmath subalgebra and compare the dynamics and the
supersymmetry variations to IIB supergravity as explained in section
4.2.2 .

My final comment addresses the symmetry structure of an exceptional
geometry. Following the argumentation of section 4.5.4 , I want to
emphasize that the procedure of a joint realization of conformal and
exceptional symmetry does not work in the present context, because a
symmetric tensor is preserved. This fact immediately implies that such a
Borisov & Ogievetsky like procedure can also be excluded to work for an
@xmath construction on a @xmath -dimensional exceptional geometry with
preserved symmetric octic tensor.

It was only after a restriction to the seven common coordinates of the
@xmath -dimensional subsector of exceptional geometry and @xmath
supergravity that the remaining @xmath symmetry was enhanced to @xmath .
¹ ¹ 1 The symmetry transformation that corresponds to the nilpotent
generators @xmath ( 4.2.14 ) is also enhanced in this restriction to the
gauge symmetry of the three-form potential. This procedure was first
observed by West in [ 64 ] . Since it is clear from section 4.2.2 that
the action of the remaining generators of @xmath would violate this
restriction, there is no joint realization of @xmath and @xmath with an
@xmath valued vielbein matrix.

### Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Hermann Nicolai for supervising my thesis and for
inspiring discussions. Furthermore, I am grateful to Thibault Damour,
Marc Henneaux, Axel Kleinschmidt and Peter West for clarifying comments
and valuable advice.

During my work on this dissertation, I benefitted from the support of
the Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes, of the
Albert-Einstein-Institut, Potsdam, of the International Solvay
Institute, Brussels and of the Université Libre de Bruxelles.

## Chapter 6 Appendix

### 6.1 To chapter 1

#### 6.1.1 To the proof of theorem 1.9

This part shows that there is a one-to-one correspondence between @xmath
and @xmath . Given any diffeomorphism @xmath , the equation ( 1.3.8 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

uniquely prescribes a vector field @xmath , because it is analytic due
to the analyticity of @xmath and linear in @xmath by construction. This
is the easy part. The more complicated one is to show how to construct a
diffeomorphism @xmath from a given vector field @xmath . As @xmath is
linear in the multilabel @xmath , I can extract a scalar label @xmath ,
in the following way: For arbitrary, but fixed @xmath , it is possible
to define a multilabel @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, as @xmath is analytically connected to the identity map, I
can without loss of generality parametrize the slope by @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

With the definition ( 6.1.2 ), the equation ( 6.1.1 ) has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since this expansion holds for every @xmath in the domain of validity of
the diffeomorphism @xmath , which is analytically continued to the
identity map, it holds in particular for the slope @xmath with @xmath .
This implies

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and by differentiation for all @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This ordinary differential equation exactly is the definition of an
integral curve to a vector field [ 62 ] . As an ordinary differential
equation of first order with specified initial condition has a unique
solution, the question of finding a unique diffeomorphism @xmath for a
vector field @xmath is equivalent to solving ( 6.1.4 ). As the vector
field is analytic, the solution @xmath will allow a Taylor expansion
about @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As the dependence of @xmath on @xmath is only implicit via @xmath , one
can replace all @xmath -derivatives by @xmath -derivatives with the help
of the chain rule

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Repeating this procedure yields for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

With the identity ( 6.1.3 ), I finally obtain the formula ( 1.3.9 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If I had started with an arbitrary @xmath , the theorem of
Picard-Lindelöf implies that there exists @xmath such that the initial
value problem ( 6.1.4 ) has a unique solution. This proves the
one-to-one correspondence between @xmath and @xmath . It also explains
the subtlety with the domain of validity, I mentioned at the end of
section 1.3.2 : given a vector field @xmath , there is an open set
@xmath on which there is a unique solution and on which the Taylor
expansion ( 1.3.9 ) is valid. This solution does not have to be globally
well-defined, in general.∎

#### 6.1.2 Isometries

The constraint of preserved Minkowski metric @xmath restricts @xmath to
the finite dimensional subgroup of Poincaré transformations. To prove
this, it is without loss of generality sufficient to consider the
infinitesimal version of the isometry constraint ( 1.3.3 ) with the
expansion for a general diffeomorphism ( 1.3.8 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

With the abbreviation @xmath this reads for constant @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Acting with a second differential operator yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Adding the first two equations and subtracting the last one provides

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This implies that only polynomials of degree @xmath and @xmath may
contribute to the series ( 1.3.36 ), which restricts the degrees of
freedom of the vector fields to the ones of the affine group. Imposing (
6.1.5 ) on top restricts to the Poincaré group.

#### 6.1.3 The integral curve to the conformal vectorfield @xmath

In section 1.3.3 , I showed that the conformal algebra in @xmath
dimensions is the same as the one of the orthogonal group in @xmath
dimensions @xmath , with the appropriate signatures. In this section, I
will stick to Lorentzian signature @xmath , but the argumentation is the
same for any @xmath . The formula ( 1.3.9 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

defined for any vector field @xmath locally a diffeomorphism @xmath .
This is in particular the case for all the vector fields with generators
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ( 1.3.14 , 1.3.24 , 1.3.28a ,
1.3.28b ). Therefore, an action of the conformal group on the @xmath
coordinates @xmath is defined. Since the translation generators @xmath
are included in this group, the non-linear action on the vector space
parametrized by @xmath is transitive. ¹ ¹ 1 As coordinates on a manifold
parametrize the open set @xmath ( 1.1.5 ), this transitivity is only to
be understood locally from a manifold point of view.

On the other hand, the algebra @xmath has a natural action on a @xmath
-dimensional vector space, its vector representation @xmath . It is a
linear action. Due to its orthogonality, the @xmath -metric @xmath is
preserved. This allows to define a @xmath -dimensional submanifold of
the @xmath -dimensional vector space, the so-called “light cone”.
Introducing @xmath coordinates

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

this submanifold is parametrized by all @xmath fulfilling the following
constraint ² ² 2 In other words, this submanifold, is the locus of the
following polynomial. ( 1.3.32 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Starting from a @xmath -dimensional vector space, the projective space
also provides the definition of a @xmath -dimensional submanifold. Due
to the linear action of the orthogonal group on @xmath , the projective
space is preserved under an action of the orthogonal group. From the
definition of the light cone submanifold, it is obvious that the
intersection of the two @xmath -dimensional submanifolds is a @xmath
-dimensional one. Thus, there is a @xmath -dimensional submanifold of
@xmath that is preserved under an action of the Lorentz group. What is
more, the group action on this @xmath -dimensional submanifold also is
transitive. ³ ³ 3 For every @xmath and every vector @xmath fulfilling (
6.1.3 ), @xmath also fulfills the constraint ( 6.1.3 ). Hence by
definition, the projective equivalence class of any vector also fulfills
( 6.1.3 ). On the other hand, assume that there were two equivalence
classes @xmath and @xmath both fulfilling ( 6.1.3 ) that are not linked
by a group action. This would imply that both generate different orbits.
Translating this statement to the algebra level, which is possible due
to the linear action, this however contradicts the irreducibility of the
orthogonal group. Hence, the action is indeed transitive.

Hence, there are two transitive group actions on @xmath -dimensional
manifolds. This implies that there must be a diffeomorphism linking the
two manifolds. ⁴ ⁴ 4 This can be proved by identifying one element on
one manifold with one on the other. Due to the transitivity, this fixing
induces an identification of all elements on the two manifolds, which
allows to identify the manifolds. Parametrizing the projective light
cone by the @xmath -dimensional coordinates @xmath constrained by (
6.1.3 ), by @xmath -covariance this identification must be of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

because due to the identification ( 1.3.30 ) of the algebra generators,
the @xmath generators do not act on the @xmath nor on the @xmath
coordinate. The constants @xmath are uniquely fixed by comparing the
action of the translation generators @xmath on both coordinates: On the
one hand, ( 1.3.3 ) implies

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

On the other hand, the identification ( 1.3.30 ) defines the action of
@xmath in the representation of linear vector fields ( 1.3.14 ) acting
on the @xmath coordinates @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the minus sign in the last line is due to @xmath . Hence @xmath
and @xmath are subject to the constraint with ( 6.1.8 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which uniquely fixes @xmath ( 1.3.31 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Finally, this identification allows the evaluation of the conformal
diffeomorphism in a closed form. Recall that the identification ( 1.3.30
) also defines the action of @xmath in the representation of linear
vector fields ( 1.3.14 ) acting on the @xmath coordinates @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The minus sign in the last line is again due to @xmath . A direct
evaluation on the coordinates ( 6.1.9 ) does not provide a great
simplification. However, if the sign in the denominator was different,
the evaluation would indeed be easy. Recalling that the constraint (
6.1.3 ) linked the sum of @xmath and @xmath to its difference, one is
led to discuss

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.1.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

This allows a direct evaluation with derivative operators acting on
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the integral curve @xmath ( 1.3.23 , 1.3.26 ) has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

I obtain the identity

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where I have used the abbreviation introduced in equation ( 1.3.35 ).
With the inversion ( 1.3.33 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this formula can be solved to ( 1.3.34 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which has the explicit form ( 1.3.35 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

An expansion in @xmath proves that its linear part indeed is the
conformal Killing vector field @xmath ( 1.3.22b ), what was expected
from theorem 1.9 , of course.

#### 6.1.4 Global properties of the conformal group

I have already mentioned in section 1.2.5 that the same real Lie
algebras do not imply that the corresponding Lie groups coincide. The
same is true for the conformal group. In order to be a subgroup of
@xmath , every element of the orthogonal group @xmath must also uniquely
correspond to a diffeomorphism @xmath that maps the open set (at least
locally) to itself. This is not the case, because for even @xmath , the
two diagonal matrices

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

correspond to the same diffeomorphism @xmath on the @xmath coordinates
by the relation ( 1.3.31 ). ⁵ ⁵ 5 For non-Euclidean signature, i.e.
@xmath , they are even in the same connected component as @xmath . This
implies that for even dimensions, the conformal subgroup of @xmath is
isomorphic to @xmath .

It is obvious from comparing ( 1.3.31 ) and ( 6.1.10 ) that the
inversion ( 1.3.33 ) corresponds to the pair of diagonal matrices @xmath
and @xmath . For even dimension @xmath , both matrices are of
determinant @xmath and therefore, they are not an element of @xmath . As
has a pole, it is not an analytic map. Since @xmath consists of analytic
maps by definition, is not an element of @xmath .

The @xmath argumentation is the same for odd spacetime dimension @xmath
, but in this case the inversion is an element of @xmath . Hence there
is no strict isomorphism between the conformal subgroup of @xmath and
@xmath . This statement is independent of the signature @xmath . There
are elements like in @xmath that cannot be embedded in @xmath . More
details on the conformal group can be found in [ 14 ] .

#### 6.1.5 Proof of Ogievetsky’s theorem

I will quote Ogievetsky’s original proof here [ 51 ] . It is performed
by induction over the degree @xmath . The definition of the affine
linear generators ( 1.3.14 ) provides the starting point for @xmath and
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath independent arbitrary parameters @xmath and @xmath . It
suffices to show that any vector field ( 1.3.37 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath arbitrary and @xmath arbitrary can be written as
a linear combination of (commutators of) the generators @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath , too. For every @xmath , the conformal vector field
@xmath provides a particular vector field of degree @xmath ( 1.3.24 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These vector fields form an Abelian subalgebra ( 1.3.25 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence, another generator of degree @xmath is necessary to construct
vector fields of degree @xmath . I have shown in section 1.3.3 that
commutators of @xmath ( 1.3.24 ) with all the generators of the affine
algebra @xmath apart from the symmetric generator

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

close to the conformal algebra @xmath . Hence, it must be this generator
that extends the conformal algebra to @xmath . Ogievetsky chose to
consider the particular generator

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with no summation on the index @xmath . For the rest of this proof, I
introduce the following convention:

-   Greek indices @xmath and Latin ones @xmath have the same domain
    @xmath .

-   If a Greek index occurs twice, a summation is implicit. For a Latin
    index, this is not the case.

-   I introduce the abbreviation @xmath , @xmath and @xmath et cetera. I
    want to emphasize again that this is a mere abbreviation. The @xmath
    ( 1.3.19 ) in the conformal vector field @xmath ( 1.3.22b ) should
    not be iterpreted as a metric on a manifold but as a mere
    prescription how to construct a particular vector field of degree
    @xmath .

With these conventions, a short calculation with the standard rules for
derivatives shows

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence, @xmath is another vector field of degree @xmath , but it is still
not general. Next, evaluate another commutator, where there is no
summation implicit for the indices again

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For every @xmath , the vector fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
contained in the closure of the two algebras. Hence, their linear
combination is contained, too:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To sum up, for @xmath , the following vector fields are contained in the
closure

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Commuting the last one again with @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since upper indices differ from lowered indices just by a minus sign,
this implies that all vector fields @xmath of degree @xmath also are in
the closure:
for @xmath and @xmath , @xmath contains them all, the case of exactly
two equal indices is covered by either @xmath or @xmath and the one with
all three indices equal by @xmath .

Commuting two different vector fields @xmath of degree @xmath will in
general result in a vector field @xmath of degree @xmath . This is the
step of induction: assume that the general vector field

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

of degree @xmath is contained in the closure. Without loss of
generality, assume @xmath . Then the vector fields

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath are of degree @xmath and they are contained in the closure.
Unless the prefactor vanishes, this is the general form of a vector
field of degree @xmath , which would complete the proof by induction.

Given @xmath , there are two possibilities to obtain @xmath :

1.  @xmath and @xmath

2.  @xmath and @xmath

For the first case, recall that @xmath . Hence there is an index @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath if @xmath . Then, the commutator

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

maps to @xmath with a non-zero coefficient.

For the second case and for arbitrary @xmath , the commutator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

does not vanish due to @xmath . Thus, the last step of the proof
consists of showing that for the case @xmath and @xmath , a vector field
with @xmath can be generated. This is shown adding a double commutator
to the commutator of @xmath with ( 6.1.11 ) keeping in mind @xmath in (
6.1.11 )

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

This proves Ogievetsky’s theorem.∎

#### 6.1.6 Proof of corollary 1.11

The proof of Ogievetsky’s theorem 1.10 consists of two parts: At first,
I showed that a general vector field ( 1.3.37 ) of polynomial degree
@xmath is contained in the closure. Then, I used this to construct
vector fields @xmath of arbitrary degree @xmath by induction. Since the
theorem is valid for any dimension @xmath , an application of the first
part of the proof to a @xmath -dimensional setting implies that all
vector field of the form ( 1.3.37 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath and @xmath are contained in the closure. Their commutators
with the general linear generators @xmath ( 1.3.14 ) in @xmath
dimensions also are in the closure. Using Latin indices for @xmath and
@xmath for the range @xmath and Greek ones for the rest @xmath , the
multiple commutators of

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the vector field ( 6.1.12 ) generates all vector fields of degree
@xmath in @xmath dimensions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence, the second part of the proof of Ogievetsky’s theorem is
applicable.∎
Note added: The restriction @xmath only is necessary for this proof to
work. The corollary 1.11 remains true for @xmath and @xmath .

### 6.2 To chapter 2

#### 6.2.1 Clifford algebras

For a diagonal, non-degenerate metric @xmath of signature @xmath , a
Clifford algebra @xmath is a vector space endowed with a multiplication.
It is spanned by the free algebra generated by the objects @xmath with
@xmath modulo the Clifford property

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This implies in particular that the antisymmetric products of matrices
@xmath are linearly independent of the generators @xmath . It is
conventional to introduce the following abbreviation for these objects
for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As usual, the antisymmetrization is normalized by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Due to the non-degeneracy of the metric @xmath , the position of the
indices can be adjusted as explained in section 1.4.3 .

The definition of representations of a Lie algebra on vector spaces
@xmath of dimension @xmath from section 1.2.3 can also be transferred to
the Clifford algebra. Hence the generators @xmath are presented as
@xmath matrices. The lowest possible @xmath depends on the dimension
@xmath and the signature @xmath of @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 The review [ 69 ]
contains more information on this topic as well as further references.
For the eleven-dimensional flat Minkowski metric

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the lowest dimension @xmath of the representation space @xmath is @xmath
. Furthermore, it is possible to choose the matrix representations of
the Clifford generators @xmath with @xmath to only consist of real
@xmath matrices, which is referred to as the Majorana property. For my
thesis, I adopt this choice with the sign convention

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The Clifford algebra of major importance for this thesis corresponds to
the Euclidean metric @xmath in seven dimensions. I use the
pseudo-Majorana representation that implies that all generators @xmath
with @xmath are presented by purely imaginary @xmath matrices. These are
normalized by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.6b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

An explicit form of the real matrices @xmath is provided in appendix C
of [ 11 ] .

Finally, I use the Majorana representation of the Clifford algebra
associated to the Minkowski metric of signature @xmath . These real
@xmath matrices will be denoted by @xmath with @xmath . Following the
decomposition of the isometry group @xmath of the Minkowski metric in
eleven dimensions into the product @xmath of the isometry groups of four
and seven dimensions, the real @xmath matrices @xmath allow for a
decomposition into the matrices @xmath and @xmath that is provided by
the identification

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.7b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the obvious change in the labeling of the seven matrices @xmath .
The consistency of the normalizations ( 6.2.5 ) and ( 6.2.6 ) with the
decomposition ( 6.2.7 ) implies the normalization

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This leads to the identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.9a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.9b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The square of @xmath is evaluated with the help of the Clifford property
( 6.2.1 ) keeping in mind the Lorentzian signature of @xmath . I want to
emphasize that I had to introduce the imaginary unit @xmath in the line
( 6.2.7b ), because the matrices @xmath are purely imaginary, whereas
@xmath and @xmath are real matrices.

Of further importance for this thesis is the fact that the Clifford
algebra provides a representation @xmath of the orthogonal Lie algebra
@xmath for the corresponding signature. In equation ( 2.2.22 ), I used
this fact for the four-dimensional Minkowski space:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is obvious that the matrix representation of the orthogonal algebra
@xmath consists of real matrices for both Majorana and pseudo-Majorana
representations of the Clifford algebra.

To conclude, I want to stress that I distinguished the generators of the
Clifford algebræ for the different metrics under consideration by the
different names @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It is furthermore
conventional in supergravity to introduce “dressed” @xmath matrices that
correspond to the standard Clifford matrix representations @xmath by a
multiplication with the vielbein

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

This convention to distinguish the Clifford generators in the vielbein
frame from the ones in the coordinate induced frame merely by a
different naming of the indices is only used once in equation ( 2.3.4 ).
For the Clifford generators @xmath in @xmath , I will provide additional
identities in appendix 6.4.3 .

#### 6.2.2 Explicit calculation of @xmath

In order to construct an invariant Lagrangian, the commutator of the
connection @xmath ( 2.2.7 ) with itself is the key ingredient as in the
case of an internal symmetry. The difference in the evaluation for an
external symmetry is that the algebra action of the second covariant
derivative also acts on the coordinate index of the first one.
Therefore, I have included the detailed computation of @xmath to
illustrate the procedure of section 1.4 . I want to start with an
arbitrary physical field or section of a tensor bundle @xmath that I
decompose along the generators @xmath of the corresponding
representation space @xmath ( 1.4.1 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The connection @xmath is defined on the coefficients @xmath by ( 2.2.7 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.2.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Only in this computation, I will use the abbreviation defined in the
second line. The notation should not be confused with the Lie group
multiplication ( 2.2.5 ), which will not be used during this
calculation. The second covariant derivative then acts on the section

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

in the product bundle with the basis vectors @xmath parametrizing the
antifundamental representation @xmath . The Lorentz action on the
coefficient @xmath follows the definition ( 1.4.4 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the last relation follows from duality and ( 1.3.15b , 1.4.6 ). ⁷
⁷ 7 The group action on the contraction of fundamental and
antifundamental representation @xmath is trivial by definition. Passing
to the linearized part defines the algebra action on the dual vector:
@xmath .
This implies @xmath . Comparing the basis vectors results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence, the commutator of two covariant derivatives on @xmath has the
form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The first term is the commutator ( 1.3.7 ) of the vector fields @xmath (
2.2.1 ). The third term can be transformed in a more conventional form
with the help of the commutation relation ( 1.3.15a ) and of ( 1.4.4 ,
6.2.10 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Substituting the original expression for the abbreviation ( 6.2.10 ) in
all terms, I obtain the abstract equation acting on any physical field
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

I defined @xmath to transform as a Lorentz tensor under a local Poincaré
action. The derivative @xmath is not equivariant, however. Hence, I have
to reshuffle the terms to get the covariant expression ( 2.2.10 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

### 6.3 To chapter 3

#### 6.3.1 Proof of theorem 3.2

I want to start the proof with the observation that in a local theory, a
tensor can only be constructed from contracting other tensors and
covariant derivatives thereof. ⁸ ⁸ 8 In particular, integrations are not
admitted in a local theory. Since the minimal connection @xmath ( 3.1.21
) provides a covariant derivative with affine linear equivariance, I can
without loss of generality focus on tensors @xmath that are not of
derivative form.

To discuss the vielbein dependence of @xmath , it is important to recall
from equation ( 3.1.5 ) that the vielbein matrix @xmath does not
transform as a Lorentz tensor under an affine linear diffeomorphism
@xmath on its own:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Next, recall from section 2.2.3 that the fixing of the matrix
representative for the vielbein in the orbit @xmath was arbitrary.
Hence, the tensor @xmath must be independent of the fixing of the
vielbein gauge, i.e. independent of the choice for the matrix form of
the vielbein @xmath . Therefore, the global left action decouples from
the local right action. This implies that Lorentz covariance requires
invariance of @xmath under a global left action by @xmath .

The latter is tantamount to an arbitrary @xmath left action on an
essentially arbitrary @xmath matrix @xmath . Hence, invariance of @xmath
can only be achieved if the entire dependence of @xmath on the matrix
@xmath is of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The constraint on the @xmath valued operation @xmath in the last line
follows from an evaluation of the formula ( 3.1.9 ). Therefore, @xmath
has to be commute with all invertible matrices. Hence, it is
proportional to the identity matrix. Since @xmath does not depend on
@xmath , the action of @xmath on the variable @xmath is arbitrary. Due
to the locality of the theory however, the only admissible action on the
coordinates is a (multiple) derivative.

Furthermore, recall that global left actions also affect the coordinates
and hence the derivative operators in the coordinate frame @xmath . This
is the reason to use the vielbein frame @xmath ( 2.2.1 ) for derivative
operators.

In order to achieve invariance under global left actions, @xmath may
hence only depend on arbitrary powers of derivatives @xmath in the
vielbein frame acting on the vielbein @xmath in the following way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The dependence on @xmath is a symbolic notation for the fact that @xmath
may only depend on derivatives of Lorentz tensors by the derivative
@xmath in the vielbein frame ( 2.2.1 ).

The right action on the vielbein matrix @xmath is @xmath -dependent in
general. This implies that requiring @xmath to be a Lorentz tensor
restricts the dependence further. I start by discussing dependences on
first order derivatives acting on the vielbein, i.e. only the @xmath
terms in ( 6.3.1 ). Under the affine linear diffeomorphism @xmath , this
matrix transforms as induced by ( 3.1.5 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the compensating Lorentz action @xmath is @xmath -dependent,
@xmath provides a non-vanishing contribution that is @xmath valued. In
other words, it is antisymmetric with respect to the Minkowski metric as
defined in ( 1.2.9 ). Thus, the symmetric part of this matrix transforms
as a tensor. This exactly is the object @xmath defined in ( 3.1.20a ).
The remaining part is @xmath ( 3.1.20b ), which is antisymmetric or
@xmath valued and transforms as a Lorentz connection.

Finally, for the left invariant derivative operator @xmath acting on
arbitrary Lorentz tensors to be equivariant under @xmath , I have to
replace it by the minimal connection @xmath ( 3.1.21 ). ⁹ ⁹ 9 The
vielbein @xmath is not a Lorentz tensor ( 3.1.5 ). Therefore, I must not
replace the partial derivative in @xmath ( 3.1.20a ) by this connection,
of course.

A comparison with the dependence 3.1.24 in the theorem 3.2 reveals that
completing the proof is equivalent to showing that it is impossible to
construct any Lorentz tensor under @xmath from the objects with more
than one derivatives acting on @xmath , i.e. @xmath alone. Nonetheless,
objects like this will show up in an evaluation of the minimal connetion
@xmath on the tensor @xmath ( 3.1.20a ), but then they are accompanied
by other terms. In analogy to the @xmath case, I ask if there is a
choice in arranging the indices such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

vanishes. For the matrix representation of @xmath , define the
corresponding matrix representation of the Lie algebra element by @xmath
such that @xmath with @xmath arbitrary. I can without loss of generality
assume that @xmath has general form, i.e. there is no restriction on the
@xmath -dependence of @xmath , because the tensorial property of @xmath
must hold for a general vielbein in any gauge. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 nota bene: for a
fixed vielbein, it is however not true that every @xmath is induced by a
diffeomorphism @xmath due to the integrability condition. Hence, there
are no restrictions on @xmath either. This implies that the derivative
indices @xmath cannot help in making the object transform as a tensor:
this must be achieved by restricting the matrix form alone. Similarly to
the case @xmath , @xmath must be antisymmetric for the linear order in
@xmath to vanish. However, the non-linear orders in @xmath give a
non-trivial constraint in this case:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.3.2)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Taking the symmetric part for @xmath results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which does not vanish. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The antisymmetric part in @xmath does
not vanish either. For simpilicity, I have only stated the symmetric
part. As the relation ( 6.3.2 ) links a term with @xmath “internal”
derivatives to terms with @xmath “internal” derivatives, this statement
generalizes for all @xmath . Hence, it is impossible to generate tensors
from these terms alone and the only tensor is @xmath ( 3.1.20a ) and
derivatives @xmath thereof, which completes the proof.∎

In section 2.2.1 , I have introduced the torsion and the curvature
tensors of a connection. For the case of the minimal connection @xmath ,
the theorem 3.2 restricts these objects to be constructed from the
symmetric tensor @xmath ( 3.1.20a ). A short calculation shows that this
indeed is the case:

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

#### 6.3.2 Proof of (3.2.11)

In this section, I will prove that the Lorentz rotation @xmath ( 3.2.3 ,
3.2.7 ), induced by the conformal diffeomorphism @xmath , and the one
@xmath ( 3.2.9 ) compensating a global left action by @xmath coincide.

To start, recall from section ( 3.2.2 ) that after fixing the Lorentz
gauge in such a way that the unimodular vielbein @xmath ( 3.2.4b ) is a
Lorentz representation, the induced Lorentz transformation @xmath was
uniquely determined by the space-time coordinate @xmath and the constant
parameter @xmath alone ( 3.2.7 ). The Lorentz group element @xmath
corresponds via the homomorphism @xmath ( 1.2.3 ) to a Lie algebra
element @xmath , whose generators are antisymmetric with respect to the
Minkowski metric @xmath ( 1.2.9 ). However, there is a unique way modulo
a scalar function how an antisymmetric tensor can be built from two
vectors. And this scalar function is uniquely determined by the
following argument:

The concatenation or group multiplication of two consecutive conformal
diffeomorphisms @xmath implies for the induced Lorentz actions ( 2.2.3 )
with @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath is an Abelian subgroup ( 1.3.27 ) of @xmath , this equation
takes the form with @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As sketched before, the matrix @xmath is antisymmetric and it also is an
analytic function of the two vectors @xmath and @xmath alone. Therefore,
it must have the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the antisymmetric Lorentz generators @xmath ( 1.3.28a ). Due to
Lorentz covariance, the scalar function @xmath must analytically depend
on the three scalar parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with the
abbreviation @xmath for the contraction with the Minkowski metric @xmath
defined in ( 1.3.35 ). Finally, an iterative evaluation of ( 6.3.3 )
with the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula [ 32 ] uniquely fixes the
dependence of @xmath on these three scalar parameters as a power series.

Hence, the transformation ( 6.3.3 ) uniquely fixes the Lorentz
transformation @xmath that is induced by the conformal diffeomorphism
@xmath and the vielbein @xmath in the symmetric gauge. Thus, it is is
sufficient to show that the same relation ( 6.3.3 ) also holds for the
Lorentz transformations that compensate global left actions on the
conformal coset @xmath ( 3.2.8 ).

A priori, the compensating Lorentz rotation @xmath ( 3.2.9 ) for a
global left action by @xmath on the coset @xmath may depend on all coset
parameters @xmath . The commutation relations ( 1.3.29 ) however show
that in evaluating ( 3.2.9 ), no Lorentz algebra generator @xmath can be
produced by the generators associated to the parameters @xmath and
@xmath . Hence, the compensating Lorentz group element can only depend
on the two vector valued parameters @xmath and @xmath .

Now, it is easy to conclude that the two Lorentz group objects must
coincide: two consecutive global left actions of @xmath with parameters
@xmath and @xmath on the conformal coset ( 3.2.8 ) induce two
compensating Lorentz rotations for the coset. Since @xmath is an Abelian
group ( 1.3.27 , 1.3.25 ), their product must be the compensating
Lorentz rotation of a left action with @xmath . This implies that the
condition ( 6.3.3 ) also is valid for the compensating Lorentz rotations
of the coset. As this fixes the local Lorentz rotation uniquely, the Lie
group elements must be equal

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

if the vielbein matrix is symmetric. If another choice for the vielbein
gauge was fixed, the compensating Lorentz rotation @xmath would also
depend on the unimodular vielbein @xmath explicitly. Since @xmath is not
encoded in the conformal coset @xmath , the equality ( 3.2.11 ) does not
hold for any other gauge choice. ∎

### 6.4 To chapter 4

#### 6.4.1 Symplectomorphisms

In local coordinates, a symplectic form @xmath can always be written in
the following way

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By Darboux’s theorem [ 43 ] , it is always possible to restrict the
symplectic form to have constant coefficients @xmath . This is what I
have done in ( 4.1.2 ). Then, the constraint ( 4.1.6 ) can be written in
coordinates for all @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Since every element @xmath locally is uniquely fixed by its associated
vector field @xmath , that are related by ( 1.3.8 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

the equation ( 6.4.1 ) implies ( 4.1.7 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For constant coefficients @xmath , this constraint ( 4.1.7 ) is
equivalent to requiring that the Lie derivative of @xmath along a vector
field @xmath vanishes. Due to the one-to-one correspondence between
@xmath and @xmath , I can drop the @xmath restriction.

Next, I will solve this constraint for @xmath by using the split ( 4.1.1
). The equation ( 4.1.7 ) hence has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which decomposes into four constraints for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These simplify with the explicit form of @xmath ( 4.1.2 ) to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If I introduce the following notation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

the first and the last line imply that @xmath and @xmath , respectively,
considered as one-forms, are closed:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From section 1.3.2 it follows that the domain of validity @xmath of the
diffeomorphisms @xmath is simply connected. Then, Poincaré’s lemma
implies that these forms are exact with functions or zero forms @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Substituting these definitions into the remaining two equations, I
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The general solution obviously is @xmath modulo affine linear
contributions. Since all translational vector fields can be constructed
from @xmath , this is no constraint on the level of the vector fields.
Hence, the general solution to this set of differential equations is
provided by an arbitrary function @xmath ( 4.1.8 ) with @xmath ( 4.1.5
):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

I want to denote this infinite dimensional subgroup of
symplectomorphisms of the Lie group @xmath by @xmath . If I dropped the
restriction of general diffeomorphisms to @xmath from section 1.3.2 ,
there would be further solutions to the constraint ( 4.1.6 ). In this
context, @xmath is the subgroup of all symplectomorphisms that
correspond to Hamiltonian vector fields, which is called the subgroup of
Hamiltonian flows [ 43 ] .

#### 6.4.2 Vector fields preserving @xmath and @xmath

In section 4.1.2 , I discussed the symplectomorphisms @xmath , i.e. the
infinite dimensional Lie subgroup of @xmath preserving the symplectic
form: @xmath ( 4.1.6 ). I want to restrict @xmath further to the ones
that also preserve the quartic symmetric tensor @xmath ( 4.1.38 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As explained in the sections 1.3.2 and 6.4.1 , I restricted the
symplectomorphisms to Hamiltonian flows. Therefore, the constraint (
6.4.2 ) is equivalent to requiring ( 4.1.40 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with a Hamiltonian vector field @xmath ( 4.1.8 ). In section 4.1.5 , I
stated that the general solution to this constraint is provided by the
Hamiltonian ( 4.1.6 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In order to show this, I proceed in the following way:

1.  As the tensor @xmath in the @xmath -covariant coordinates @xmath (
    4.1.38 ) is easier to handle, I start by rewriting the constraint (
    4.1.40 ) in these coordinates.

2.  Next, I show that @xmath ( 4.1.6 ) solves this constraint.

3.  As the constraint is @xmath -covariant, it is sufficient to exclude
    all other quadratic Hamiltonians that correspond to the other @xmath
    representations.

4.  Finally, I will show that Hamiltonians of higher polynomial degrees
    are excluded, what is expected from Cartan’s theorem [ 6 ] .

I start by restating ( 4.1.40 ) in the holomorphic coordinates @xmath
with the summation introduced in section 4.1.5 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Due to the explicit form of the quartic tensor ( 4.1.38 ), this leads to
the following equations that always occur in pairs of holomorphic and
antiholomorphic objects

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with all indices up and down, respectively. Symmetrizations are to be
taken over pairs of indices. For the next set of equations, one has to
pay attention to the numerical factors:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The selfdual equation finally is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where I have used the abbreviations @xmath and @xmath .

Since I want to restrict the symplectomorphisms @xmath to the ones that
preserve @xmath ( 6.4.2 ), I can without loss of generality restrict to
Hamiltonian vector fields that are generated in the holomorphic frame by
( 4.1.32 ). This implies that it is sufficient to discuss the
holomorphic constraint, the antiholomorphic always follows from complex
conjugation. With the explicit form for the coefficients of @xmath (
4.1.38 ), these equations pose restrictions on the functions @xmath .
The one from the first holomorphic equation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

From the second set of equiations, I use the antiholomorphic constraint

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath                     
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

that is related to the holomorphic one by raising the indices with
@xmath , because @xmath is in the definition of @xmath ( 4.1.6 ). The
selfdual equation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath                     
     @xmath                     
     @xmath                     
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This appears to be a set of very restrictive constraints, for which it
is not clear that there exist non-trivial solutions at all. Before
discussing possible non-linear solutions, I will first show that there
is a quadratic solution. Using the ansatz @xmath ( 4.1.6 ) yields

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

in eight dimensions. I continue with the selfdual constraint, because it
also projects on the @xmath components of the ansatz @xmath ( 4.1.6 ). A
short look at the constraint furthermore reveals that the trace part
@xmath cancels. Hence, I can focus on the other part ¹² ¹² 12 As the
constraint is linear, the trace term also fulfils the identity
separately for @xmath . that also vanishes by itself:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Since the second constraint only involves the @xmath contribution in
@xmath ( 4.1.6 ), this already shows that the @xmath contribution
generates vector fields and hence symplectomorphisms that preserve the
quartic tensor @xmath ( 4.1.28 ). ¹³ ¹³ 13 There is a different way to
see this: as the parametrization of @xmath ( 4.1.38 ) only involves
@xmath -invariant tensors @xmath and @xmath and as @xmath corresponds to
the Lie algebra @xmath , what I show in section 4.1.7 , the conservation
is trivial.

The second constraint finally is

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where antisymmetrizations over pairs of indices are implicit. This
proves that the ansatz @xmath ( 4.1.6 ) solves the constraints.

The third part of the proof consists in showing that no further
quadratic vector fields solve this constraint. To do this, recall from
the general solution for symplectomorphisms ( 4.1.13 ) from section
4.1.2 that the general quadratic Hamiltonian is provided by the real
function

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the coefficient @xmath having the appropriate reality properties
such that @xmath is real. The fact that the constraint for the
conservation of the quartic tensor @xmath is @xmath -covariant ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14
In the definition of @xmath ( 4.1.38 ) only @xmath -invariant tensors
@xmath and @xmath were used. implies that it is sufficient to discuss
the irreducible @xmath representations separately.

Next, observe that @xmath in the ansatz @xmath ( 4.1.6 ) generates the
@xmath algebra, as I show in section 4.1.7 . Thus, the decomposition of
the components @xmath parametrizing @xmath into irreducible @xmath
representations is dictated as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The first equation immediately discards the singlet representation,
because it corresponds to the double trace @xmath . Where the @xmath is
concerned, it is the irreducible representation of @xmath with vanishing
single trace @xmath . Due to @xmath -covariance of @xmath , this implies
that the entire @xmath is either admitted or excluded. A short check
shows that the exclusion is indeed the case. The same argumentation
holds for the non-compact generators. In dimensions, the decomposition (
4.1.17a ) is as follows:

  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath .
  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The symmetric @xmath tensors @xmath in @xmath and @xmath further
decompose under @xmath to

  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath   []       @xmath   []

As the second constraint links @xmath to @xmath by the @xmath tensor,
one combination of the two @xmath representation survives, the other one
is discarded. It is obvious that the @xmath tensor cannot link the
@xmath representations. Hence, the second constraint discards both of
them.

To complete the proof, I have to show that there are no polynomials of
higher degree in @xmath that preserve the completely symmetric quartic
tensor. The argument is similar to the one that the group preserving a
symmetric two tensor is finite dimensional. ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 As an example
serves the Poincaré group, the isometry group of the Minkowski metric
that I discussed in section 6.1.2 . I start with the quartic tensor in
the coordinate form ( 4.1.5 ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Consider its transformation under an infinitesimal diffeomorphism @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with at least quadratic dependence of @xmath on the coordinate @xmath .
Recall that I have restricted the general diffeomorphisms @xmath to
symplectomorphisms @xmath that preserve @xmath ( 4.1.6 ). Hence, the
formula ( 4.1.8 ) implies that the dual coordinate @xmath must
infintesimally transform as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath at least linear in @xmath . Hence, in the evaluation of the
pull-back, the first term in the quartic tensor will give rise to the
term

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A brief look at the quartic tensor @xmath in the coordinates @xmath
reveals that no other term in @xmath gives rise to a contribution like
this. Therefore, the quartic tensor cannot be invariant under a
non-constant symplectomorphism that is non-linear in the @xmath
coordinates @xmath .

The same argumentation works for the dual coordinates @xmath . If it was
invariant under such a symplectomorphism that is at least quadratic in
some other coordinates or a combination of coordinates, there must not
exist a linear transformation that maps the coordinates to each other,
because a concatenation would map this again to the case specified in (
6.4.3 ). As the vector space @xmath is an irreducible representation of
the Lie group specified by the linear diffeomorphisms, which is @xmath
what I show in section 4.1.7 , these linear transformations do exist.
This completes the proof that there are no symplectomorphisms @xmath
that preserve @xmath whose Hamiltonian is a polynomial of degree higher
than @xmath .∎

This is a very special case of Cartan’s theorem [ 6 ] that lists the
possible simple, infinite dimensional, non-trivial subgroups of @xmath :
diffeomorphisms of unit determinant, symplectomorphisms and contact
diffeomorphisms.

I conclude by mentioning that this statement does not contradict the
transformation defined in [ 23 ] , because the one in [ 23 ] cannot be
interpreted as a vector field: it is only possible to define a
transformation preserving @xmath that is of at least second order in
derivative operators.

#### 6.4.3 Some relations for @xmath matrices

For the purely imaginary @xmath Clifford matrices @xmath that I defined
in appendix 6.2.1 , the following relations can be deduced from the
defining property of the Clifford algebra ( 6.2.1 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.4b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.4c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Small letters as indices @xmath always have the range @xmath , whereas
capital ones denote the matrix indices @xmath . A proof by induction
with ( 6.2.1 ) leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the definition ( 6.2.3 ), it is obvious that a @xmath matrix with
seven indices is maximal in seven dimensions. Its normalization is (
6.2.6 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . This leads to the matrix products

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.4.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.4.6b)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

with the identity matrix @xmath . Together with the @xmath linearly
independent traceless @xmath matrices ( 4.2.1 ), @xmath spans the
complex vector space of all @xmath matrices. This is the core of the
Fierz identity that can be proved by taking traces

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are short for arbitrary @xmath vector indices.
By setting @xmath and antisymmetrizing in @xmath , one obtains the
completeness relation ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 It is not important for these formal
relations, if an index of a @xmath matrix is raised or lowered.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The Fierz identity ( 6.4.3 ) also provides the identity

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Furthermore, tracing in @xmath proves the identity

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

I conclude the summary of formulas for @xmath matrices with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.11b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.11c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.11d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.11e)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.11f)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.11g)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.11h)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4.11i)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

Further relations in the same conventions are stated in the appendix of
[ 68 ] .

#### 6.4.4 Action of the @xmath-generators on the coordinates in the
@xmath decomposition

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --