This thesis describes mathematical structures of the quantum BRST
constraint method. Ultimately, the quantum BRST structures are
formulated in a @xmath -algebraic context, leading to comparison of the
quantum BRST and the Dirac constraint method in a mathematically
consistent framework.

Rigorous models are constructed for the heuristic examples of BRST for
quantum electromagnetism (BRST-QEM) and Hamiltonian BRST with a finite
number of constraints. This facilitates comparison between the results
produced by the BRST method, and the results of the @xmath -procedure of
Grundling and Hurst for the quantum Dirac constraint method.

The different constraint methods are shown not to be equivalent for the
examples of Hamiltonian BRST with a finite number of constraints that
close, and a BRST-QEM model constructed using the Resolvent Algebra of
Buchholz and Grundling with covariant test function space. Moreover,
this leads to the following three consequences:

The quantum BRST method, and quantum Dirac method of constraints, are
not equivalent in general.

Examples of quantum Hamiltonian BRST can be constructed to show that the
BRST method does not remove the ghosts in the BRST physical algebra.
This occurs since quantum Hamiltonian BRST selects multiple copies of
the physical state space selected by the Dirac algorithm, and the ghosts
are not removed from the BRST-physical state space. Extra selection
criteria are required to select the correct physical space, which do not
gaurantee correspondence between the Dirac and BRST physical algebras.

Conversely, the BRST physical algebra and Dirac physical algebra
coincide when QEM is encoded in the auxiliary Resolvent Algebra. This is
a rigorous example of Lagrangian BRST, hence quantum Lagrangian and
quantum Hamiltonian BRST are not equivalent constraint methods.
