This thesis focuses on the study of binary radio pulsars, their
evolution and some specific use of their properties to investigate
fundamental physics such as general relativity and other gravitational
theories. The work that we present here is organized in three main
parts.

First, we report on the study of PSR J1744 @xmath 3922, a binary pulsar
presenting a peculiar ‘flickering’ flux behavior as well as spin and
orbital properties that do not correspond to the expectations of
standard evolution scenarios. We investigated the nature of this flux
behavior. We also studied the pulsar’s properties in relationship to the
binary radio pulsar population and proposed the existence of an as yet
unidentified class of binary pulsars.

Second, we conducted an in-depth analysis of the eclipses in the
relativistic double pulsar system PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B. During these
eclipses, the ‘A’ pulsar partly disappears for @xmath s behind its
companion, ‘B’. The eclipse light curve displays a complex structure of
flux modulation that is synchronized with the rotation of pulsar B. We
worked on improving our understanding of the eclipse phenomenology and
more particularly the modulation phenomenon. From our modeling of the
eclipses, we precisely determined the geometry of pulsar B in space and
used this information to study the temporal behavior of the eclipses,
which revealed that pulsar B precesses around the angular momentum of
the system in a way that is consistent with the prediction of general
relativity.

Third, we searched for the signature of latitudinal aberration in the
pulse profile of pulsar A in PSR J0737 @xmath 3039A/B. This relativistic
effect should cause a periodic variation in the separation between the
two pulse components of pulsar A on an orbital time scale. The
non-detection of this effect allows us to put an upper limit on its
amplitude, which constrains the geometry of pulsar A with respect to our
line of sight as well as its emission geometry.
