##### Contents

-    I INTRODUCTION
    -    I.1 NOTATION AND CONVENTIONS
-    II NEWTONIAN MECHANICS
    -    II.1 Multipole Expansion
        -    II.1.1 Moments of a Scalar Function in @xmath
        -    II.1.2 Mass, Momentum and Stress Moments
    -    II.2 Reduced Moments
    -    II.3 Point Particle Approximation
    -    II.4 Internal Structure and Higher Moments
        -    II.4.1 Rigid Objects
-    III GENERAL RELATIVITY
    -    III.1 Momentum and Angular Momentum
    -    III.2 Force and Torque
    -    III.3 Center of Mass Worldline
    -    III.4 Energy Momentum Skeleton
        -    III.4.1 Moment Generating Functions in a Relativistic
            Theory
        -    III.4.2 Constraints, Relation to the Energy Momentum Tensor
        -    III.4.3 Existence Proof
        -    III.4.4 Construction of the Energy Momentum Skeleton
    -    III.5 Gravitational Force and Torque
    -    III.6 Relativistic Multipole Moments
    -    III.7 Explicit Evaluation of Force and Torque
-    IV CONCLUSIONS
-    A WORLD FUNCTION
-    B VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL COVARIANT DERIVATIVES
    -    B.1 Vertical Covariant Derivative
    -    B.2 Horizontal Covariant Derivative
-    C JACOBI EQUATION
-    D TENSOR EXTENSION

## I Introduction

Describing the motion of an object in a gravitational field is the main
concern of any theory of gravity. But even in the simplest cases, the
problem is a difficult one when one aims for an accurate description of
Nature. Dealing with the motion of a point particle is a simple one, but
when some structure is added to the object in concern, the problem gets
complicated. A solution for the problem of motion of @xmath isolated
bodies with internal structure in Newtonian mechanics was first proposed
by Tisserand tiss . The method suggested a way for separation of the
external motion of the bodies from their internal motion, by making use
of the linearity of equations of motion. Reviews of this method can be
found in damour . As a result of this separation, overall motion of one
of the bodies can be described to the order of desired accuracy, and
justification for the point particle approximation can be made more
reliable dixonIV .

In General Relativity, the field equations are coupled and nonlinear,
and these prevent direct application of the above mentioned methods of
Newtonian mechanics. Even solving the equation of motion for a point
particle is not straightforward, since the existence of a particle
changes the metric tensor. If this effect (self-field) is neglected, it
was shown in schild that such a particle follows a geodesic.
Introduction of the self-field highly complicates the problem poisson ;
waldself . Ignoring the self force, a way of approaching the problem of
motion of an extended test body in General Relativity was proposed by
Mathisson in 1937 mat . The idea was to define the body by a set of
multipole moments defined on a central worldline, which is to be
identified as the generalization of the Newtonian concept of mass center
to a relativistic theory. His paper showed that in a relativistic theory
one can have the useful definitions of mass center, force, torque and
mass; with desired properties. Mathisson called the set of moments as
the “Dynamical (or Gravitational) Skeleton”, and the resulting equations
of motion as the “Variational Equation of Dynamics”. A similar treatment
of the problem was proposed by Papapetrou papa , and Mathisson‘s methods
were further developed by Tulczyjew Tul , Tulczyjew & Tulczyjew tul1 and
others, with the accompanying improvements of the definition of mass
center by Moller Tul ; mol ; bb and others damour ; dixonrev . No claim
of originality is made in this thesis, except for the details of
derivations. I mainly follow the series of papers Dixon wrote in this
topic, expounding on these derivations dixonIV ; dixon64 ; dixonI ;
dixonIII ; dixonV .

In the first chapter, I will review the problem of motion of @xmath
extended isolated bodies in Newtonian theory, and try to obtain some
insight which will be useful in the relativistic theory. The first
section will be devoted to the definitions of multipole moments in
Newtonian theory. Moments of mass, momentum and stress, and their
interrelations will be defined. In the second section, “Reduced Moments”
will be defined with the help of the previously defined moments, and the
set of equations they satisfy will be found. In the third section, the
simplest approximation to such a system - point particle approximation -
will be made. This approximation ignores any kind of internal structure
present in the bodies. In this case, only the masses of the bodies and
their mutual separation play a role in the equations of motion. When
some structure is added to the objects (quadrupole approximation),
pole-dipole interaction will be observed. Considering higher order
moments will give more and more accurate results, but these results are
indeterminate, as will be seen, without an accompanying equation of
state. To get determinate equations, one can work with rigid objects.
This discussion will finalize the first chapter. The first chapter is
based on damour ; dixonIV ; dixonV .

In the second chapter, the analogous relativistic problem will be
reviewed. At first, the difficulties faced during the generalization of
the ideas from Newtonian mechanics will be discussed. The following
three sections will discuss the definitions of momentum, angular
momentum, center of mass worldline in General Relativity. The fifth
section involves the discussion of the energy momentum skeleton, and
sketches the outline of the existence proof of such an object. Also, its
relation to the energy momentum tensor will be given explicitly. The
rest of the chapter involves the definition of gravitational force and
torque, and the multipole moments of the energy momentum skeleton. This
chapter will mainly review dixonIV ; dixonI ; dixonIII ; de felice ;
schattnerdixon .

During the development of the theory, several mathematical tools are
needed. Two-point tensors - especially Synge’s world function - are
frequently used in the relativistic theory, and discussed in detail in
Appendix A . Useful definitions of vertical and horizontal covariant
derivatives, defined for a two-point tensor, is discussed in Appendix B
. Jacobi equation and its consequences are frequently used, and is
discussed in Appendix C .

Moreover, tensor extensions, which are used in the definitions of
relativistic force and torque, is important, and its definition, in
addition to normal coordinates, can be found in Appendix D . The
appendices are mainly based on synge ; dixonIV ; schattnerjacobi ;
veblen , respectively.

### i.1 Notation and Conventions

Throughout this thesis, Greek indices will run from 0 to 3 and Latin
ones from 1 to 3. The metric is of the signature @xmath . Derivation
along a curve @xmath is denoted by @xmath . Riemann tensor is defined
through the relation

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

Two-point tensors are frequently used, and a special notation is
introduced for notational simplicity. When dealing with a two-point
tensor, @xmath will be used as tensor indices at @xmath , and @xmath for
tensor indices at @xmath ; unless stated otherwise. Covariant
derivatives of the world function will be denoted by subscripts, such
that

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

Curly bracket notation, defined only for 3 indices, is defined as:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

Throughout the thesis, round brackets will denote symmetrization, such
as:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

and square brackets will denote antisymmetrization:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

## Ii Newtonian Mechanics

In this chapter, we will deal with the problem of motion of @xmath
isolated extended bodies in detail, in Newtonian mechanics. This will
give us an idea about the necessary steps to be taken in a relativistic
theory. Our main aim will be the separation of the external motion of
the bodies from their internal motion.

Consider a system composed of @xmath bodies such that the individual
size of each body is small compared to the mutual separation between
each of them; and let each body be made of some fluid, with an internal
structure governed by a given equation of state.

Let @xmath be the position vector of a general point with respect to a
fixed origin and @xmath be the mass density. (In the following lines,
index notation, such as @xmath , will be used instead of vector notation
for simplicity.) Save the details of the derivations, nothing we shall
present is new. We follow damour ; dixonIV ; landaufluid .

The equations governing the motion are:

1.  Mass Conservation - Continuity Equation:

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (6)
      -- -------- -- -----

    which relates the rate of change of mass in some volume @xmath to
    the mass of fluid flowing through the boundary of @xmath , and,

2.  Continuum Equation of Motion:

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (7)
      -- -------- -- -----

    which is obtained by evaluating the rate of change of momentum
    density, by using Euler’s equation that tells us that some fluid
    enclosed by a volume element exerts a pressure on that element.

Here @xmath , @xmath is the internal stress tensor - it contains the
information of the pressure and possibly viscosity - and @xmath is the
gravitational field given by the Poisson equation:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

with the boundary condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the equations are coupled and nonlinear, instead of directly
trying to solve them, one can try to find approximate solutions. The
bodies are largely separated, so in order to solve the equation of
motion of each body, one can make multipole expansion of the necessary
function with respect to some origin, and keep terms up to the order of
needed accuracy. The simplest case is to keep only the lowest order
terms in each of the resulting series. This will give the point particle
approximation for each body. Now, this procedure will be discussed in
detail, in the following order damour ; dixonIV :

-   Multipole Expansion

-   Reduced Moments

-   Point Particle Approximation

-   Internal Structure and Higher Moments

### ii.1 Multipole Expansion

#### ii.1.1 Moments of a Scalar Function in @xmath

Before dealing with the actual problem, we will first consider the
multipole structure of a scalar function and see how the moments
determine it completely. For this, consider a continuous scalar function
@xmath of compact support on @xmath . We ask for compact support since
functions representing a finite sized object (mass, momentum or stress
density) will be of this kind. Moments of such a function with respect
to origin is defined as

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

One can show that this set of moments completely describe the original
function @xmath by considering the Fourier transform of it, defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

Expanding the exponential, this can be written in terms of ( 9 )

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

And finally, one can obtain @xmath by taking the inverse Fourier
transform of this expression. @xmath is called the “modified moment
generating function” of @xmath dixonI .

#### ii.1.2 Mass, Momentum and Stress Moments

Now, consider one of the bodies in the system described at the beginning
of this chapter. As a representative point for this particular body,
introduce the moving origin @xmath , with respect to which the multipole
expansion will be made. Let the velocity of this point be @xmath . Then,
the position vector relative to this moving origin will be @xmath . We
define moments of mass, momentum and stress densities with respect to
this point, respectively, as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the integrals are taken over some spatial volume containing the
body that is being dealt with, but not any other body dixonIV ; dixonV .
This can be done, since, at the beginning, it was assumed that the
separation between the bodies is large. Note that for the sake of
notational simplicity, we supress the arguments of the functions. ( 6 )
and ( 7 ) relate time derivatives of mass and momentum densities to
other quantities, so let us evaluate the time derivatives of them in
terms of the moments.

Before that, note that for the time derivatives of any integral which
includes the mass density

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using ( 6 ), and integrating by parts (keeping in mind that mass density
vanishes on the boundary); the right-hand side of ( 15 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

one has

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using this result damour , let us evaluate the time derivatives of mass
and momentum density moments dixonIV ; dixonV .

For mass moments, let us consider lower moments separately:

For @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

which basically states the mass conservation.

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is just the relative momentum with respect to the moving origin.

@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

The physical meaning of these higher moments are not that transparent
but we shall use them in our computations. Let us find the analogous
expressions for the momentum density moments.

@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we have made use of ( 7 ) and ( 16 ).

Since the total divergence term vanishes on the boundary:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is just the total gravitational force on the body.

@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to evaluate this, use ( 6 ) in ( 7 ) to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this, one has:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , the term with the derivative of the stress tensor on the
right hand side can be integrated by parts to give @xmath

Then,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

And finally, for @xmath , a similar computation gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that the resultant infinite set of equations ( 17 ) - ( 23 ) are
completely equivalent to the equations ( 6 ) and ( 7 ). All the
information can be obtained from the moments, except the terms involving
the gravitational potential. But these terms can be written in terms of
mass moments by expanding @xmath about @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that the moments @xmath and @xmath , with the above infinite
set of interrelations completely define the system.

Dixon’s idea is to find a subset of these moments that defines the same
system of equations, but subject to a finite number of interrelations.
This can be done by finding the irreducible symmetries of the moments
@xmath and @xmath

### ii.2 Reduced Moments

It is simple to find the reduced moments of the momentum density. The
defining equation ( 13 ), shows that these moments are symmetric in the
first @xmath indices, and does not have a particular symmetry in the
last index. This object can be separated into two irreducibly symmetric
parts; one of which is totally symmetric in all indices, and the other
antisymmetric in last index and each of the first @xmath indices. But it
is better to find the irreducible symmetries in a more formal way that
can also be used in the evaluation of irreducible symmetries of @xmath
’s.

@xmath is a tensorial object which is obtained by taking the tensor
product of a rank @xmath tensor with a totally symmetric tensor of rank
@xmath . In order to evaluate the irreducible symmetries of it we will
use representation theory of the symmetric group weyl . Let @xmath with
@xmath correspond to the irreducible symmetry of the Young diagram with
partition @xmath (see figure ( 1 )).

In order to evaluate the irreducible symmetries of @xmath , we need to
consider the product of 2 Young diagrams with partition @xmath and
partition @xmath dixonV . Following the rules of multiplying the Young
diagrams sakurai , one has @xmath .

This shows that @xmath can be written in terms of 2 irreducible parts as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a totally symmetric part; and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Instead of these @xmath ’s, one can also use the following

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can see by checking ( 23 ) that @xmath ’s are totally determined by
@xmath ’s. The only moment left undetermined by this process is @xmath ,
but it can be read directly from ( 18 ), so this moment is also
determined by @xmath ’s. So @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s can be used to
determine the moments of the momentum density instead of @xmath ’s and
@xmath ’s. The advantage of using the former is that it has only one
restriction, that is ( 17 ), on the other hand the latter has to obey an
infinite set of interrelations ( 17 ) - ( 19 ). @xmath ’s are called
“Reduced moments” of @xmath - the momentum density dixonV .

The same can be done for the moments of the stress tensor. Using the
rules for taking the direct product of Young Diagrams, it can be found
that @xmath has symmetry @xmath . (This is valid only for @xmath , so
moments with @xmath must be treated separately.)

Equation ( 23 ) relates @xmath to moments of mass and momentum density.
Then, totally symmetric part of @xmath ’s (with symmetry @xmath ) and
the part which is antisymmetric in 2 indices (the part with symmetry
@xmath ) can be determined from @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s, or from @xmath
’s and @xmath ’s.

The remaining part of @xmath ’s, with symmetry @xmath can be taken as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equivalently, one can introduce

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

(with antisymmetrization over the pairs @xmath and @xmath ), and impose

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

In order to finalize the evaluation of reduced moments of stress tensor
density, one has to consider the case with @xmath .

For @xmath , @xmath as it can be seen by writing down the terms
explicitly. From ( 23 ), it can be seen that both terms are determined
by @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s.

For @xmath , @xmath is determined by the symmetric portion of equation (
22 ). So the antisymmetric part of ( 22 ) is not included in this
reduction. Also, as previously noted, ( 21 ) is also not included by
this reduction.

In summary, we’ve seen that instead of the complete set of moments,
@xmath ’s, @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s with an infinite set of constraints,
( 17 )-( 23 ); one can use the reduced set of moments: @xmath ’s, @xmath
’s and @xmath ’s, which also represent the system defined by ( 6 ) and (
7 ), with only 2 constraints ( 21 ) and the antisymmetric part of ( 22 )
dixonV .

### ii.3 Point Particle Approximation

In this section, equations ( 21 ) and the antisymmetric part of ( 22 )
will be examined in detail dixonIV .

Working on one of the bodies, it is convenient to define a mass center
for the body. Following the definition of mass center in Newtonian
mechanics, we see that mass center can be defined by setting mass
density dipole moment to zero. Using equation ( 18 ),

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

Following this, again by ( 18 ), we have the usual momentum-velocity
relation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

This is the same relation as if we were working with a point particle,
so this velocity can be interpreted as the velocity of the body.

In the next step, total force and torque acting on the body will be
defined. The right hand side of ( 21 ) can be defined to be the force

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

For the total torque, first the antisymmetric part of equation ( 22 )
will be defined as the total angular momentum of the body with respect
to @xmath . This can be seen by using the center of mass relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (31)
              @xmath   @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

by ( 29 ). It is seen that these terms are basically the internal
angular momentum with respect to the fixed origin and the angular
momentum of the center of mass with respect to the moving origin @xmath
. The difference of these is the total angular momentum of the body with
respect to @xmath . Now, evaluating the time derivative of this term

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first term on the left hand side can be written as @xmath . For the
second term, using ( 7 ), one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Integrating by parts and dropping a boundary term, and using once again
( 7 ); the result can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here the first term on the right hand side is purely kinematical, and
vanishes when @xmath is chosen as the center of mass; so the other term
can be interpreted as the total torque acting on the body: @xmath . Then
we have:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

The next step is to separate the self and external fields. For the self
field of the @xmath body damour ; dixonIV

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

with the boundary condition @xmath as @xmath

Define the difference field as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the linearity of ( 8 ) and ( 35 ) one can say that the difference
field for a body is equivalent to the external field. Also, note that by
definition ( 30 ), ( 34 ), force and torque are also linear, and can be
separated in the same way.

Self force and self torque can be evaluated explicitly as follows. The
solution of Poisson’s equation ( 8 ) is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

and by ( 30 ), the self force is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

which vanishes because of the antisymmetry in @xmath and @xmath as
expected by Newton’s @xmath law. Self torque also vanishes in the same
way. So, all we have to consider is the external field acting on the
particle. This can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath denotes a point in the @xmath body Now, let @xmath be a
point in the @xmath body. Assuming that the separation between the
bodies is large compared to the individual sizes of them (See figure ( 2
)), we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

Then we can expand @xmath in a Taylor series about @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath

Then the external field can be expressed as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the definition of the mass density moments ( 12 ), this can be
written in terms of the moments of the @xmath body

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

In order to evaluate the external force and the torque acting on the
body, we can expand @xmath in a Taylor series about @xmath in the
definitions ( 30 ) and ( 34 ), once again using our starting
assumptions. Then the force can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath as usual. Again using ( 12 )

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

and similarly for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

In transition to the point particle approximation, only the first terms
in the series of @xmath and @xmath will be taken. (The accuracy of the
approximation could be maximized by taking @xmath to be center of mass
of the @xmath body, so that the second term in each series identically
vanishes.)

Expanding ( 30 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the center of mass frame of the @xmath body (the body we are working
on), we have the momentum velocity relation ( 29 ). Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is just the inverse square force law. This equation can be solved
for given initial conditions and known masses. It is independent of the
internal structure of the bodies damour ; dixonIV .

### ii.4 Internal Structure and Higher Moments

Going one step further, and including the second order terms in each
series, internal structure of the bodies can be accounted for in the
equation of motion. Using the center of mass condition

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath order mass density moment is the inertia tensor

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

By ( 38 ) and ( 8 ), the Laplacian of the external field is zero within
the body that is being dealt with, one can equivalently use the
traceless ‘Quadrupole Tensor’ instead of the inertia tensor damour

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

This does not change anything in ( 46 ), but the fact that it can be
written in this form shows that the point particle approximation, for
bodies whose trace of the inertia tensor has a large norm, has greater
accuracy.

Now, using the expansion of @xmath as in ( 41 )

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

again introducing the quadrupole tensor, force can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

This can be written in a more compact form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we have used

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

If we let @xmath be the typical length of one of the bodies and @xmath
the typical separation between each body; the first term in the above
series is of the order @xmath , the second and the third is @xmath . The
first neglected term (dipole-dipole interaction) is of the order @xmath
.
In contrast to the point particle case, as higher moments is considered,
the motion becomes indeterminate since there is no information on the
time dependence of these moments. To get rid of this, now it will be
assumed that the bodies are rigid objects dixonIV .

#### ii.4.1 Rigid Objects

In Newtonian mechanics, an object is called rigid if the relative
separation of the particles forming the body does not change over time
landaumech . Consider the infinitesimal motion of a point in such a
body. Such a motion, @xmath , with respect to fixed origin can be
written in two parts. One is a part that is equal to the movement of the
center of mass @xmath , and the other is the motion of the corresponding
particle with respect to center of mass. We are assuming that the
separation of these two points don’t change, so it can only include a
rotation of the point @xmath around the center of mass: @xmath , where
@xmath is the angle of rotation. Then,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

from which, after dividing by @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , and we have used the assumption that the relative
position of the particles to be constant landaumech . This can be
expressed as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

using index notation, for some antisymmetric @xmath .

Using this in ( 13 ), one obtains dixonIV

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is the center of mass, using the vanishing of the mass
dipole moment, we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

And the time dependence of any @xmath can be found as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

With these in hand, ( 29 ) and ( 56 ) can be used to eliminate momentum
and angular momentum from ( 30 ) and ( 34 ). Resulting equations are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

Together with the multipole expansion of the force and the torque, we
have a determinate set of equations for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
irrespective of the order of moments kept in the calculation dixonIV .

## Iii General Relativity

In order to discuss the problem of motion of a system of bodies in
General Relativity, relativistic versions of ( 6 ), ( 7 ), and ( 8 ) are
needed. In this case, equations of motion are dixonIV (replacing the
continuum equation of motion in Newtonian Theory)

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

and equations ( 6 ), ( 7 ) will be replaced by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is obtained by the contracted Bianchi identity. These set of
equations fully describe the motion, and the aim is to follow the
procedure followed in the previous chapter to extract them in a
convenient form. The difficulty comes from the nonlinearity of the
equations. In the Newtonian problem (due to linearity of the theory) it
was possible to separate the self field and the external field for one
of the bodies, but this is no longer the case in a relativistic theory.
Also, in Newtonian theory, gravitational force is totally determined
only by mass density, while in General Relativity all forms of energy
have some gravitational mass, so if we were to make a similar moment
expansion as in ( 12 ), this will not be an expansion only for @xmath ,
but also for the other components of the energy momentum tensor dixonIV
; dixonIII .

In the previous chapter, the first step was to describe a mass center
for the body in concern. Here, however, first the definitions of
momentum and angular momentum will be given, since the center of mass
definition that fits in with the Dixon’s theory involves these
definitions.

### iii.1 Momentum and Angular Momentum

The aim of this section is to define momentum and angular momentum of a
spatially bounded body, which is described by some symmetric energy
momentum tensor @xmath . For a finite sized object, @xmath is nonzero in
the world tube @xmath of the body, which extends to past and future
infinity but is spatially bounded. Assume, for now, that the spacetime
admits isometries described by a Killing vector field @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

In such a spacetime, there exists some constants of motion resulting
from the symmetries of the spacetime, which can be obtained by
contracting the energy momentum tensor with the Killing vector field de
felice . By ( 62 ) and ( 61 ), and the symmetry of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

Integrate this over some volume @xmath which includes some portion of
the object‘s world-tube @xmath ; whose surface is everywhere timelike
and bounded by two space-like, non-intersecting hypersurfaces @xmath and
@xmath , such that @xmath is the future of @xmath . Choose @xmath such
that @xmath vanishes on the surface of it (see figure ( 3 )).

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

which can also be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using Stoke’s theorem, this can be written as an integral over the
boundary of the volume

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

Writing the contributions of each boundary of @xmath separately

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

The last term vanishes since @xmath is zero on @xmath , and the first
two terms can be restricted to @xmath by the same reasoning. Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

is a constant of motion, independent of the hypersurface chosen dixonIV
; de felice .

After this construction, we will define the momentum and angular
momentum of this system in such a way that the symmetries of the
spacetime will lead to a vanishing linear combination of them, and they
will match with the known definitions in special relativistic limit.
Using ( 314 ),

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath is a fixed but otherwise arbitrary
point. Define momentum and angular momentum as dixonIV ; dixonI

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

The constant can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since the definitions of @xmath and @xmath do not depend on the Killing
vector fields, the definitions can be used for an arbitrary spacetime
without any symmetries. However, when the spacetime admits isometries,
@xmath gives a linear combination of momentum and angular momentum which
is a constant dixonIV ; dixonI .

In the flat space limit, @xmath is equivalent to the displacement vector
of @xmath as is shown in ( 281 ), and @xmath and @xmath both reduce to
unit tensors poisson , so the special relativistic limit of the above
momentum and angular momentum are

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

which are the usual definitions obtained by using Noether’s theorem in
classical field theories dixonV . This result supports the validity of
the given definitions, ( 70 ) and ( 71 ), in an arbitrary spacetime.

### iii.2 Force and Torque

@xmath and @xmath as given above depend on the fixed but otherwise
arbitrary point @xmath and the hypersurface of integration @xmath , but
( 72 ) is independent of both. So one can vary @xmath along a
parametrized worldline @xmath , and use the constancy of ( 72 ) along it
to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the parameter along @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

Or writing the terms explicitly

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

By ( 62 ), we have @xmath with @xmath ; and since a Killing vector field
satisfies

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

the above result can be written as,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

This holds for all Killing vector fields if each term in the brackets
separately vanishes. They will be defined to be the total force and
total torque acting on the body dixonIV ; dixonI .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

With these definitions, ( 78 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

Both definitions, ( 79 ) and ( 80 ), can be generalized to arbitrary
spacetimes, since they don’t depend on the Killing vectors. But in a
general spacetime, higher multipole moments will also contribute to
force and torque. ( 81 ) expresses the connection between the integrals
of motion and the isometries of the spacetime. By ( 317 ), it can be
seen that the maximum number of linearly independent Killing vectors
@xmath is equal to the maximum number of independent values of the
initial values @xmath de felice . So in a maximally symmetric spacetime,
@xmath and @xmath vanish separately.

As a last note, keep in mind that by construction ( 81 ) holds
independent of the hypersurface chosen, but the force and torque as
define above, depend on it. Also, in each definition, there is a term
involving @xmath , the kinematical velocity, which will be defined in
the next section to be the velocity of the center of mass dixonIV .

### iii.3 Center of Mass Worldline

Before defining the multipole moments which carry all the information
about the body, the definition of the center of mass worldline will be
made. This will reduce the arbitrariness in the definitions of the
worldline @xmath and the hypersurface of integration @xmath . This is
the worldline with respect to which the multipole expansion will be made
dixonIV ; dixonI .

Before giving the definition of center of mass in a curved spacetime, it
will be convenient to make the definition in the flat space of Special
Relativity. In Newtonian mechanics, the definition of center of mass is
done through the vanishing of the mass dipole moment, and relates the
center of mass velocity to the momentum of the object by ( 29 ). Also,
note that by ( 32 ), only internal spin contributes in the center of
mass frame. One can directly generalize the definition made for
Newtonian mechanics ( 28 ) as dixonI ; de felice

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath runs from 1 to 3. This can be put in a better form by
introducing the notation @xmath as the unit normal to the hypersurface
chosen, defining the Lorentz frame in which the body is at rest, and
using @xmath where @xmath is the invariant volume element de felice

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

which can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using ( 281 ), ( 73 ) and ( 74 ), above condition can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

The left hand side of ( 85 ) will be our generalization of the mass
dipole moment in a relativistic theory. It can be shown to reduce to the
Newtonian definition ( 28 ) in the limit. ( 85 ) can be carried to
curved spacetime. In a general spacetime, we would like to have a
momentum of the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

for a timelike vector @xmath at @xmath with @xmath not necessarily a
constant. But it would be natural to expect @xmath to reduce to a
constant if the spacetime admits some symmetries. It has been shown in
bb ; schattnercm that if the gravitational field varies slowly over the
body, there exists a timelike future directed vector @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

Generally, @xmath will be different from @xmath dixonIV ; abrahamtez ,
the tangent to the worldline and its normalization will be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

Hypersurface of integration can be constructed such that it is generated
by all geodesics through @xmath orthogonal to @xmath . Using ( 286 ),
this tells that @xmath is the set of all @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

Then, the special relativistic definition of the mass center can be
generalized to an arbitrary spacetime, using the definition of momentum
as being parallel to @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

Uniqueness of such a worldline has been proven in bb ; schattnercm .
This construction removes the arbitrariness of the hypersurfaces of
integration and of the central line @xmath . Note that by ( 90 ), @xmath
has 3 linearly independent components dixonI . This can be written
explicitly by defining the spin vector as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the volume @xmath -form and @xmath with @xmath is the
Levi-Civita symbol. ( 91 ) satisfies

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath can be written in terms of this spin vector with the use of ( 90
) as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

which can be interpreted as the generalization of vanishing of the
orbital component of the angular momentum in the center of mass frame
abrahamtez .

It is useful to study how @xmath in ( 86 ) changes along @xmath . First
of all, since @xmath was defined to be a unit vector, it satisfies:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using the definition ( 86 ) in ( 79 ), one obtains

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

In flat space, @xmath vanishes by 81 and @xmath The contraction of the
above equation with @xmath shows, by ( 94 ), that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

Let us continue the problem in a general spacetime. Contracting ( 95 )
with @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

The last term vanishes due to the antisymmetry of the Riemann tensor. By
using ( 88 ) and differentiating the center of mass condition in the
form ( 85 ) along @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

Contracting this with @xmath gives, by the antisymmetry of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

Contracting ( 80 ) with @xmath and using ( 88 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this in ( 97 ), one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

So when force and torque vanish (which is the case in a maximally
symmetric spacetime), @xmath is a constant de felice .

An explicit solution of the center of mass velocity can also be found in
terms of other variables as in ehlers . In order to do this, one has to
solve ( 79 ) and ( 80 ) in terms of @xmath with constraints ( 86 ), ( 88
) and ( 90 ) dixonIV . Before proceeding to the solution of the general
problem, let us again evaluate the situation in flat spacetime, and work
without the normalization @xmath for now. In flat space, ( 79 ) and ( 80
) reduce to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

Contract ( 103 ) with @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 86 ), this can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

The term in the parenthesis projects orthogonal to @xmath , and its
contraction with @xmath measures the velocity of the center of mass
frame from the rest frame of an observer which has velocity @xmath de
felice . Now, using the constancy of momentum in flat space ( 102 ),
differentiate the center of mass condition in the form ( 85 ) along with
respect to @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

This shows that the left hand side of ( 105 ) vanishes. Then one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

That tells that @xmath is parallel to @xmath , and identical to it when
it is normalized as in ( 88 ). Since @xmath was shown to be constant
before, it is seen that @xmath and @xmath are also constant along @xmath
in flat space. ( 85 ) with ( 86 ) and the constancy of @xmath also show
that the spin vector ( 91 ) is constant along @xmath . This discussion
shows that the center of mass worldline in flat space is a geodesic, and
the spin vector is parallelly propagated along it de felice .

Now its time to proceed to the aforementioned problem of finding the
explicit solution of the center of velocity in terms of other parameters
dixonIV ; ehlers . As a first step, differentiate ( 90 ) along @xmath to
get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

Use ( 80 ) and ( 86 ) in the second term to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

Use ( 88 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

For simplicity, let @xmath so that the equation can be written in the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be inverted to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

Use this in ( 79 ) to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

To get an equation for @xmath , contract this with @xmath

  -- -- -- -------
           (114)
  -- -- -- -------

where we have used the symmetries of the Riemann tensor to
antisymmetrize @xmath and @xmath with no cost. In order to simplify this
further, we will use the fact that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

identically due to antisymmetry of @xmath and ( 85 ). The simplest way
to see this is to choose a frame where @xmath takes the form @xmath
(since it is a unit timelike vector). With this choice, the only
nonvanishing components of @xmath are @xmath where @xmath , and an
explicit calculation, with using the antisymmetry of @xmath gives ( 115
); which, in turn implies dixonIV

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, ( 114 ) can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, using ( 111 ), we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the desired equation, which gives the velocity of the center of
mass @xmath in terms of other quantities. In order to check that @xmath
obtained from this equation satisfies ( 88 ), contract with @xmath . The
right hand side vanishes by the center of mass condition. Then, we are
left with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath was defined to be proportional to @xmath , so that @xmath ; so
the center of mass velocity found above satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

In a maximally symmetric spacetime, there exists 10 linearly independent
Killing vectors so that @xmath by ( 81 ). If @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also, remembering that in such a space, the Riemann tensor can be
written as wald

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant, the left hand side of ( 118 ) vanishes by (
90 ), resulting in

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

Vanishing of the force already shows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

And using ( 123 ) in ( 80 ), when @xmath vanishes, leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

( 124 ) also implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

So that in a maximally symmetric spacetime, the center of mass worldline
is a geodesic, angular momentum is parallelly transported along it and
@xmath is a constant dixonIV ; de felice ; ehlers .

### iii.4 Energy Momentum Skeleton

Having defined all the necessary concepts in order to define the motion
of a body in General Relativity, the next step is to find an explicit
expression of force and torque appearing in ( 79 ) and ( 80 ). This
information is hidden in ( 61 ), but there is no straightforward way to
obtain it, since that equation contains much more than the information
of force and torque. In turn, ( 60 ) contains ( 61 ), but also some
other information about the body and the field. The reason for this is
the coupling of the field and the geometry, that is the impossibility of
separating matter and field variables. In this section, the aim is to
find an expression for the case when one extracts the information of (
61 ) from that of ( 60 ). In order to do this, we will write down an
expression of the energy momentum tensor, in terms of the momenta ( 70
), ( 71 ) and a new quantity, @xmath called the “Energy Momentum
Skeleton”, which was first coined by Myron Mathisson mat . The name
suggests that this skeleton will have all the necessary information
about the body. Mathematically, it will be a tensor valued distribution
on the tangent bundle, nonzero only on the tangent spaces of each point
of the center of mass worldline, and have a compact support on the
@xmath hypersurface, where @xmath is the position vector in the tangent
space of @xmath dixonIV ; schattnerdixon . The advantage of this
formalism is that instead of dealing with the set of partial
differential equations ( 61 ), we will be left with two ordinary
differential equations ( 79 ) and ( 80 ); and we will get explicit forms
of force and torque, given an energy momentum tensor dixonIV ;
abrahamtez .

Before starting the discussion summarized above, we will try to obtain
the analogs of the idea of moment generating functions discussed in
Section ( II.1.1 ) in a relativistic theory. After that, we will see how
one can the energy momentum skeleton from a given @xmath ; and also how
to reconstruct @xmath from given @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This will
be done in the following sections dixonIV .

#### iii.4.1 Moment Generating Functions in a Relativistic Theory

As stated above, our first aim is to generalize the ideas of Section (
II.1.1 ). There, we dealt with a scalar function on @xmath , but what we
need is the construction for @xmath in curved spacetime. There is no
straightforward generalization, so we will first work with a scalar
function in flat space of Special Relativity, then generalize the
results to curved spacetime, and finally obtain the corresponding
expression for a rank @xmath tensor field.

We are interested in the energy momentum tensor @xmath , representing
the properties of a finite sized object. The support of such a tensor
field will be bounded in spacelike directions, but extend to past and
future infinity. Fourier transform of such an object may not be defined
in the usual sense because of its support, but one can always define its
Fourier transform as a “generalized function” gelfand ; dixonII .

We will start with a continuous scalar field @xmath on @xmath , flat
space of Special Relativity, whose support extends to past and future
infinity, but bounded in spacelike directions. Let @xmath be a scalar
function of compact support on @xmath , whose Fourier transform is
defined as as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, we can consider @xmath as a functional on the space of all @xmath
, whose value at a particular @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the value of this integral is known for all @xmath , then @xmath is
known. Following this, we will define the Fourier transform of @xmath as
a functional on the space of all @xmath through Parceval’s relation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can decompose this integral by introducing a timelike worldline
@xmath with parametric form @xmath with @xmath proper time along it, and
constructing a family of hypersurfaces @xmath representing the
instantaneous rest space of this observer, constructed through @xmath
orthogonal to @xmath for each @xmath . This is the worldline along which
the multipole expansion will be made. Introduce a vector field @xmath
such that @xmath drags @xmath to @xmath for each @xmath . Now, if we let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

be the Fourier transform of @xmath referring @xmath as origin; with the
help of above construction, ( 129 ) can be put in the form dixonII

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the moment generating function of @xmath , analogous of (
11 ), defined through the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the multipole moments of @xmath defined as integrals over @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . ( 131 ) is the equation that we will generalize to curved
spacetime, but first we should interpret it properly (We will not give
the explicit forms of the analogs of ( 132 )-( 133 ) in curved spacetime
here since they are not important for the rest of this thesis.
Interested reader may check dixonII ). Now, we have taken @xmath as
origin, so its natural to consider the dot product in ( 130 ) as taken
between tangent vectors at @xmath , so that @xmath and @xmath are
elements of tangent space @xmath at @xmath . @xmath is the element of
@xmath , which is mapped into @xmath by the exponential map @xmath at
@xmath . With this identification, the integral can be considered to be
taken over @xmath , if we identify @xmath on @xmath with @xmath on
@xmath . Now, if @xmath is varied over @xmath , @xmath will be a scalar
field in the tangent bundle @xmath of @xmath . So, with this
construction, we can say that the Fourier transform relates scalar
functions on @xmath rather than @xmath .

In a curved spacetime @xmath , we will define the Fourier transform of a
function @xmath on @xmath of compact support on @xmath for each @xmath
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the volume element on @xmath . Then,
the Fourier transform of @xmath is defined as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, there are two different test functions; @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath on @xmath ; which are related by the exponential map of @xmath on
@xmath as @xmath dixonII .

Above ideas can be extended to tensor fields, and particularly to a
tensor with contravariant rank @xmath (such as @xmath ). One way to do
this in flat space would be considering each component of the tensor
field as a scalar function while calculating analogs of ( 133 ), but
integrating a component of a tensor in curved spacetime will not be
covariant, so we need an alternative approach. One was is to introduce a
propogator @xmath that can be used to transport the tensor @xmath to a
central world line @xmath before the integration to obtain the multipole
moments. If this way is followed, the resulting equation is dixonII

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is a @xmath map of compact support of @xmath into the
tensor bundle @xmath , and related to @xmath on @xmath via some
propagator @xmath , which is the inverse of above mention propogator
@xmath , as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . So, in order to evaluate the result, one needs the
explicit form of this propagator. There are some options for this choice
but a natural one would be choosing @xmath of ( 316 ) as the propagator
such that in Riemann normal coordinates with pole at @xmath (where
@xmath becomes @xmath ), the components of @xmath and @xmath would
match. Unfortunately, this choice is not useful dixonIII ; abrahamtez .
The correct form requires the introduction of an auxillary field @xmath
satisfying certain conditions which will be discussed in detail in the
following section. The resulting equation is dixonIV ; dixonIII

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the equation which will be examined in the following sections,
where the terms appearing in ( 138 ) will be explained in detail.

#### iii.4.2 Constraints, Relation to the Energy Momentum Tensor

In this section, we will directly write down the equation relating
@xmath to @xmath and @xmath and the constraint equations on @xmath , as
they appear in dixonIV ; dixonIII , and give the proof of the existence
of such a @xmath , without discussing the reason of the choice. Details
of this construction is beyond the scope of this thesis and can be found
in dixonIII . We will start by separating monopole and dipole
contributions to @xmath in ( 138 ), which is actually separating the
moments whose time evolution is determined by ( 61 ) (see Section III.6
and ( 268 )). Then, ( 138 ) takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all symmetric @xmath of compact support. Here @xmath is the
invariant volume element on the tangent space of @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that @xmath satisfies the inhomogeneous generalization of the
Jacobi equation (See also ( 311 ))

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all geodesics @xmath through @xmath with @xmath an affine parameter
along them with curly bracket notation defined only for three indices
expressing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

and such that @xmath satisfies the following boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this expression, it should be understood that the derivatives are
taken before the limits. In all the equations above, we used indices as
defined in Chapter I.1 dixonIV

#### iii.4.3 Existence Proof

As a first step in the proof, we will show that for all symmetric @xmath
of compact support, there exists a unique symmetric @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to prove this, we first prove the following lemma dixonIV ;
dixonI ; schattnerdixon :
Lemma 1 : The condition ( 146 ) is equivalent to the following

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

Proof : First we will show how to get the latter condition from the
former one. Taking the covariant derivative of ( 146 ) and expanding it,
we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -- -------

Multiplying this with @xmath ( @xmath ) gives, using ( 146 ) and ( 292 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the symmetry, these two expressions together are equivalent to (
149 ). In order to find ( 150 ), take the limit of ( 151 ), as @xmath .
In this limit, @xmath , and @xmath . Then we are left with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -- -------

This completes the second part of the proof. Now, we will show that (
149 ) and ( 150 ) implies ( 146 ). Suppose that the conditions ( 149 )
and ( 150 ) hold. Contracting ( 149 ) with @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 289 ) this can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

since @xmath (which differentiates along geodesics @xmath through @xmath
). This can be integrated by using ( 150 ) as the initial data. Then,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking the covariant derivative, @xmath , of this, and rearranging the
terms gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this in ( 149 ) gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be put in a more convenient form by noticing that the term on
the left hand side can be rewritten by using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -- -------

So ( 158 ) can be written as

  -- -- -- -------
           (160)
  -- -- -- -------

Writing this as a linear equation for @xmath , by taking the @xmath in
the first term out of the derivative, one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (161)
  -- -------- -- -------

which has the unique solution @xmath , by the use of ( 150 ) as the
initial condition. This is what we were looking for, that is ( 147 ).
This completes the proof.

By directly using ( 147 ) in ( 150 ), it is straightforward to show that
this implies ( 143 ) by using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (162)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, note that by ( 146 ), ( 148 ) and ( 150 ) together imply

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be used as initial conditions for ( 143 ), by rewriting them as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then one can integrate ( 143 ) along @xmath to get the @xmath that
satisfies ( 146 ) and ( 148 ) dixonIII ; schattnerdixon .

Up to now, calculations were made for an arbitrary @xmath . Now, we can
extend the result by treating @xmath and @xmath as two point tensor that
have scalar character at @xmath dixonIV ; schattnerdixon . With this
construction, ( 147 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to extract the @xmath dependence of @xmath , take the
derivative with respect to @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, comparing with ( 147 ) shows that this can be obtained from ( 147 )
if we set @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Note that this construction
identically satisfies ( 146 ). Then, by Lemma 1 , ( 143 ) is also
satisfied in the following form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -- -------

By ( 149 ), we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (169)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using @xmath , this can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -- -------

By relabeling dummy indices in the first two terms, it can be seen that
they are equivalent. Then ( 168 ) can be written as, by using ( 289 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to integrate this and to find a solution for @xmath , we need
the initial conditions that correspond to ( 163 ). This can be found by
differentiating them with respect to @xmath and taking the coincidence
limit, @xmath afterwards. The resulting initial conditions, obtained by
using ( 296 ) are dixonIV ; schattnerjacobi

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (173)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, let us assume that we have the solution of ( 168 ) with the initial
conditions

  -- -- -- -------
           (174)
  -- -- -- -------

Let this solution be @xmath . This solution is determined only by @xmath
and its exact form can be found in schattnerdixon . Then, the solution
of ( 168 ) can be obtained by subtracting the solution of the
homogeneous part. This part can be written in terms of its initial
values by ( 317 ), the corresponding solution to the inhomogeneous
Jacobi equation is of the form dixonIV ; schattnerdixon

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (175)
  -- -------- -- -------

Before introducing the energy momentum tensor, let us discuss one
further remark. Let us discuss the results of Lemma 1 in flat space
(such as the tangent space at a point). Let @xmath be the coordinates on
@xmath and @xmath be a symmetric tensor field. Then one can prove that
there exists a tensor field schattnerdixon

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , from Lemma 1 . It can be shown that with such an @xmath
, @xmath satisfies ( 146 ) and ( 147 ) by its symmetries. In order to
shown the other way of the proof, take the derivative, @xmath of ( 146 )
after the replacements @xmath , @xmath . We obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (178)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is symmetric, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

Operating on this by @xmath , one finds

  -- -- -- -------
           (180)
  -- -- -- -------

Distributing the derivative and contracting with @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (181)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now introduce @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (182)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (183)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -- -------

( 184 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (186)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using these results, let us set @xmath in ( 178 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -- -------

By following the remarks made after ( 178 ), we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that for @xmath , @xmath . Taking another derivative of ( 188 )
with respect to @xmath , and by using ( 185 ) again

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath in ( 181 ) to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then ( 189 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the antisymmetrization is over the pairs @xmath and @xmath on the
left hand side. Now, @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -- -------

as can be seen by carrying out the integral on the right hand side.
Using these results for the first two terms on the right hand side and
using @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -- -------

This completes the proof and gives the exact form of @xmath
schattnerdixon .

#### iii.4.4 Construction of the Energy Momentum Skeleton

Now that we’ve finished the construction of mathematical preliminaries,
we will obtain ( 139 ). In this construction, we need a future pointing
timelike unit vector @xmath and the hypersurfaces of integration
constructed as explained in the paragraph preceeding ( 89 ). In addition
to these, we will define a scalar field @xmath for all @xmath on @xmath
and a vector field @xmath such that it maps @xmath , with @xmath . With
these at hand, consider the right hand side of ( 139 ). In the view of
Lemma 1 , it can be written as dixonIV

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can, by using the definition of @xmath , be written as dixonIV ;
dixon64 ; dixonIII

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (196)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 175 ), and plugging in the definitions ( 70 ) and ( 71 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -- -------

Comparing this with ( 139 ) shows that the last term (integral over
@xmath ) is identified with the energy momentum skeleton. It is a scalar
valued functional of @xmath . Let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (198)
  -- -------- -- -------

When @xmath is on the center of mass worldline, we will set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (199)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the volume element on the tangent space @xmath to the
manifold at @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (200)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a tensor field defined in the same way as @xmath was in
177 , i.e. it is equal to @xmath when results of @xmath holds in flat
space.

Now, we will examine the properties of @xmath defined in this way
dixonIV . In order to get the first important property, take

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (201)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is as defined in ( 298 ). With this choice, @xmath vanishes
by ( 194 ), so ( 198 ) also vanishes by construction. So, one can
integrate by parts the left hand side of ( 199 ) and use the compact
support of @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (202)
  -- -------- -- -------

for arbitrary @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (203)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, we will derive another property of @xmath which will restrict the
singularity that must be present to concentrate the distribution on the
hypersurface @xmath . For this, define a new tensor field @xmath , with
the same symmetry properties of ( 176 ) and set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (204)
  -- -------- -- -------

With such a @xmath , one has @xmath , so @xmath by Lemma 1 . By using
this result with ( 89 ) and ( 292 ) on ( 200 ), @xmath vanishes. Then,
from ( 199 ), we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (205)
  -- -------- -- -------

By the arbitrariness of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (206)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now finally, we are going to show how to get the form ( 139 ) as it was
first introduced dixonIV . For this, let us rewrite the equation
explicitly

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (207)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now rewrite ( 200 ) by using ( 316 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (208)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 147 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (209)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the first term gives @xmath , as defined in ( 140 ). In order to
evaluate the second term, first rewrite it as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (210)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, by ( 316 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (211)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking the covariant derivative of this, one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (212)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (213)
  -- -------- -- -------

again by using ( 316 ). Using ( 213 ), the definitions ( 141 ) and ( 142
), we have, for the second term on the right hand side of ( 209 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (214)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term on this expression does not contribute to the integral (
207 ), since by ( 299 ), it can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (215)
  -- -------- -- -------

whose contribution to the integral vanishes in the view of ( 202 ). So
we finally obtain the form given in ( 139 ).

Now we are in a position to show that, if @xmath satisfies ( 139 ), then
it automatically satisfies @xmath . In order to do this dixonIV , choose
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (216)
  -- -------- -- -------

for an arbitrary @xmath of compact support which vanishes in some
neighbourhood of the center of mass worldline. Use this in ( 143 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expanding the terms, using the geodesic equation and ( 162 ), it can be
seen that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (218)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a solution, since by the definition of the support of @xmath , the
initial conditions ( 145 ) hold. Now introduce a new tensor @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (219)
  -- -------- -- -------

Form this definition, let us calculate the (symmetrized) vertical
derivative of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (220)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expand the terms to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (221)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 213 ), this can be written as:

  -- -- -- -------
           (222)
  -- -- -- -------

Using the definitions ( 140 ), ( 141 ) and ( 142 ), ( 220 ) can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (223)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this in ( 139 ); while keeping in mind the comments on ( 215 ) and
the support of @xmath , the right hand side vanishes. Then integrating
the rest by parts, one is left with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (224)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath with described support. Then, by the arbitrariness of
@xmath , one obtains ( 61 ) dixonIV .

### iii.5 Gravitational Force and Torque

In this section, the analogs of ( 79 ) and ( 80 ) will be derived. In
order to do this, again take @xmath to be of the form ( 216 ), but this
time assume @xmath is nonzero in the neighborhood of the center of mass
worldline dixonIV . Around this worldline, let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (225)
  -- -------- -- -------

With such a choice, we still have @xmath as a solution of ( 143 ), but
its initial conditions must be set by using the method of ( 175 ), in
order to get the form ( 145 ). So, with the help of a Jacobi field
@xmath along a fixed geodesic with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (226)
  -- -------- -- -------

it is found that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (227)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (228)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the needed solution dixonIV . At this point, we would like to make
use of ( 222 ), but now @xmath is defined as in ( 227 ) instead of ( 218
), so ( 222 ) must be modified as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (229)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (230)
  -- -------- -- -------

By checking ( 222 ), one can see that @xmath only enters the definition
through the term @xmath . Using ( 227 ) here will give an extra term of
the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (231)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we will show that the extra terms in ( 229 ) is equivalent to this.
Using the given definitions and ( 299 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (232)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 213 ) this can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (233)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (234)
  -- -------- -- -------

At this point, we need another manipulation of @xmath . By ( 316 ), we
have dixonIV

  -- -- -- -------
           (235)
  -- -- -- -------

Also by ( 319 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (236)
  -- -------- -- -------

since @xmath is a scalar at the point @xmath so that the Lie derivative
and covariant derivative at that point commutes. From these, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (237)
  -- -------- -- -------

Also since,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (238)
  -- -------- -- -------

the last term in ( 229 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (239)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (240)
  -- -------- -- -------

For fixed @xmath , in normal coordinates with pole at @xmath , we have
@xmath for all @xmath . Then, from the definitions, @xmath so that
@xmath . It is time to use these tools in ( 139 ). Plugging this new
@xmath into that equation results for the terms with @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (241)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (242)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (243)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are as defined in ( 225 ). Using the definition
of Riemann tensor and the Bianchi identity, this can be put in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (244)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the rest of the terms in ( 139 ), remember that we have, by ( 229 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (245)
  -- -------- -- -------

When plugged into ( 139 ) in this form, the first two terms on the right
hand side do not contribute to the integral by the discussion of ( 215
). Recall that the left hand side of ( 139 ), with the choice @xmath was
shown to vanish previously. Then, the resulting equation is dixonIV

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (246)
  -- -------- -- -------

Integrating by parts and collecting the terms @xmath , @xmath , and
using the antisymmetry of the latter

  -- -- -- -------
           (247)
  -- -- -- -------

Using ( 79 ) and ( 80 ), this can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (248)
  -- -------- -- -------

This holds for all @xmath if the expression in the brackets vanishes
identically. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (249)
  -- -------- -- -------

for arbitrary @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath as given in ( 228 ).
Comparing this final result with ( 81 ) it can be seen that this is the
simplest generalization of it. @xmath in normal coordinates with pole at
@xmath reduces to @xmath , which vanishes when @xmath is a Killing
vector field. This shows that force and torque are results of the
asymmetries of the spacetime.

The next thing to do is to find the explicit forms of @xmath and @xmath
from ( 249 ). When acting on an arbitrary two point tensor @xmath , the
Lie derivative should be considered as acting on both of the arguments
dixonIV . Let us consider the action of the Lie derivative on a two
point tensor which has scalar character at @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (250)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, the second term is the outcome of the Lie derivative acting on the
argument @xmath , whereas the others follow from its action on the
argument @xmath . Now, as discussed in Appendix B , one can treat @xmath
as a function of @xmath and @xmath instead of @xmath and @xmath . So, by
using ( 226 ), ( 317 ), ( 299 ) and ( 310 ); this can be put into the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (251)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (252)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (253)
  -- -------- -- -------

Applying this to @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (254)
  -- -------- -- -------

To put this in a more useful form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (255)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (256)
  -- -------- -- -------

This reduces the @xmath in normal coordinates with pole at @xmath , as
can be seen from ( 144 ) and ( 240 ) dixonIV , and satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (257)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to see this, we can simply expand the terms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (258)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (259)
  -- -------- -- -------

After cancelations and the use of ( 298 ), this reduces to ( 255 ). When
used in this form in ( 249 ), the last term does not contribute in view
of the discussion of ( 215 ). Then we are left with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (260)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equating the coefficients, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (261)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (262)
  -- -------- -- -------

in view of the antisymmetry of @xmath dixonIV . This finalizes our
discussion of gravitational force and torque on an extended body in a
General Relativistic theory. The force and torque are obtained in their
final form. Note that these definitions do not include @xmath , the
center of mass velocity, so they are purely dynamical. The next step in
the procedure is to separate external and self forces, but this
discussion is beyond the scope of this thesis. For the rest of this
chapter, we will be working on the results of these equations on a test
body and neglect the self-field on the object. Following such a line
clearly excludes many physically interesting cases, such as the motion
of a planet around the sun, but results will still be useful. For
further information and different aspects of self force in theories of
gravity, see poisson ; waldself ; dixonIV ; abrahamtez .

### iii.6 Relativistic Multipole Moments

In order to evaluate the force and torque acting on a test body in
General Relativity, we will make use of multipole moments, as we did in
the Newtonian theory. We will assume that the external field varies
slowly over the body in concern dixonIV .

For @xmath , we will define @xmath -pole moment tensor of @xmath at
@xmath to be dixonIV

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (263)
  -- -------- -- -------

Clearly, it has the following symmetry

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (264)
  -- -------- -- -------

By using ( 203 ), another symmetry property follows: Using ( 298 ), we
have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (265)
  -- -------- -- -------

Integrating this over @xmath , using ( 263 ) and the fact that @xmath
has compact support, the left hand side (boundary term) vanishes, then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (266)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the above definition of the multipole moments, we have set @xmath .
One can make the same definition for @xmath , but even this is done,
@xmath will only contain quadrupole or higher order information about
the body. On the other hand, one can extend the definition of the energy
momentum skeleton and introduce an “Extended Energy Momentum Skeleton
@xmath ” dixonIV such that ( 139 ) can be written in the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (267)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (268)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the Dirac delta function on the tangent space of @xmath
. After the integration over @xmath , this will give ( 139 ). If we had
continued in this manner, we find that the multipole moments of @xmath
for @xmath are nonzero, and it can be seen in this formulation that
momentum and angular momentum are the monopole and dipole moments of the
energy momentum tensor. Following either line does not change anything
in the following calculations, but an important point to remember that
in Dixon’s formalism, gravitational force and torque result from the
quadrupole and higher order effects.

The moments ( 263 ) contain all the information about @xmath , and the
latter can be obtained from the former by observing that, by ( 263 )
dixonIV

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (269)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where, the summation starts from @xmath , since the lower moments vanish
identically. @xmath can be obtained from this point by taking the
inverse Fourier transform gelfand . Note that taking the contraction of
( 269 ) with @xmath , and using ( 298 ) and ( 266 ), gives ( 203 ). In
order to obtain ( 206 ), we will introduce a new set of moments, @xmath
, which are related to @xmath ’s in the same fashion that @xmath ’s are
related to @xmath ’s in Newtonian mechanics ( 24 ), and have symmetry
properties analogous to ( 25 ),( 26 ) and ( 27 ). It can be seen by
using the definition of @xmath ’s in terms of @xmath ’s in ( 263 ) that,
using this new moments, ( 206 ) can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (270)
  -- -------- -- -------

The main reason for introducing the @xmath ’s is the simplicity of such
orthogonality properties. Besides, they have a more direct physical
meaning than the @xmath ’s dixonIV .

### iii.7 Explicit Evaluation of Force and Torque

Assuming that the gravitational field varies slowly over the body, we
can take the Taylor series expansion of ( 261 ) and ( 262 ) about @xmath
dixonIV ; dixonIII . For the force expression, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (271)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this in ( 261 ) with the use of ( 263 ), results in

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (272)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, for the expansion of torque, we need

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (273)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using in ( 262 ), again with ( 263 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (274)
  -- -------- -- -------

By the discussion following ( 240 ), the limiting terms in the above
expression reduces to “extension of the metric tensor”, which is
discussed in Appendix D . Following their definition, it can be seen
that the @xmath and @xmath commute dixonIV , and as @xmath , @xmath .
So, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (275)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the @xmath extension of @xmath Then, similarly for
the expression in ( 274 ), using ( 256 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (276)
  -- -------- -- -------

When these results are plugged into ( 79 ) and ( 80 ), we have dixonIV ;
dixonIII

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (277)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (278)
  -- -------- -- -------

This series can be truncated at the required order of accuracy. If we
consider the first nontrivial contributions to the gravitational force
and torque, by using ( 351 ), the result can be written in terms of
@xmath ’s instead of @xmath ’s as dixonIV ; dixonI ; dixonIII

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (279)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (280)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Iv Conclusions

In this thesis, I have reviewed the problem of motion of extended
objects in Newtonian and relativistic mechanics. This work mainly
depends on the series of papers by W. G. Dixon published from 1970 to
1979 dixonIV ; dixonI ; dixonIII ; dixonV ; dixonII . Even though I have
discussed the problem in the presence of gravitational field, the theory
can be extended to include electromagnetism as well. Dealing with the
charge-current vector is actually a simpler problem when compared to the
stress-energy tensor. Details of such a construction can be found in
dixonII .

After discussing the problem in Newtonian mechanics in Chapter II , I
have gone over the construction of momentum, angular momentum, mass
center in a relativistic theory, and discussed the reasoning behind
their christening as such by extracting the desired properties for these
objects. The corresponding quantities in a maximally symmetric spacetime
were calculated and shown to be meaningful in retrospect.

In the following sections, I have made a detailed analysis of the energy
momentum skeleton, which completely describes the system just as good as
the energy-momentum tensor does. Using these, I have also constructed
the equations of motion for an extended body in a relativistic theory.
It was shown that, as in the Newtonian theory, it is possible to define
the torque and the force acting on the body, in a series involving the
dynamical field. Note that in the sections III.6 and we have also
discussed the problem for a test particle ignoring the self-field, which
greatly simplified the problem.

The problem of self force demands further discussion, but it is clearly
a difficult one. If the self force on a body is involved in the
calculations, it may not be possible to truncate the series expansion
after a finite number of terms. In Chapter III , while making a
multipole expansion of the external field acting on a test particle, we
noted that taking a finite number of terms might be legitimate, if the
field varies slowly over the body. This does not necessarily have to be
the case for self-force. One might try to define the body such that the
self field does not vary greatly over the body, but such a system may
not have a physical counterpart in Nature.

The final equations of motions found in the Newtonian theory was shown
to be indeterminate, since there were no constraints in the time
evolution of the multipole moments. This problem was overcome by
introducing the concept of rigidity, which resulted in determinate
equations of motion. The same situation was also faced in the
relativistic theory. In such a theory, there is no fully accepted
concept of rigidity. A natural suggestion for such an object, resulting
from Dixon’s theory, is to require the components of the moments to be
constant with respect to a comoving orthonormal frame defined along the
central worldline ehlers .

For some recent applications of Dixon’s theory in different problems,
one can check tod ; singh ; singh1 ; singh2 ; tod1 ; tucker ; bini ;
semerak for pole-dipole approximation, and bini1 ; bini2 ; bini3 ; abra
for quadrupole approximation.

## Appendix A World Function

Throughout this thesis, Synge’s world function synge have been used. It
is a single valued function of each pair of points @xmath , if there
exists a unique geodesic connecting them. It is defined to be one half
the geodesic distance between the points. World function and its
properties in flat space will be discussed before writing down the
definition in a general spacetime. In flat space, following the above
verbal definition, world function can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since the geodesics in flat spacetime are straight lines.

Checking the first derivatives of this, we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (281)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are the separation vectors between points, one with a negative
sign. Second derivatives obviously give Kronecker delta functions.

In order to generalize this to a curved spacetime, let @xmath be the
parametric form of a geodesic connecting @xmath and @xmath with @xmath
an affine parameter along it. Then world function is defined as poisson
; dixonI ; synge

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (282)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath

Note that using the geodesic equation, the integrand is constant on the
geodesic, so this can be integrated to give @xmath , where @xmath is the
length of the geodesic, and the sign depends on whether the geodesic is
timelike/spacelike.

In order to evaluate the derivatives of the world function, we can check
how @xmath changes when one of the endpoints is moved poisson .

Let us first vary @xmath as @xmath while keeping @xmath fixed. Assume
that the new endpoint is connected to @xmath by a geodesic which is
parametrized such that the affine parameter along it runs from @xmath to
@xmath . Then,

  -- -- -- -------
           (283)
  -- -- -- -------

Integrate the first term by parts

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (284)
  -- -------- -- -------

The last two terms in the integral can be rearranged to give @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (285)
  -- -------- -- -------

So, the last term vanishes upon use of the geodesic equation. Evaluating
the boundary term, keeping in mind that @xmath was kept fixed in the
variation, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (286)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is obviously a vector at @xmath and a scalar at @xmath .
Essentially the same calculation for the variation of @xmath , keeping
@xmath fixed, gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (287)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following shorthand notation for the covariant derivatives of the
world function will be used from now on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the notation, see Chapter I.1 .

So, ( 286 ) can be written as dixonI ; synge

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (288)
  -- -------- -- -------

and ( 287 as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (289)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Note once again that after direct integration of ( A ) we
have,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (290)
  -- -------- -- -------

So

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (291)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the mentioned index notation. So, @xmath @xmath is a
vector tangent to the geodesic with length equal to the that of the
geodesic. Also, taking the derivative of ( 286 ) shows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (292)
  -- -------- -- -------

Coincidence limits @xmath of various two point tensors can be calculated
with the help of ( 292 ), and by assuming that the resulting tensor is
independent of the direction in which the limit is taken poisson . By (
A ),( 288 ) and ( 288 ), we see that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (293)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the limits of higher derivatives of the world function, consider,
for example, the first equation in ( 292 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (294)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now use ( 287 ) to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (295)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, using our assumption (the resulting tensor is independent of the
direction in which the limit is taken) results that, in the coincidence
limit @xmath , @xmath . Similar calculation can be made for higher
derivatives of the world function.

For the coincidence limit of two point tensors including a tensor index
at @xmath , in it convenient to employ Synge’s rule synge , which we
will state without proof. A simple proof can be found in poisson . Let
@xmath be any two point tensor, with indices suppressed, and @xmath
denote the coincidence limit @xmath . The result of Synge is that
dixonII

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (296)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a final point, we will discuss the relation of the world function to
the exponential map. Assume that @xmath is a vector in the tangent space
at @xmath . Then one can set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (297)
  -- -------- -- -------

Ho the exponential map is defined so that it takes a vector in the
tangent space of @xmath to another point in the manifold which lies at a
distance equal to the length of the vector. Also exponential map can be
used to define Riemann normal coordinates about a point @xmath , which
is separately discussed in Appendix D carroll .

## Appendix B Vertical and Horizontal Covariant Derivatives

Throughout this thesis, two point functions are frequently used. In this
section, we will define some natural derivation operations for such
tensors. Consider a general two point tensor @xmath . Now, instead of
using @xmath and @xmath , treat this as a function of @xmath and @xmath
, which can be done by ( 297 ) ( @xmath was defined to be an element of
the tangent space at @xmath ). Now, our aim is to define, instead of the
covariant derivatives @xmath @xmath ; which are, as our notation,
covariant derivatives at points @xmath and @xmath , respectively;
introducing covariant differentiation with respect to @xmath and @xmath
. Note that in @xmath , @xmath is kept fixed during the differentiation.
This will be our main standing point in the following definitions. We
would like to do the same with @xmath and @xmath dixonIV .

### b.1 Vertical Covariant Derivative

The first derivative operation we would like to define will keep @xmath
fixed, while changing the radius vector @xmath dixonIV

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (298)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath also keeps @xmath fixed, it can be related to the above
differentiation by the usual chain rule. For a two point tensor @xmath ,
which, by our notation convention, is a scalar at point @xmath , and a
rank 2 tensor at @xmath , this relation can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (299)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in the last equation, we used ( 297 ) and our notation for the
covariant derivatives of the world function. This equation shows the
general relation of @xmath and @xmath . Obviously, this is valid for two
point tensors of arbitrary rank, which have scalar character at point
@xmath .

### b.2 Horizontal Covariant Derivative

As stated before, we would like to define a derivation, which varies
@xmath while keeping @xmath constant. But this is not possible, since
@xmath is defined to be a vector at the point @xmath . Since this cannot
be done, the best that could be done is to try to define a
differentiation operation such that @xmath is parallelly transported
along @xmath , as @xmath is varied dixonIV . Parallel transport of
@xmath along @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (300)
  -- -------- -- -------

while for the derivative of @xmath along @xmath , one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (301)
  -- -------- -- -------

by the usual definition of differentiation along a curve. Expand the
first term on the right hand side

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (302)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 300 ), this can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (303)
  -- -------- -- -------

or

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (304)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this in ( 301 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (305)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath does not have any @xmath dependence, the term in parenthesis
reduces to the standard definition of the covariant derivative (note
that the last term automatically vanishes in that case.). As in the
previous case, this definition can be extended to two point tensors of
arbitrary rank with scalar character at @xmath . Since this operation
does not actually keep @xmath fixed, we can’t express @xmath in terms of
@xmath only, but it can be written in a combination of @xmath and @xmath
. Using the parallel transport of @xmath in this operation, rewrite (
300 ) in terms of the world function. By ( 297 ) dixonIV

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (306)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (307)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 316 ), this can be written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (308)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have obtained all the preliminary results needed. Now, evaluating the
change of a two point tensor field @xmath , treating it as a function of
@xmath and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (309)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 308 ) for the last term, and remembering ( 305 ), we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (310)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix C Jacobi Equation

Consider a general spacetime, with @xmath a one parameter family of
geodesics along it, such that @xmath is an affine parameter along each
geodesic and @xmath labels the geodesics. Choose the following basis
vectors adapted to a coordinate system

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the tangent vector to the geodesics, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the deviation vector. @xmath satisfies the geodesic deviation
equation for each fixed @xmath carroll

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (311)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, in the definition of the world function, set @xmath and @xmath ,
Then by ( 286 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (312)
  -- -------- -- -------

Differentiating this with respect to @xmath dixonI , keeping in mind
that the differentiation acts on each argument separately, one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (313)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, @xmath can be found as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (314)
  -- -------- -- -------

since @xmath , which can most easily be checked by choosing a locally
inertial frame synge .

Consider this equation with @xmath , so that @xmath represents the
geodesic along which @xmath satisfies the equation of geodesic
deviation. So ( 311 ) actually determines @xmath , in terms of @xmath
and @xmath . So, with the knowledge of these initial values at @xmath ,
one can obtain its value at @xmath .

Note also that a Killing vector field @xmath also satisfies ( 311 )
which can be shown from ( 77 ); but also by the defining equation ( 62
). Its initial velocity, @xmath , can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (315)
  -- -------- -- -------

So, the values of @xmath and @xmath at a point can be used to find
@xmath at another point. The derivatives of the world function appearing
as coefficients in ( 314 ) are called the Jacobi propagators, and fields
satisfying ( 311 ) along the geodesics are called Jacobi fields de
felice . For the propagators, the following notation is used

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (316)
  -- -------- -- -------

With this notation, solution of 311 (geodesic deviation equation or
Jacobi equation) with known initial values can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (317)
  -- -------- -- -------

In flat space, following the limits of the derivatives of the world
function, they reduce to @xmath . Moreover, the coincidence limits (
@xmath case) will also be needed, which can be found as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (318)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can be checked that @xmath (not necessarily a Killing field)
satisfying the Jacobi equation ( 314 ) will leave @xmath invariant under
Lie derivation abrahamjacobi . Since @xmath is a two point tensor,
derivation should act on each parameter separately

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (319)
  -- -------- -- -------

since the term on the right hand side is identical to ( 314 ).

## Appendix D Tensor Extension

Assume, in a manifold @xmath , we have a point @xmath , and another
point @xmath which are connected by a geodesic @xmath , with @xmath an
affine parameter along the geodesic. Then, @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (320)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to find a formal solution of this equation, one can take
successive derivatives veblen

  -- -- -- -------
           (321)
  -- -- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (322)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -- -- -------
           (323)
  -- -- -- -------

To write this in a more convenient form, let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (324)
  -- -------- -- -------

and set

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (325)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath denotes the cyclic permutation of the free subscripts. Then
( 323 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (326)
  -- -------- -- -------

This procedure can be repeated for higher derivatives of ( 320 ), and
the equations will be of similar form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (327)
  -- -------- -- -------

and so on. Here all the newly defined @xmath ’s will be symmetric in
their subscripts. If the initial conditions on ( 320 ) are given as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (328)
  -- -------- -- -------

then the exact solution of ( 320 ) can be written as veblen

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (329)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, one can say that the transformation

  -- -- -- -------
           (330)
  -- -- -- -------

transforms the curves ( 329 ) into

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (331)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence it is possible to find a coordinate system in which curves through
the origin satisfy ( 331 ). Such a coordinate system will be called a
“normal coordinate system”. Let the connection coefficients in such a
coordinate system be @xmath . Then if @xmath is plugged into

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (332)
  -- -------- -- -------

one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (333)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath ’s. Multiplying with @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (334)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expanding @xmath ’s in a power series of @xmath ’s

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (335)
  -- -------- -- -------

This holds only if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (336)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (337)
  -- -------- -- -------

or for a term of arbitrary order

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (338)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, this discussion veblen shows that at the origin of normal
coordinates, @xmath ’s vanish so that the covariant derivatives simply
reduce to partial derivatives. This can be extended to any tensor. We
define the “ @xmath extension” of a tensor of rank @xmath as the rank
@xmath tensor, denoted by @xmath , (where the indices after the comma
denotes extension indices) whose components at any point @xmath in any
coordinate system @xmath is given as veblenthomas ; veblen

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (339)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, as can be understood from the notation, the right hand side
involves expressions defined in the normal coordinate system. It can be
shown that the @xmath extension of a rank @xmath tensor is a rank @xmath
tensor by checking the transformation properties veblen . Note that the
resultant tensor is symmetric in its indices defining extension. From
the definition, it is obvious that the @xmath extension of a tensor is
its covariant derivative. Extensions of the connection coefficients
(called normal tensor) will be important in the following lines because
of their direct relation to the normal coordinates. The extensions of
the connections are tensors since their transformation between two
normal coordinates with the same origin obeys the tensor transformation
laws. From ( 338 ) and ( 339 ), it can be seen that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (340)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will use the following notation for the extensions of the connection
coefficients

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (341)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (342)
  -- -------- -- -------

and so on. In this thesis, we are interested in the extensions of the
metric tensor. By metric compatibility, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (343)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the first extension of the metric tensor - which is the covariant
derivative - vanishes. In order to calculate the higher extensions of
it, one needs the help of the Riemann tensor. So we will postpone the
discussion of higher extensions of @xmath for now. Riemann tensor in
normal coordinates can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (344)
  -- -------- -- -------

When evaluated at the origin, the last two terms vanish, and in terms of
the normal tensor, one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (345)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be inverted, by using the symmetries of @xmath ’s to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (346)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, differentiating ( 344 ) and evaluating at the origin
of the normal coordinates gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (347)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this, by using the symmetry of @xmath ’s with respect to the first
two indices, extension indices and with the help of ( 340 ), one can
obtain an expression of @xmath in terms of the covariant derivatives of
the Riemann tensor veblen

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (348)
  -- -------- -- -------

The procedure of expressing @xmath ’s in terms of @xmath ’s can be done
to any order. Now that we have all the necessary tools, we can attack
the problem of finding the extensions of @xmath . This can be obtained
by differentiating ( 343 ) in normal coordinates and evaluating at the
origin. For the second extension, we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (349)
  -- -------- -- -------

The rest of the terms are of no interest to us since we will calculate
this at the origin of the normal coordinates in which @xmath ’s vanish.
Then, for the @xmath extension, in terms of the normal tensors, one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (350)
  -- -------- -- -------

This, in turn, can be written in terms of the Riemann tensor with the
help of ( 345 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (351)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the second extension, one has to consider

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (352)
  -- -------- -- -------

in normal coordinates. The terms that were not explicitly written are
the ones that will vanish at the origin of the normal coordinates,
either because of vanishing connections, or @xmath . Then, one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (353)
  -- -------- -- -------

which, using ( 348 ), can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (354)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can obtain the extension of the metric tensor to any order by
following the similar steps for higher derivatives of ( 343 ), and a
closed form for the higher extensions can be found in dixonIV .

###### Acknowledgements. The author is thankful to his supervisor Assoc.
Prof. Dr. Bayram Tekin for everything, but especially for suggesting him
to study this delightful subject. The author would also like to thank
Assoc. Prof. Dr. B. Özgür Sarıoğlu and Dr. A. Isaiah Harte for their
guideance and useful discussion, and Enderalp Yakaboylu for his great
assitance on almost all parts of the thesis. The author was the
receipent of TÜBİTAK Scholarship BİDEB-2228 throughout his graduate
education.