# Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Background and motivation

The field of numerical relativity has been a rich interplay of different
disciplines throughout its relatively young life. Besides the advances
in numerical methods applied to the theory of general relativity, eg.
spectral methods [ 34 ] , finite-element methods [ 2 ] , [ 50 ] and
multigrid methods [ 61 ] , [ 42 ] , diverse fields such as theoretical
computational science, eg. adaptive mesh refinement algorithms and
algebraic computation; fluid dynamics, eg. magnetohydrodynamical flows;
the theory of partial differential equations; the theory of the global
structure of spacetimes, eg. the study of the structure of singularities
and the dynamics of the spacetimes surrouding it; theoretical
astrophysics, eg. binary pulsars and black holes, rotating stars, and
supernovae core collapses; cosmology, eg. galactic clusters and
collisions; and astronomy, eg. gravitational radiation detection,
gamma-ray burst modelling; have contributed to its development [ 28 ] ,
[ 30 ] , [ 15 ] , [ 76 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 74 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 78 ] , [ 77 ] , [
67 ] , [ 57 ] , [ 7 ] , [ 81 ] , [ 35 ] , and vice versa. An example is
the application of the Godunov method in dealing with hydrodynamic
shocks when solving the Einstein field equations on a numerical
finite-differenced grid. Godunov first suggested this method in 1959 as
a means to solve partial differential equations. In the application of
his method in numerical relativistic hydrodynamics, the relativistic
fluid is cast as a Riemann problem, which consists of a conservation law
together with a piecewise constant data having a single discontinuity.
The use of the Godunov method is now widespread and known to be highly
effective in all state-of-the-art numerical general relativistic
hydrodynamics simulations of astrophysical systems and phenomena [ 31 ]
, [ 32 ] .

In 1993, a phenomenon is found by Choptuik [ 20 ] in general
relativistic simulations, analogous to phase transitions in condensed
matter systems, thereby earning the name critical phenomenon. Critical
phenomena are the first new phenomena discovered via numerical
simulation in the theory of general relativity. The phenomena observed
describes the existence of a threshold between distinct possible end
states of a gravitational collapse scenario, and new behavior of the
gravitating system on this threshold reflective of that undergone by
condensed matter systems during phase transitions, eg. liquid-gas
transitions and ferromagnetic phase transitions. The dominant features
of this behavior include fine-tuning, universality and scale-invariance,
where a term called order parameter is used to describe a physical
quantity that follows a power-law behavior, and where the phase
transitions are categorized according to whether the order parameter
changes discretely or continuously. The scale-invariant feature of these
condensed matter systems, eg. the dimensionless quality of the
correlation length which causes the particle clusters to exhibit a
fractal structure, and the renormalization group transformation
performed on the correlation length, is carried over analogously to the
gravitational collapse behavior on the threshold. As such, the discovery
of critical phenomena in gravitational collapse became another prominent
example where a separate field of physics has enriched the field of
numerical relativity. In addition, it has sinced opened a new
mathematical vista into the theory of relativity. In the first decade
after this discovery, research has been focused on analytically
establishing the existence and generality of critical phenomena in
general relativity. Due to the complexity of Einstein’s field equations,
such analytic analyses of the phenomena have all assumed spherical
symmetry, and involved simplified matter or massless systems. Overview
of these works has been covered comprehensively by Gundlach in his
review [ 38 ] . Later works gradually ventured into more relaxed
symmetry, ie. axisymmetry, and considered more complicated matter
models. However, the field of critical gravitational collapse still
dwells very much in the theoretical and mathematical arena, and has been
used only as a tool to understand new and interesting aspects of the
theory of general relativity, eg. the cosmic censorship conjecture and
the emergence of fractality.

In 2003, Noble and Choptuik [ 63 ] began looking into how critical
phenomena could be triggered in static neutron star models in spherical
symmetry. Neutron stars refer to stars with masses on the order of 1.5
@xmath , radii of about 12 km, and central densities 5 to 10 times the
nuclear equilibrium density of about 0.16 @xmath , thereby making them
some of the densest massive objects found in the astrophysical realm [
10 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 43 ] . They were first predicted by Baade and Zwicky
in 1933 [ 8 ] in a study on the origins of supernovae, and discovered by
Bell and Hewish in 1967 as a source of regular radio pulses in the Crab
Nebula [ 44 ] . Neutron stars are now thought to be formed as an
aftermath of the gravitational collapse of the core of a massive star of
more than 8 @xmath at the end of its life [ 52 ] . They are also
believed to be created from the accretion-induced collapse of massive
white dwarfs. Their interiors, in particular their outer cores, consist
of neutron superfluids with proton superconductors. These interiors lose
energy at a rapid rate via neutrino emission. A standard neutrino
cooling scenario called the Urca process [ 71 ] requires the proton to
neutron ratio to exceed @xmath . Each reaction in this process produces
a neutrino and antineutrino via alternate beta and inverse-beta decays,
losing thermal energy in the process. The period whereby this occurs
beginning from the explosion is about @xmath years old. In 1974, Hulse
and Taylor discovered a binary neutron star system [ 45 ] , a system
which is also termed as a binary pulsar, due to their emission of radio
pulses as first observed by Bell and Zwicky. Two stars starting from
large separations slowly inspiral into each other due to loss of angular
momentum and energy. When their orbits shrink beneath the innermost
stable circular orbit, they enter a coalescence phase, where they begin
to plunge and merge. Even though this phase is characterized by very
strong and dynamical gravitational and hydrodynamical processes, the
plunging can be approximately described as two stars colliding head-on
into each other. Due to the pervasiveness of such systems in galactic
clusters as well as the dynamics of their orbital decrease and energy
loss, coalescing binary neutron stars are also generally considered good
candidates as sources of gravitational radiation detectable by both
existing ground-based detectors such as LIGO, VIRGO, GEO600, and TAMA300
and the proposed space-based detector LISA [ 26 ] .

In current state-of-the-art numerical simulations of such processes,
full general relativistic hydrodynamic is employed, where the standard
Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff models are solved together with a polytropic
equation of state. The study of the time scales involved in
gravitational collapses in colliding neutron stars was first considered
by Miller, Suen and Tobias [ 58 ] using fully general relativistic
hydrodynamics simulations. In this study, the neutron stars are modelled
such that they infall into each other from infinity. As a result, a
dividing line is found to exist between neutron star masses producing
collapses that occur within a dynamical time scale, ie. prompt
collapses, and those that occur after neutrino cooling settles in, ie.
delayed collapses. As the problem is studied using a 3-dimensional code,
the quest of determining the dividing line between these two scenarios
becomes computationally expensive. This drove the need to construct a
2-dimensional code capable of high resolutions in the
finite-differencing scheme employed in the code (refer to Appendix A),
which in turn can be employed to resolve the fine structure behavior at
the dividing line. In 2007, such an axisymmetric construction was
undertaken by Jin and Suen [ 47 ] in a study that explores this dividing
line in fine detail. They report that critical phenomena is observed
along this dividing line, characterizing an oscillatory threshold
between the black hole and neutron star end states. Furthermore, the
same phenomena is seen to occur when the equation of state of the
neutron star system is made to vary infinitesimally. Although the same
equation of state is used in both this study and in the study undertaken
by Noble and Choptuik earlier, the former does not exhibit
scale-invariance at the threshold. With all these considerations, this
study poses a significant departure from previous works and approaches
the realm of realistic astrophysical phenomena. Furthermore, the
determination of the gravitational radiation signature of the unstable
modes of such gravitational collapses of neutron star systems may
provide insights to gravitational radiation emission data. However, at
present, the dynamics of critical phenomena in such astrophysical
gravitational collapse scenarios are still largely unknown.

In addition, the study of non-rotating neutron stars is still a
deviation from realistic systems typically formed in the universe. In
particular, coalescences of binary neutron star inspirals produce
hypermassive neutron stars that support themselves against gravitational
collapse via differential rotation. These hypermassive neutron stars
undergo diverse astrophysical mechanisms, eg. angular momentum
transport, magnetic breaking, as well as gravitational radiation
emission, before collapsing into black hole states. Rotating neutron
stars are also formed from rotational core collapse of supernovae. With
this in mind, Jin and Suen [ 48 ] recently incorporated angular momentum
into the head-on colliding neutron star system. The axis of angular
momentum is parallel to the axis of collision. In this recent study,
they find similar critical phenomena in the simultaneously oscillating
and rotating merger.

Given this background, my thesis is motivated by a three-fold objective
as follows:
(1) understand the properties of neutron star critical collapses, (2)
understand the properties of the threshold in the solution space of the
Einstein field equations between the black hole and neutron star end
states, and (3) clarify the implication of the results on realistic
astrophysical scenarios.

### 1.2 Overview of thesis

In Chapter 2 of the thesis, the theoretical basis of numerical
relativity is presented, namely detailed derivations of the 3+1 ADM
formalism in solving the system of Einsteins field equations in the
theory of general relativity. Chapter 3 presents the various constructs
required in the implementation of the 3+1 formalism in neutron star
simulations, where we see the coupling of the spacetime with the
hydrodynamical matter equations adapted to the 3+1 formalism. It further
explores in particular how conformal decomposition and the BSSN
formalism is employed in the solution and evolution of the system of
Einsteins field equations in the theory of general relativity coupled
with hydrodynamically-described matter, the basis of the GRAstro-3D code
[ 31 ] , [ 32 ] . We also present the main concepts behind the set-up
and mechanism of the GRAstro-2D code. In Chapter 4, we study the
Tolman-Volkoff-Oppeheimer spacetime and the ingredients of stellar
perturbation theory as well as numerical observations in stellar phase
transitions in order to enable us to understand the time scales involved
in neutron star critical collapses. Chapter 5 in turn presents the basic
concepts of critical gravitational collapse as well as some features of
its implementation in numerical simulations of neutron stars. In this
chapter, the dynamical systems picture is brought forward prominently as
an important tool in understanding the structure of critical solutions.

Chapter 6 contains the bulk of the analysis and simulation results in
line with the three-fold objective mentioned above, utilizing all the
ingredients presented in former chapters. In Section 6.1, curve fitting
is employed in order to establish the time scales and oscillation
frequencies exhibited by the critical solution and their universality
across several crucial parameters in the critical solution. These
results are compared with the values obtained from analytic perturbative
analysis of equilibrium TOV configurations as presented in Chapter 4 of
the thesis. The construction of a neutron star-like initial data is
carried out and evolution of various sets of this new initial data is
studied and analyzed in Sections 6.2 and 6.3 in order to provide
evidence that the neutron star critical solution is a semi-attractor.
The boundary of its attraction basin and the transition to a known set
of non-critical fixed points is explored. In Section 6.4, the evolutions
of the neutron star initial data sets obtained by Jin and Suen [ 47 ]
are studied in detail in the aspects of its spacetime and matter
properties. Convergence tests and various parameter searches for the
construction of a phase diagram are also performed in this section. The
power of the radiation emitted at the brink of critical collapse is
examined using the quadrupole approximation in order to shed light on
the structure of the semi-attractor, ie. on whether it is a limit cycle
or a limit point. In Section 6.5, convergence tests are performed for
the critical indices obtained from different sets of the new initial
data in order to determine whether the neutron star critical index has a
1-parameter or 2-parameter dependence. The mass dependence of the
critical index is also studied.

Chapter 7 summarizes the main conclusions drawn from the analyses and
simulation results and propose interpretations of them in the framework
of astrophysical relevance. Finally, the Appendix contains explanations
of the finite-differencing scheme, of the basic geometric constructs of
the pushforward and pullback operators used in the previous chapters,
and of the derivation of geometric units used in this thesis.

## Chapter 2 3+1 formalism in numerical relativity

Throughout the past half century, the theory of general relativity has
proven to be extremely successful in the understanding of phenomena of
massive objects interacting under strongly dynamical gravitational
fields. In particular, numerical advances within the field have made
enormous headway in solving the celebrated two-body problem in
geometrodynamics. As a result, we are now able to understand to a great
extent the various physical phenomena observed in binary neutron star
coalescences and binary black hole coalescences. This includes the
understanding of the broader context of gravitational collapse of
compact objects, the various mechanisms that trigger their occurence and
their effects on the spacetime structure surrounding these systems via
the emission of gravitational waves.

Numerical advances in the theory are characterized by the success of
fully coupled general relativistic simulations of the astrophysical
systems as mentioned above. These simulations employ massive numerical
algorithms that solve the Einstein field equations coupled with matter.
Their theoretical basis is the 3+1 formalism which reduces the Einstein
field equations to an initial-value problem [ 6 ] , [ 83 ] , [ 85 ] . In
this chapter, we present this formalism as it is adapted to the
simulations performed for the study in this thesis, ie. the study of
critical phenomena in gravitational collapse of neutron stars.

### 2.1 Hypersurfaces and foliations

In the 3+1 formalism, the 4-dimensional spacetime is foliated by
3-dimensional spatial hypersurfaces of constant coordinate time. We
denote the spacetime by @xmath and the hypersurface by @xmath . The
hypersurface @xmath is obtained by an embedding of a 3-dimensional
manifold in the 4-dimensional spacetime via a 1-to-1 mapping that
ensures that the hypersurface does not intersect itself. The embedding
induces a push-forward mapping between vectors on @xmath to vectors on
@xmath , and a pull-back mapping between linear forms on @xmath and
those on @xmath (refer to Appendix B).

As the hypersurfaces are labeled by constant coordinate time, @xmath ,
the gradient 1-form @xmath is timelike and can be written in component
form as @xmath . We denote the future-directed timelike unit vector
normal to a hypersurface as @xmath . We also define as Eulerian
observers a class of observers whose 4-velocity is collinear with this
vector and thus whose worldlines are orthogonal to the hypersurface. The
vector @xmath is collinear with the timelike normal evolution vector
@xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

whereas the 1-form, @xmath , which is dual to @xmath , is collinear with
the gradient 1-form @xmath , as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

N is thus the lapse function that ensures the normalization relation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

On each hypersurface, we introduce a spatial coordinate system @xmath
which constitutes a well-behaved 4-dimensional coordinate system on
@xmath , @xmath when varied smoothly between neighboring hypersurfaces.
The natural basis for this coordinate system is denoted by @xmath where:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the time vector tangent to the lines of constant spatial
coordinates, whereas @xmath are vectors tangent to the hypersurface. We
define as ”coordinate observers” a class of observers whose 4-velocity
is collinear with the time vector.

The difference between the time vector @xmath and the timelike normal
evolution vector @xmath is the shift vector @xmath , and the relation is
as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The shift vector thus enables the freedom to choose how the spatial
coordinate system changes from hypersurface to hypersurface. Fig. 2.1
shows the construction of an adapted coordinate system.

The 4-metric @xmath can be written in terms of components @xmath with
respect to the coordinates @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using Eq. ( 2.5 ), the @xmath -component of the 4-metric is thus given
by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

whilst the @xmath -components are given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the vector @xmath is tangent to the hypersurface. The 3-metric @xmath
is thus induced on each hypersurface with respect to the adapted
coordinate system via this relation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The orthogonal projector that maps the 4-dimensional metric @xmath onto
the 3-dimensional hypersurfaces is given in terms of components with
respect to the coordinates @xmath by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operator acts on the normal timelike unit vector, as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and on any vector tangent to the hypersurfaces, as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.2 The covariant and Lie derivatives

The 4-dimensional spacetime @xmath with the metric @xmath possesses an
associated connection, @xmath , denoted as the affine connection or
covariant derivative, which enables the comparison between vectors
evaluated at 2 different points along the congruence of curves generated
by a vector field. We define the vector evaluated at a point @xmath ,
with coordinates @xmath along the congruence, as @xmath and the vector
evaluated at a point Q, with coordinates @xmath , as @xmath . This
vector at point Q is given by a Taylor’s expansion as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We further introduce another vector at point Q which is ’parallel’ to
the vector at point P, and denote it as @xmath . @xmath is collinear
with @xmath and @xmath and thus can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The connection or covariant derivative then evaluates the difference
between @xmath and @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are thus denoted as the connection coefficients, also known
as Christoffel symbols. The covariant derivative can be generalized to
apply to the differentiation of a tensor @xmath of any rank in the
4-dimensional spacetime @xmath , along a congruence generated by any
vector field @xmath . The 3-dimensional covariant derivative, @xmath ,
is thus obtained from the projection of the 4-dimensional covariant
derivative, @xmath , onto the 3-dimensional hypersurfaces, as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The connection coefficients components can be given in terms of the
4-metric components as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be written analogously for the 3-dimensional connection
coefficients in terms of the 3-metric components, @xmath .

The 4-dimensional Lie derivative for @xmath measures the distortion of
the 4-dimensional coordinate system. As it is based solely on coordinate
bases, the 4-dimensional Lie derivative is considered a more fundamental
construct compared to the affine connection. The Lie derivative is given
by the difference between the vector evaluated at point Q, @xmath , and
the vector evaluated at point P that is ’dragged along’ to point Q,
given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the affine parameter along the congruence of curves
generated by the vector field @xmath . Therefore, the derivative is
given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The 3-dimensional Lie derivative acts on vectors tangent to the
hypersurfaces in the same way.

### 2.3 The intrinsic and extrinsic curvatures

The intrinsic curvature of the 4-dimensional spacetime @xmath is
described by the non-vanishing of the commutator of any vector, @xmath
in @xmath , @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, this can be generalized to a tensor of any rank in @xmath . The
contraction of the intrinsic curvature, also known as the Riemann tensor
@xmath , gives the Ricci tensor @xmath . The contraction of the Ricci
tensor in turn gives the Ricci scalar @xmath . This 4-dimensional Ricci
scalar is independent of the ambient coordinate system of @xmath . The
expressions for the 3-dimensional Riemann tensor, Ricci tensor and Ricci
scalar take on analogous forms. We shall denote them as @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath respectively. Similarly, the 3-dimensional Ricci scalar is
independent of how the hypersurfaces are embedded in @xmath .

Conversely, the extrinsic curvature describes how the hypersurfaces are
embedded in @xmath , or more specifically, it measures the curvature of
the hypersurfaces in the embedding. It is given by the orthogonal
projection of the covariant derivative of the timelike normal unit
vector @xmath along any vector @xmath tangent to the hypersurfaces, as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

By invoking the vanishing of the covariant derivative of the 4-metric as
a direct result of Eq. ( 2.17 ), the covariant expression of the
projection operator in Eq. ( 2.10 ), and the @xmath identity, the
extrinsic curvature can also be expressed as the Lie derivative of the
3-metric along @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

### 2.4 The Gauss-Codazzi relations

The various contractions of the 4-dimensional Riemann tensor @xmath
along the 3-dimensional hypersurfaces and the timelike unit normal
vector @xmath are essential for the 3+1 formulation of the Einstein
field equations. Solutions to the field equations can be obtained when
the equations are cast in an initial value problem involving constraint
equations on the initial hypersurface and evolution equations on
subsequent hypersurfaces. Due to the fact that these contractions of
@xmath do not involve any timelike derivatives of the metric tensor
@xmath , they will be used to construct the constraint equations. In
this section, we present how these contractions are obtained. Covariant
derivatives of vectors and tensors will hereby be denoted by the
subscripted semicolon, and the vectors and tensors along the
hypersurface will use indices denoted with the alphabet instead of Greek
letters.

We begin by considering the full projection of @xmath onto a
hypersurface. Using Eq. ( 2.10 ) and Eq. ( 2.21 ), we first calculate
the commutator of the double covariant derivative of the projection
tensor @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.23)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Denoting analogously to @xmath , the 3-dimensional intrinsic curvature
@xmath , in terms of vectors @xmath tangent to the hypersurface as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

the previous equation can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

A further projection of this equation along the hypersurface yields the
Gauss relation as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Gauss relation can be contracted in the @xmath and @xmath indices
using again Eq. ( 2.10 ) to yield the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further contraction in the @xmath and @xmath indices will yield the
contracted Gauss relation as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which will be used in the 3+1 formulation of the Einstein field
equations.

We now consider the projection of Eq. ( 2.26 ) along the timelike normal
unit vector @xmath which results in the Codazzi relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Codazzi relation can be similarly contracted in the @xmath and
@xmath indices to yield the contracted Codazzi relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.5 The Ricci relation

The projection of @xmath twice along the hypersurface and twice along
the timelike unit normal vector @xmath yields the Ricci relation which
will be used to construct the evolution equations in the 3+1 formulation
of the Einstein field equations. We obtain this by considering the
projection of the commutator of the double covariant derivative of the
timelike unit normal vector itself, and using the expression for @xmath
in Eq. ( 2.22 ) and the component form of Eq. ( 2.21 ), as well as the
projection onto the hypersurface of the Lie derivative of @xmath with
respect to the timelike normal evolution vector @xmath , as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.31)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

### 2.6 Projections of the stress-energy tensor

The various projections of the stress-energy tensor onto the
3-dimensional hypersurface and along the timelike unit normal vector
@xmath are needed to construct the matter sources for the 3+1
formulation of the Einstein field equations.

We first present the full projection of this tensor along @xmath . We
recall from Section 2.1 that the 4-velocity of the Eulerian observers is
definitionally the timelike normal unit vector @xmath . Therefore, the
projection of the stress-energy tensor along @xmath is the matter energy
density, which is a scalar measured by these Eulerian observers. We
denote this matter energy density as @xmath .

The mixed projection of the stress-energy tensor is called the matter
momentum density, @xmath , which is a linear form tangent to the
hypersurface. Its component form is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The full projection of the stress-energy tensor along the hypersurface
is called the matter stress tensor, @xmath , which is a bilinear form
tangent to the hypersurface. Its componenet form is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 2.10 ) in this component form of the matter stress tensor
and taking the trace, we obtain the following relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.7 3+1 decomposition of the Einstein field equations

Armed with the various projections of the intrinsic curvature tensor
@xmath and the stress-energy tensor @xmath , we are now ready to present
the full 3+1 decomposition of the Einstein field equations. In the
decomposition, we will utilize two forms of the field equations, namely:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and its equivalent:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the trace of the stress-energy tensor @xmath .

To construct the Hamiltonian constraint components of the Einstein field
equations, we apply the twice-contracted Gauss relation obtained in
Section 2.4, into the twice-contracted Eq. ( 2.35 ) along the timelike
normal unit vector @xmath , as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The momentum constraint components of the field equations however will
make use of the contracted Codazzi relation as obtained in Section 2.4,
in the mixed projection of Eq. ( 2.35 ) once along @xmath and once along
the hypersurface, as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To construct the evolution components of the field equations, we first
combine the Ricci relation (Section 2.5) with the once-contracted Gauss
relation (Section 2.4):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then substitute this into the equivalent form of the field equations
Eq. ( 2.36 ) in this construction:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath                              
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.40)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

## Chapter 3 Application of the 3+1 formalism in neutron star
simulations

### 3.1 3+1 decomposition of general relativistic hydrodynamics

The conservation of the stress-energy tensor @xmath ensures that, as
long as they are satisfied on the initial hypersurface, the Einstein
field equations are satisfied for all time. The conservation is given
as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In neutron star simulations, the neutron star matter is characterized by
a perfect fluid, where there is no presence of heat conduction and other
stresses besides pressure. The stress-energy tensor for a perfect fluid
is purely defined by the matter energy density and the pressure. In
component form, the stress-energy tensor is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

To incorporate these equations into the 3+1 formalism, we decompose them
into the 3+1 form by first writing them in a 1st order flux conservative
form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the evolved state vector, the flux
vector and source vector respectively. The evolved state vector @xmath
is written in terms of the primitive variables, ie. the matter density
@xmath , fluid velocity vector @xmath , and specific internal energy
density @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the fluid velocity vector is a 3-velocity related to the
4-velocity @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath representing the Lorentz factor @xmath , and @xmath is the
specific enthalpy which can be written in terms of the specific internal
energy density as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The flux vector @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

whilst the source vector @xmath is defined as:

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.8)
  -- -- -- -------

### 3.2 Conformal decomposition

Conformal decomposition was introduced by Lichnerowicz in 1944 [ 33 ] to
facilitate a more efficient resolution of the constraint equations in
obtaining valid initial data for the initial value problem. In the
decomposition, the 3-metric @xmath is written in terms of a conformal
factor @xmath , which is a positive scalar field, and a conformal
3-metric @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath when Cartesian coordinates are used. The extrinsic
curvature @xmath of the 3-dimensional hypersurface is decomposed into
its trace @xmath and a traceless form @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We recall that the expression of the extrinsic curvature
can be written in terms of the Lie-derivative of the 3-metric, as shown
in Eq. ( 2.22 ).

We substitute the new form of @xmath as written in Eq. ( 3.10 ) and
@xmath into this to obtain the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the trace of this equation with respect to @xmath and applying
the general law of variation of the determinant of an invertible matrix
twice, we obtain the evolution equation for the conformal factor @xmath
as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the general law of variation of any invertible matrix, Eq. ( 3.11
) also yields the evolution equation for the conformal metric @xmath as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain the conformally-decomposed evolution equation for the
extrinsic curvature tensor @xmath , we recall the evolution component of
the Einstein field equations in the 3+1 formalism as obtained in Chapter
2, ie. Eq. ( 2.7 ), and substitute Eq. ( 3.10 ) into it. Also using
Eq. ( 2.22 ), we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the identity:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

we thus obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We now substitute this and Eq. ( 2.7 ) back into Eq. ( 3.14 ), employing
again Eq. ( 3.10 ), to obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.17)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Eq.s ( 3.16 ) and ( 3.17 ) represent the trace part and the traceless
part of the evolution equation for @xmath . We now conformally decompose
the trace part, ie. Eq. ( 3.16 ) by subtituting Eq. ( 3.10 ) and @xmath
into it to obtain the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, employing Eq. ( 3.12 ), the conformal connection @xmath and
the resulting conformal Ricci tensor and conformal Ricci scalar, we
conformally decompose the traceless part into:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.19)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We now present the conformal decomposition of the constraint part of the
Einstein field equations in the 3+1 formalism as obtained in Chapter 2,
ie. Eq.s ( 2.7 ) and ( 2.7 ). We substitute Eq. ( 3.10 ) and the
conformal Ricci scalar, @xmath , into the 3+1 Hamiltonian constraint
equation, ie. Eq. ( 2.7 ), to yield:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, the conformal decomposition of the momentum constraint
equation, ie. Eq. ( 2.7 ), yields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

These six equations, ie. Eq.s ( 3.12 ), ( 3.13 ), ( 3.16 ), ( 3.19 ), (
3.20 ) and ( 3.21 ), constitute the conformal 3+1 Einstein field
equations. This set of equations is solved for the conformal 3-metric
@xmath , the conformal traceless part of the extrinsic curvature @xmath
, the conformal factor @xmath and the trace of the extrinsic curvature
@xmath . We recover the physical 3-metric @xmath and the physical
extrinsic curvature @xmath via the following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

However, in our neutron star simulations, we employ a modified form of
the above conformal 3+1 Einstein field equations. This modified
formulation is called the Baumgarte-Shapiro-Shibata-Nakamura (BSSN)
formulation. In this formulation, a vector is introduced by Shibata and
Nakamura as well as Baumgarte and Shapiro to restore the Laplacian
nature of the conformal Ricci tensor that is written in terms of the
conformal metric.

In order to do this, the expression of the conformal Ricci tensor in
terms of the conformal metric, @xmath , is considered as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We introduce a new tensor field @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the connection coefficients for the flat metric with
respect to the coordinates @xmath . The components of this tensor field
can also be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the covariant derivative associated with the
flat metric.

Using the expression ( 3.24 ) together with the fact that the Ricci
tensor vanishes for a flat metric and the identity @xmath , we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using expression ( 3.25 ) on the previous result yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath

The Ricci tensor as rendered in the previous expression can be viewed as
a Laplace operator acting on the conformal metric @xmath yielding
second-derivatives on the right hand side. However, the second and third
terms on the previous expression spoils the elliptic character of the
Ricci tensor operator. It is here that Baumgarte and Shapiro introduce
the vector @xmath , which turns the previous expression into the
following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the trace of this expression of the conformal Ricci tensor, as
well as recalling the identity @xmath , the conformal Ricci scalar is
thus:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , which is a term that does not contain any second
derivatives of @xmath and is quadratic in the first derivatives.

Earlier, Shibata and Nakamura introduced the covector @xmath instead of
the vector @xmath , which is related to the latter as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, the vector @xmath has an edge over the covector @xmath because
it covers all the second derivatives of the conformal metric that do not
contribute to the Laplacian operator.

### 3.3 Gauge choices

Looking at the set of conformally decomposed Einstein field equations
obtained in the previous section, we note that there are no derivatives
of either the lapse function @xmath or shift vector @xmath . This
indicates that in the solution of the field equations, the lapse
function and the shift vector can be freely chosen while yielding the
same physical solution. We recall from Chapter 2 that the lapse function
determines how the spacetime is sliced and the shift vector determines
the choice of coordinates on these spacetime slices. The choice of the
lapse and the shift thus changes the form of the Einstein field
equations to be solved, making it either more hyperbolic or more
elliptic in nature. As the success of numerical simulations in modeling
neutron star systems depends crucially on the well-behavedness or
non-singularity of the coordinate functions, the freedom of the lapse
and shift choice gives us the privilege to adjust the hyperbolicity of
the field equations based on the nature of the physical system to be
studied. We will discuss in this section the common choices made
particularly in neutron star simulations.

The simplest lapse choice is called the geodesic slicing, which sets
@xmath . Since the acceleration co-vector can be given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

setting @xmath renders zero acceleration for the Eulerian observers, ie.
they travel along geodesics of the spacetime, hence the name of this
lapse choice. This choice permits only limited evolution of the
spacetime due to its focusing property that results in coordinate
singularities.

A more popular choice is the maximal slicing which sets the extrinsic
curvature scalar @xmath . This lapse choice maximizes the volume of the
hypersurface. The volume enclosed within a closed 2-dimensional surface
lying on a hypersurface is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath is the determinant of the metric @xmath with respect to the
coordinates @xmath on the hypersurface. The change of hypervolume can
thus be written:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the domain at time @xmath . Using the identity @xmath
that is derived from the evolution equation of the 3-metric, the
variation of the hypervolume in the previous equation can be written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the unit normal to @xmath lying in the hypersurface,
@xmath is the induced metric on @xmath with @xmath and @xmath are the
coordinates on @xmath . Therefore, setting @xmath on the hypersurface
renders the hypervolume extremal with respect to the variations in the
domain bounded by @xmath . With a metric of a Lorentzian signature, this
extremum is a maximum, hence the name of this lapse choice. Combining
the maximal slicing condition with the evolution equation for the
extrinsic curvature scalar @xmath , Eq. ( 3.16 ), as derived in the
Section 3.2, we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

an elliptic equation which imposes the condition on all subsequent
hypersurfaces in the spacetime. Maximal slicing avoids the formation of
coordinate singularities in the evolution of a physical system. As we
recall from Chapter 2, the extrinsic curvature scalar is defined as the
divergence of the unit normal vector @xmath , alternatively called the
4-velocity field of the Eulerian observers. Fixing @xmath thus results
in @xmath , which prevents the Eulerian observers from converging
towards any coordinate singularity that forms due to the focusing effect
of gravity. This happens when the lapse function and thus the proper
time between two adjacent hypersurfaces tends to zero as the coordinate
time tends to infinity.

The next important category of lapse choice is called the @xmath
slicing, which is a generalization of the harmonic slicing introduced by
Bona, Massó, Seidel and Stela [ 14 ] . Harmonic slicing was introduced
by Choquet-Bruhat and Ruggeri [ 21 ] in an attempt to write the 3+1
Einstein field equations in a hyperbolic form, and sets @xmath , a
harmonic condition for the time coordinate. Using the relation @xmath ,
the expression for the 4-metric @xmath delineated in Chapter 2 and again
the identity @xmath , this d’Alembertian becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is an evolution equation for the lapse function. The @xmath
slicing thus generalizes this equation as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function with @xmath corresponding to the
harmonic slicing and @xmath corresponding to the geodesic slicing. Using
the identity @xmath and employing normal coordinates where @xmath , this
equation becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

which yields @xmath as one of its solutions, hence the name of @xmath
slicing. The @xmath slicing produces foliations very similar the to
maximal slicing and thus have strong singularity avoidance, its biggest
advantage, making it another popular choice for neutron star
simulations.

We now move on to the gauge choices commonly made in the shift vector
for neutron star simulations. Again, the simplest of these choices are
the normal coordinates, which set @xmath , where the 4-velocity field
@xmath or the unit normal vector field lines are parallel to the
constant spatial coordinate field lines, hence the name normal
coordinates. An advantage of this choice is its incapability in
introducing any pathologies of its own. However, in rotating star
spacetimes, the employment of this shift choice can result in coordinate
shears due to the fact that the unit normal vector field lines are not
parallel to the stationary Killing vector field @xmath lines.

The minimal distortion shift was introduced by Smarr and York in 1978 [
75 ] in an attempt to minimize the time derivative of the conformal
3-metric, @xmath . The components of this time derivative are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are related to the distortion tensor components @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has 5 degrees of freedom, ie. 6 freely chosen components minus 1
constraint requiring @xmath . The distortion tensor @xmath is a measure
of the change of the shape of spatial domain @xmath within a fixed
coordinate boundary from one hypersurface to the next. The minimal
distortion shift hence seeks to minimize the change in the shape of the
spatial domain @xmath . This can be done by choosing coordinates @xmath
that set the distortion tensor @xmath identically equal to zero. Taking
into account that the 3 degrees of freedom for the coordinate choice are
insufficient to constrain the 5 degrees of freedom for the distortion
tensor @xmath , we decompose the distortion tensor @xmath into a
longitudinal part and a transverse-traceless part as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the conformal Killing operator associated with the
physical metric @xmath acting on some vector field @xmath . Taking the
divergence of this relation, we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which possesses 3 degrees of freedom that can be constrained by the
coordinate choice. Hence, the minimum distortion shift conditon becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the evolution equation for the 3-metric @xmath , namely, @xmath ,
the identity @xmath , and the expression for the traceless part of the
extrinsic curvature tensor @xmath , Eq. ( 3.10 ), this condition yields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, we can employ the 3+1 momentum constraint equation, Eq.
(2.38), to obtain the following elliptic equation of shift evolution
resulting from the minimal distortion condition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

A more computationally-feasible shift choice based on the minimal
distortion shift is the @xmath -freezing shift, introduced by Alcubierre
and Brügmann [ 3 ] . This shift choice sets @xmath . The covariant
derivative @xmath can be written in terms of the connection coefficients
for the flat metric @xmath with respect to the coordinates @xmath as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the @xmath -freezing shift condition sets @xmath . To apply this
condition on the shift evolution, we write the Lie derivative of the
conformal 3-metric @xmath in terms of the covariant derivative as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

the divergence of which, via the expression @xmath , the conformal 3+1
momentum constraint equation, and the relationship between the conformal
and flat covariant derivatives, becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -freezing shift condition thus yields an elliptic equation
for the shift. Alcubierre and Brügmann [ 3 ] turned it into a parabolic
equation using the relation @xmath with @xmath being a positive
constant. A modification of this is used in the neutron star simulations
presented in this thesis, namely:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we set @xmath .

### 3.4 The initial value problem

In Chapter 2, we see that the Einstein field equations are separated
into the constraint part and the evolution part, such that their
resolution amounts to solving an initial value problem using the
constraint part to obtain initial data that will be propagated forward
in time using the evolution part of the field equations. As the initial
data is constrained, it is a non-trivial astrophysical problem common
particularly in neutron star simulations, to ascertain that the solution
to the constraint part of the field equations yields the physical system
to be studied.

In this section, we discuss the conformal transverse traceless method
proposed by York [ 83 ] , [ 84 ] , [ 85 ] , a method that has been
employed in our general relativistic hydrodynamics simulations of
neutron star and neutron star-like systems. We recall that in Section
3.2, we have obtained the conformally decomposed constraint part of the
Einstein field equations. In 1973 and 1979, York solved this system of
equations by further decomposing the trace part of the conformal
extrinsic curvature @xmath into a longitudinal part and a transverse
part, as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is both traceless and transverse with respect to the
conformal metric, ie. @xmath and @xmath respectively, and @xmath is the
conformal Killing operator associated with the conformal metric @xmath
that acts on the vector field @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is also traceless, ie. @xmath .

We incorporate this longitudinal/transverse decomposition and the
identity @xmath into the conformally decomposed constraint part of the
Einstein field equations, Eq.s  ( 3.20 ) and  ( 3.21 ) and obtain the
following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

Eq.s ( 3.52 ) and ( 3.53 ) above show that in solving this system of
equations, the conformal metric @xmath , the symmetric traceless and
transverse tensor @xmath , the extrinsic curvature scalar @xmath , and
the conformal matter variables @xmath , can be freely chosen, whilst the
conformal factor @xmath and the vector @xmath will be determined as
results of the initial value solve. We then construct the physical
metric as @xmath , the physical extrinsic curvature tensor as @xmath ,
the physical matter energy density as @xmath and the physical matter
momentum density vector as @xmath , which form a set of initial data
@xmath that satisfies the constraint part of the Einstein field
equations, Eq.s ( 2.7 ) and ( 2.7 ).

### 3.5 GRAstro-2D as an axisymmetric general relativistic hydrodynamics
code

The GRAstro-2D code is based on the Cactus Computational Toolkit [ 17 ]
and the GRAstro-3D code [ 31 ] , [ 32 ] . Thus, similar to the
GRAstro-3D code, it solves the full 3+1 Einstein field equations as
presented in Chapter 2, using the BSSN scheme as presented earlier in
Section 3.2. The evolution of the code is similarly unconstrained, ie.
the constraint equations are only solved at the initial time and not
throughout the evolution. As such, violation of the constraint equations
are monitored throughout the evolution to determine convergence of the
code. The code also employs the same initial value problem solver and
finite-differencing scheme as used in GRAstro-3D. In this section, we
present the basic concepts behind the modifications made by [ 47 ] on
the GRAstro-3D code for the purpose of adapting the former to perform
numerical simulations of axisymmetric systems. In both GRAstro-3D and
GRAstro-2D, we use geometric units where we set @xmath (refer to
Appendix C).

The basic concepts are based on the Cartoon technique introduced by
Alcubierre, Brandt, Brügmann, Holz, Seidel, Takahashi and Thornbug in
2005 [ 4 ] . This technique is able to avoid the problems normally
encountered in other axisymmetric techniques, eg. techniques that employ
a cylindrical @xmath coordinate grids, where physically non-singular
variables may become indeterminate @xmath forms along the @xmath -axis.
Although these indeterminate forms can be regularized by L’Hospital’s
rule, their evaluation becomes inaccurate in finite differencing schemes
where the grid spacing is finite when its limit is required to go to
zero to be consistent with its analytic counterpart. In addition to this
problem, some of the variables in the 3+1 Einstein field equations are
obtained in finite differencing schemes using a summation of terms that
may include these indeterminate forms. Regularization of such variables
require detailed analysis of the entire system of the 3+1 Einstein field
equations in the axisymmetric coordinate system near the axis of
symmetry, a difficult although not impossible undertaking.

However, Cartesian coordinate grids do not introduce any such pathology,
as the coordinate system is completely regular even at the grid origin.
The Cartoon technique employs a 3-dimensional Cartesian @xmath
coordinate grid that is restricted to the @xmath plane by only one
finite-diffence-length. It uses continuous rotational symmetry to
provide the boundary conditions for this thin 3-dimensional slab. Fig.
3.1 shows the construction of this slab, where the @xmath axis is taken
as the axis of symmetry. The solid dots represent grid points where
variables take on the values calculated on the original 3-dimensional
coordinate grid. The white dots represent grid points where the
variables are calculated via the Cartoon boundary conditions. The white
squares represent grid points where the variables are calculated by
imposing a physical boundary. The Cartoon boundary condition is
described by a rotational coordinate transformation @xmath . If we
consider arbitrary tensor fields @xmath on the 3-dimensional coordinate
grid, a rotation of such a tensor field by an angle @xmath about the
axis of symmetry is equivalent to the rotation of the coordinate system
by an angle @xmath . The coordinate transformation @xmath can thus be
written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . It operates on the tensor field
@xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

This tranformation law applies to partial derivatives of tensors in the
same way. A 1-dimensional interpolation will be needed to calculate
fields at the points @xmath that are not part of the original
3-dimensional coordinate grid. This interpolation may require points in
the @xmath range, where the values are calculated via the same
coordinate transformation Eq. ( 3.53 ) as shown by the dashed lines in
Fig. 3.1.

## Chapter 4 Stellar perturbations and phase transitions

### 4.1 The TOV spacetime

The TOV (Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff) spacetime is an exact solution in
general relativity modelling fluid balls such as isolated stars. It is
the only known general relativistic static equilibrium configuration for
spherical objects with matter. The line element of this spacetime is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which contains no non-diagonal components. @xmath in this line element
represents the coordinate radius of the fluid ball in question, which we
will henceforth call the Schwarzschild radius, whereas @xmath and @xmath
are purely functions of @xmath , indicating the time-independence of
this spacetime. This line element is used to model neutron stars in this
thesis. The connection coefficients, Ricci tensor and scalar that result
from this line element are as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with all other components of the Einstein tensor @xmath being zero.

Within the interior of the neutron star, the momentum-energy tensor
@xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath here is the matter-energy density. Using GRTensorII on
Mathematica, the Einstein field equations are computed to be as follows:
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eq. ( 4.1 ) can be solved for the function @xmath when it is written as
an integral as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Employing Eq.s ( 4.1 ) and  ( 4.1 ) in Eq. ( 4.1 ) gives us:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We then use the former two equations together with the derivative of
Eq. ( 4.1 ) to write Eq. ( 4.6 ) entirely in terms of @xmath and @xmath
as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq.s ( 4.8 ), ( 4.9 ) and  ( 4.1 ) form a set of ordinary differential
equations that can be solved to yield our theoretical stellar models. In
our simulations, we choose a value for @xmath with @xmath , employ an
equation of state giving @xmath as a function of @xmath , and integrate
the former equations from @xmath to a radius where the pressure @xmath
vanishes. This radius defines the surface of the neutron star, which we
will denote henceforth as @xmath . We employ an equation of state
popularly used in neutron star simulations called the polytropic
equation of state coupled with a @xmath law which sets @xmath for the
initial data with @xmath and @xmath as arbitrary constants. These
solutions give us models of the interior of the neutron stars.

For the exterior region of the neutron star, @xmath and @xmath where
@xmath is the gravitational mass of the star as evaluated at spatial
infinity, which we will denote henceforth as the ADM
(Arnowitt-Deser-Misner) mass. Therefore, Eq. ( 4.1 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and Eq. ( 4.9 ) yields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The line element for the exterior region thus becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the standard Schwarzschild line element.

Since we perform these calculations within a 3-dimensional Cartesian
grid framework, we use an alternative form of the Schwarzschild line
element as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where it can be computed that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Due to Eq. ( 4.11 ), the differential for the Schwarzschild radius in
Eq. ( 4.1 ) for the stellar interior can be written analogously as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The set of ordinary differential equations for the stellar interior thus
becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution in the stellar interior is matched to the solution in the
exterior to obtain a global solution. These solutions were first
considered by Tolman, Oppenheimer and Volkoff in 1939 [ 80 ] , [ 66 ] to
model isolated stars, henceforth the name TOV spacetime.

### 4.2 Perturbations on the TOV spacetime

In this section, we present small amplitude perturbations to the TOV
spacetime as first introduced by Thorne and Campolattaro in 1967 [ 79 ]
. These perturbations are viewed as vector displacements of the fluid
elements with respect to the coordinate system of the spacetime. In
terms of the line element, the perturbation is introduced as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the perturbed line element, @xmath is the original line
element of the TOV spacetime as described in Eq.s ( 4.1 ) and ( 4.13 )
and @xmath are the components of the perturbation metric. The components
of the perturbation metric and the fluid element displacement vector can
be categorized into quantities that transform as scalar fields, vectors
or tensors under a rotational group. The quantities that transform as
scalar fields are constants under a rotation group. They can be expanded
in terms of scalar spherical harmonics @xmath and possess even parity.
Those that transform as vectors, eg. @xmath , are expanded in terms of
vector spherical harmonics @xmath in the even parity and @xmath in the
odd parity where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , whereas those that
transform as tensors, eg. @xmath , are expanded in terms of tensor
spherical harmonics @xmath , a covariant derivative with respect to the
3-metric @xmath for the TOV spacetime, @xmath in the even parity and
@xmath in the odd parity. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
quantities that transform as scalars; whereas @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
transform as vectors, and @xmath with @xmath transform as tensors.
Therefore, we can write the overall odd-parity harmonics as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The overall even-parity harmonics can be written as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq.s ( 4.20 ) and  ( 4.21 ) can be simplified via small coordinate
tranformations @xmath on the perturbation metric components as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath for the odd-parity harmonics, and @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath for the even-parity harmonics. For the odd-parity
harmonics, the simplification is performed by setting @xmath so as to
annul the function @xmath , whereas for the even-parity harmonics,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are chosen so as to annul @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . With these gauge simplications, the perturbation metric for the
odd-parity harmonic with @xmath becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the corresponding fluid element displacement vector as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The perturbation metric for the even-parity harmonics for @xmath
becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the corresponding fluid element displacement vector as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

These general forms indicate that the odd-parity harmonics are described
by differential rotations that do not change the profile of the star’s
density, pressure and shape, whereas the even-parity harmonics are
described by oscillations of the star’s density and pressure.

Armed with the previous general forms, we now consider the most basic
perturbation mode, ie. the @xmath mode. The odd-parity harmonics for
this mode are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the even-parity harmonics are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 4.27 ) indicates that the @xmath mode contains no odd-parity
harmonics, and thus does not possess any differential rotations.
However, the perturbation metric for even-parity harmonics for the
@xmath mode becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the fluid element displacement vector becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can thus write the perturbed line element for the @xmath mode as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 4-velocity of the fluid elements corresponding to the aforementioned
displacement vector is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the displacement vector, we also compute the Lagrangian change in
the number density of baryons contained in a certain stellar volume, as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the subscripted colon indicates a covariant derivative with
respect to the perturbed metric to first order in the perturbation
functions. The corresponding Eulerian changes in the density and
pressure of mass-energy of the star hence become:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We note that Eq.s ( 4.31 ) to  ( 4.2 ) constitute
spacetime and fluid perturbations that do not violate the spherical
symmetry of the equilibrium TOV background. Substituting these
expressions into Einstein’s field equations and simplifying by
neglecting higher orders of the perturbation functions, we now write the
equations of motion for the @xmath mode perturbation as follows:
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath , @xmath ::

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Euler equation for this perturbation mode, which is the projection
of @xmath along the direction orthogonal to the 4-velocity of the fluid
@xmath , is as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq.s ( 4.2 ) to  ( 4.40 ) can be solved to yield a first order ordinary
differential equation for the perturbation function @xmath . To do this,
we write the perturbation function in terms of a radial dependence and a
harmonic time dependence, @xmath . We then substitute Eq.s ( 4.2 ), (
4.2 ) and  ( 4.38 ) into  ( 4.40 ) to obtain the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now consider the @xmath mode perturbations. The odd-parity harmonics
for this mode are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas the even-parity harmonics are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the spirit of Eq. ( 4.20 ) and performing a simplification via small
coordinate transformations previously done for the @xmath mode, which
sets @xmath , we can then write the metric for the odd-parity @xmath
perturbation mode as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we include a harmonic term in the @xmath and @xmath components in
order to simplify the resulting system of ordinary differential
equations shown further on. Correspondingly, the fluid element
displacement vector is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we see that @xmath is the perturbation function describing radial
fluid oscillations whereas @xmath describes azimuthal fluid
displacements. The perturbed line element for this perturbation mode is
thus:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this line element, the Lagrangian change in the baryonic number
density becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which results in the Eulerian changes in the pressure and matter-energy
density as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . To first order in the perturbation functions, again using
GRTensorII on Mathematica, we obtain the Einstein field equations as
follows:
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

We write the perturbation functions in terms of a radial dependence and
a harmonic time dependence, ie. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . We then decouple Eq. ( 4.2 ) into two equations for @xmath and
@xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 4.54 ) however can be simplified to yield:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also consider the perturbation of the energy-momentum conservation as
follows:
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.58)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which can be decoupled into two equations for @xmath and @xmath as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.59)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.60)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Eq.s ( 4.55 ), ( 4.56 ), ( 4.57 ), ( 4.59 ) and  ( 4.60 ) form a system
of third order ordinary differential equations for the even parity
@xmath perturbation mode and can be solved to obtain the mode frequency
@xmath . To consider the effect of this perturbation on the exterior TOV
background spacetime, we solve Eq.s ( 4.2 ), ( 4.54 ) and  ( 4.58 ) in
the vacuum surrounding the star. Using Eq.s ( 4.11 ) to  ( 4.13 ), we
obtain, as in [ 19 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath arbitrary function of the coordinate time.
Considering infinitesimal coordinate transformations, we use Eq. ( 4.22
) to obtain the following for the even-parity @xmath mode:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Eq.s ( 4.2 ) show that for the even-parity @xmath mode perturbation
metric to preserve the same form, the following will have to hold true:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

which entails:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq.s ( 4.64 ) can be solved to yield the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath arbitrary function of the coordinate time.
Substituting Eq. ( 4.65 ) back into the first three equations in  ( 4.2
), we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the perturbation functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are only unique up to the transformations shown in Eq. ( 4.2
). Given Eq.s ( 4.2 ), the perturbations in the exterior background
spacetime Eq.s ( 4.61 ) can be set to zero which then preserves its
spherical symmetry. When @xmath , we obtain @xmath . Using this gauge
not only guarantees that the exterior background spacetime is
spherically symmetric but as a unique gauge, it also can be used to
remove the gauge arbitrariness in the former perturbation functions.

### 4.3 Non-radiative pulsations of neutron stars and their frequency
modes

In the previous section, we have delved into non-radiative perturbations
on the TOV spacetime, ie. the @xmath and even parity @xmath modes. In
this section, we will apply the formalism in our neutron star models to
obtain their non-radial pulsation modes. By considering boundary
conditions at the center and at the surface of the star, we employ a
shooting method to solve the systems of ordinary differential equations
in both the @xmath and even parity @xmath modes obtained in the previous
section.

For the @xmath mode, we follow Misner et al [ 60 ] as well as Kokkotas
and Ruoff [ 49 ] in re-writing Eq. ( 4.2 ) as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 4.67 ) can itself be decoupled into a system of two ordinary
differential equations as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now consider the boundary conditions for neutron star models. At the
center of the star, the radial displacement of the fluid element
vanishes, whilst at the surface of the star, the Eulerian change in the
pressure of the star vanishes. These conditions translate respectively
as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the radius and @xmath the ADM mass of the star [ 9
] . [ 49 ] found that via a Taylor expansion, @xmath , and @xmath ,
hence we obtain @xmath and @xmath as @xmath . We then employ a simple
shoot and match method to solve the boundary value problem Eq.s ( 4.70 )
to  ( 4.72 ) to obtain the normal modes of pulsation for the neutron
star. We input a range of test @xmath values and for each of these
values integrate Eq. ( 4.70 ) from @xmath to @xmath using a simple
finite-differencing scheme and observe the difference between the
integrated value and the value imposed by the boundary condition Eq. (
4.72 ) at @xmath . The @xmath values that give us zero difference are
the normal mode frequencies for the neutron star. We note that using
this method, convergence is achieved very rapidly. We denote the lowest
of these frequencies as the fundamental mode.

For the even-parity @xmath mode, we similarly consider the boundary
conditions at both the center and at the surface of the star for Eq.s (
4.56 ), ( 4.57 ) and  ( 4.60 ). We note that at the center of the star,
the perturbation functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath must be finite
whilst at the surface of the star, they must match with the values that
preserve the spherical symmetry of the exterior background spacetime.
These conditions thus translate as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary constants, and @xmath and @xmath
are respectively the matter-energy density and pressure at the center of
the star, and:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

This boundary value problem Eq.s ( 4.56 ) to  ( 4.60 ), and Eq.s ( 4.73
) to  ( 4.74 ) can then be similarly solved using a shoot and match
method where test @xmath values are chosen and Eq.s ( 4.56 ) to  ( 4.60
) are integrated from the center to the surface of the star until a
match occurs with the boundary conditions at the surface of the star. In
choosing the test @xmath values, we follow [ 56 ] in using a variational
principle for the @xmath mode frequencies as obtained by Detweiler in
1975 [ 27 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

We employ test functions @xmath and @xmath [ 56 ] and substitute Eq. (
4.47 ), Eq. ( 4.55 ) and  ( 4.56 ) into Eq. ( 4.3 ) to obtain the test
@xmath values for the neutron star. We note that the variational
principle approach is able to give us a good estimate of the mode
frequencies even without an exact knowledge of the perturbation
functions.

For these perturbation modes, when the fundamental @xmath obtained is
negative, the star’s oscillation increases without bound and the star is
said to be unstable. When the fundamental mode is zero, the star is at a
critical point between a stable branch and unstable branch. The star
will remain at this point unless perturbed. We shall delve into this in
the following section.

### 4.4 Equation of state change of neutron stars and its instability
time scale

In the previous sections, we present the formalism and the methods by
which we obtain the time scales associated with non-radiative pulsation
modes for non-rotating neutron stars. In this section, we consider the
time scales involved when a non-rotating neutron star undergoes phase
transitions induced by a change in its equation of state. Since an
analytic result has not been established governing how the time scale of
collapse of a neutron star varies with the speed of its phase
transition, in this section, we shall consider numerical results.

We consider isolated static neutron star models with a polytropic
equation of state @xmath as mentioned in Section 4.1, with @xmath . The
rest mass of these neutron stars are set to be at the maximum allowed
for a static equilibrium star with the adiabatic index @xmath .
According to Harrison et al [ 41 ] , the adiabatic index has the upper
limit of @xmath imposed by the causality condition. It is a well-known
Newtonian result that the speed of sound has the ultrarelativistic limit
@xmath . Therefore, we set @xmath in order to allow a change of equation
of state with @xmath increasing but not exceeding the upper limit of
@xmath .

Fig. 4.1 shows the variation of the rest mass and ADM mass with respect
to the central matter density of stars modelled with equations of state
with different adiabatic indices. As mentioned in the previous section,
there is a maximum for each of the curves, which indicates a critical
point between the stable branch on the left and the unstable branch on
the right. We see that as @xmath increases, the curve moves further to
the right with decreasing maximum. As the central matter density is less
than 1 in the geometric units used, the pressure of the star as well as
the number of baryons packed in the star decreases as @xmath increases.

We set the rest mass of the stars to be equal to the maximum rest mass
of a star with @xmath , ie. at @xmath . With this setup, the stars are
thus set on the stable branch of the @xmath curve, with their phases
allowed to transition with time to the maximum point of the @xmath
curve. We utilize the GRAstro-2D code and use a finite-differencing
resolution of @xmath . Convergence of the results with respect to
resolution is verified by performing simulations using other
resolutions, eg. @xmath . A slow change is imposed on the equation of
state by slowly increasing @xmath at a constant rate @xmath ,
simultaneously conserving baryonic mass, which is checked to be
conserved to the level @xmath , shown in Fig. 4.2 . Two categories of
cases are considered, namely:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In (a), @xmath increases to @xmath , reaching the critical point of the
rest mass-matter density curve for @xmath at @xmath , thus becoming
unstable for @xmath . In (b), @xmath increases to @xmath , overshooting
the critical point beyond which there is no equilibrium configuration
with the given rest mass, for @xmath . Within these two categories,
neutron stars undergoing three rates of change of @xmath , are
investigated, namely:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We determine the time scale of the collapse of these neutron stars as
they cross the critical point by measuring @xmath , where @xmath is the
central matter density of the star at the critical point of the rest
mass-matter density equilibrium curve for @xmath , and by measuring the
rate of change of @xmath and its acceleration.

Fig. 4.3 shows the change of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with time for
each of the transition speeds (i),(ii) and (iii). From this figure, we
observe that @xmath changes at a constant speed for each of the
transition speeds, with @xmath .

Fig.s 4.4 to 4.6 show the comparison of the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
changes with time, between scenario (a) and (b). From these figures, we
observe that the changes of @xmath and their respective rates of change
do not differ much between a neutron star that undergoes a phase
transition up till the threshold point, and a neutron star that
undergoes a phase transition past the threshold point reaching a state
which cannot be described by an equilibrium configuration. Whilst a
small difference is seen only toward the late stage of the collapse, the
difference in the @xmath is negligible when the transition speed reaches
the order of magnitude of @xmath .

## Chapter 5 Critical gravitational collapse

### 5.1 Critical phenomena in general relativity

Critical phenomena in general relativity were discovered by Choptuik [
20 ] in 1993 in numerical simulations of spherical scalar field
collapses. The phenomena of universality, mass scaling and
self-similarity observed in these gravitational collapses garnered the
name of critical phenomena, analogous to phase transition phenomena
observed in condensed matter systems.

In particular, as a parameter of a set of general relativistic initial
data is varied, the evolution of this initial data passes through a
threshold between black hole formation and dispersion to infinity. They
evolve toward a spacetime which can be stationary or scale-free [ 38 ] .
We shall call this spacetime the critical set henceforth. These
evolutions leave the threshold via the one unstable mode of the critical
set, and the time scale of this departure is denoted as the critical
index. In the present context, universality means that the critical
index is independent of the initial data parameter that is varied.

Mass scaling occurs when the black holes that form at this brink of
collapse begin with infinitesimal masses that scale with respect to the
distance of the initial data from the threshold, as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the mass of the black hole, @xmath denotes the
parameter of the initial data that is varied, @xmath the value of this
parameter when the initial data evolution stays on the threshold as time
goes to infinity, and @xmath the critical index. According to [ 38 ] ,
an initial data set in general relativity can be denoted as a function
of the spatial coordinates, eg. @xmath where we express it in a
1-dimensional spatial coordinate system, and its evolution in the
coordinate time can be denoted as @xmath . @xmath can be the density
distribution of the matter configuration or the 3-metric of the
spacetime, as mentioned in Section 3.4. Denoting the critical set itself
as @xmath , a solution of the initial data @xmath that produces an
evolution very near the critical set can be linearized in a small
neighborhood of the critical set as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath ’s are eigenvalues of the critical set which can be
purely real, complex or purely imaginary. As the critical set by
definition possesses one unstable mode, as @xmath , all perturbations
about the critical set vanish leaving one with positive real @xmath ,
for which we denote the amplitude of the constant as @xmath . We can
then further linearize in a small neighborhood about the critical set
via a Taylor’s expansion as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can choose a @xmath where Eq. ( 5.3 ) still holds and denote:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

A black hole that forms in the solution @xmath starts with a mass that
grows proportionately to @xmath , which, in line with Eq. ( 5.5 ), is in
turn proportional to @xmath . From Eq. ( 5.5 ) too, we can calculate the
critical index as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have taken @xmath . Analogous to critical phase transitions in
materials, ie. first and second phase transitions, with discontinuous
and continuous order parameters, we can categorize critical
gravitational collapse scenarios between those that exhibit mass scaling
and those that do not. Scenarios that do exhibit mass scaling are called
Type II scenarios and those that do not are called Type I. Type II
scenarios occur when the system in question does not have a preferred
scale, eg. in scalar field systems, whereas in Type I scenarios, there
exists a scale that typifies the Einstein field equations for the system
in question, and which cannot be neglected. Therefore, in Type I
scenarios, the mass of the black holes formed start with finite value.
The critical index in Type I collapse scenarios is similarly defined as
in Eq. ( 5.6 ).

The next feature seen in critical gravitational collapses reminiscent of
phenomena seen in condensed matter systems is the feature of
self-similarity. Self-similarity describes the symmetries of the
critical set of the collapse scenario, where the system exhibits
scale-free behavior. There are two types of self-similarity observed in
collapse scenarios, namely discrete self-similarity (DSS) and continuous
self-similarity (CSS). Cahill and Taub [ 18 ] first computed the
equations for CSS of a spherically symmetric configuration of perfect
fluid, as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a homothetic Killing vector producing this
self-similarity transformation, which in terms of the coordinate system
@xmath , can be denoted as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the 4-metric of the spacetime exhibiting CSS. Eq. ( 5.7 )
reduces Einstein’s field equations to a set of ordinary differential
equations. The resulting equations for the spacetime in such a collapse
scenario are:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This leads to the following equation for the energy-momentum tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, coupled with Eq. ( 5.7 ), produces, in the case of a perfect
fluid, the following for the matter variables:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 5.9 ) describe geometric self-similarity whereas Eq. ( 5.11 )
describe physical self-similarity, which is equivalent to geometric
self-similarity only in the case of perfect fluids. Eq.s ( 5.7 ) and  (
5.11 ) can be viewed as a similarity transformation in general
relativity whereby a spatial hypersurface is pushed forward into itself
as depicted in Fig. 5.1 (refer to Appendix B). DSS is a more general
form of self-similarity [ 25 ] and the 4-metric @xmath for the spacetime
undergoing such a collapse scenario can be written in the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the scale-invariance of Type II critical gravitational collapses,
the self-similarity feature can only be observed in Type II scenarios.

Since the first discovery of critical gravitational collapse by Choptuik
in spherical scalar fields, universality, mass scaling and
self-similarity have since been observed in a variety of other systems
such as perfect fluids [ 29 ] , [ 62 ] , 2D sigma models [ 40 ] , [ 53 ]
, [ 54 ] , SU(2) models [ 22 ] , [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] , [ 23 ] , [ 59 ] and
primordial density fluctuations in cosmological models [ 64 ] , [ 65 ] ,
[ 82 ] , [ 46 ] , [ 36 ] . However, these systems are largely restricted
to spherical symmetry and require fine tuning of initial data and are
therefore less prevalent in realistic astrophysical systems. Later on in
2003, Choptuik and his collaborators ventured into the study of scalar
fields in axisymmetry [ 24 ] . Abrahams and Evans studied axisymmetric
collapse in vacuum gravity [ 1 ] and Lai [ 51 ] found Type I critical
phenomena in boson star systems. Noble and Choptuik then reported Type
II critical phenomena in spherically symmetric static neutron stars [ 63
] . In 2007, Jin and Suen [ 47 ] produced evidence that Type I critical
collapse occurs in axisymmetric neutron star systems. A crucial finding
in the latter that differs from the previous ones is that when the
adiabatic index of the equation of state is varied, the same Type I
critical collapse is seen to occur in the neutron star system. This
presents evidence that critical phenomena not only occur via fine-tuning
of initial data, but can occur as the equation of state of realistic
star systems softens and when this time scale of equation of state
change is longer than the time scales involved in the critical collapse.

### 5.2 Universality and the critical index

In the previous section, we reviewed the basic concepts of critical
gravitational collapse and the gravitational systems in which the
phenomena has been observed. In this section, we focus on several
aspects of the concept of universality, which drive the main analyses
work in this thesis.

As mentioned in the previous section, critical collapses are said to be
universal as they produce the same critical index even when different
parameters of the initial data are varied. This is seen to be the case
due to Eq. ( 5.3 ) where only one growing mode survives in the critical
solution carrying the system away from the critical set - the main
criterion for a solution to be critical. Let us take a certain set of
initial data that is tuned via variation of a certain parameter to form
a critical solution. We then fix this parameter and vary another
parameter to tune the initial data until it produces a critical
solution. We note that these two initial data sets that produce the
critical solution lie very close to each other. Therefore, even when the
critical index extracted from these two sets of 1-parameter variations
are the same, we cannot conclude that we observe universality in the
strictest sense.

Another aspect of universality is the characteristic of the critical
solution whereby all details of the initial data, except for the
distance of the initial data from the threshold, and its conserved
geometric quantities, are washed away in the dynamical evolution, thus
arriving at a universal configuration. In scale-invariant spacetimes
where self-similarity is observed, universality in this aspect indicates
that the system has entered a region of intermediate asymptotics which
simultaneously ceases to depend on details of the initial data as well
as being far away from equilibrium. In Type I collapses of neutron star
systems where there exists a constant entropy in the evolution, it is
especially unclear how dynamical processes drive the system toward a
universal configuration [ 38 ] . In light of this, observing evolutions
of initial data sets that are very close to each other does not enable
us to strictly conclude universality.

### 5.3 The dynamical systems picture

Another approach in understanding critical gravitational collapse which
proved to be very useful, is the dynamical systems picture. The theory
of dynamical systems is generally employed in studying physical systems
that evolve in time, where the state of the system at an instant in time
is described by an element @xmath in a phase space @xmath , which can be
finite or infinite-dimensional. The evolution of the system is described
by an autonomous system of differential equations on @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we see that the right hand sides do not have an explicit time
dependence. When @xmath is finite-dimensional, Eq. ( 5.13 ) becomes an
autonomous system of ordinary differential equations. When @xmath is
infinite-dimensional, Eq. ( 5.13 ) becomes an autonomous system of
partial differential equations. Eq. ( 5.14 ) is a smooth function which
generates a flow @xmath . Given an initial condition @xmath , a solution
@xmath is obtained and is denoted as the trajectory of Eq. ( 5.13 )
based at @xmath . An important feature of this equation is the
invariance of @xmath up to translations in time, which therefore enables
the translation of solutions based at @xmath to that based at @xmath .
Among the solutions to this system of differential equations, there
exists an important class called fixed points , where the @xmath . A
fixed point @xmath is said to be stable when every solution @xmath with
@xmath lying in a neighborhood of @xmath approaches and remains close to
@xmath as @xmath . The fixed point is further said to be
asymptotically stable when @xmath as @xmath . Conversely, the fixed
point is said to be unstable when every solution @xmath leaves @xmath as
@xmath . Linearization of Eq. ( 5.13 ) in a small neighborhood of @xmath
enables one to cast the system of equations into a characteristic form
and obtain its eigenvalues and their corresponding eigenvectors, as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the eigenvalue associated with the eigenvector @xmath .
Solutions that lie in the linear subspaces spanned by the eigenvectors
form what is called invariant sets . These invariant sets can be further
and correspondingly categorized as stable and unstable depending on the
directions of the trajectories. The eigenvalues are crucial in
determining the nature of the fixed point as well as the trajectories in
its neighborhood. If there exists more than one eigenvalue, and if all
of them possess negative real parts, the fixed point is determined as
asymptotically stable. If one of the eigenvalues have a positive real
part, the fixed point is unstable. If all the eigenvalues have non-zero
real parts, the fixed point is called hyperbolic . Eigenvalues that are
all purely imaginary indicate that the fixed point is stable but not
asymptotically stable. Different combinations of the eigenvalues also
produce different trajectorial behaviors near the fixed point. We
present here a 3-dimensional example where the eigenvalues consist of a
conjugate pair of complex numbers, and a real number. Let us take the
system of ordinary differential equations as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the following solution:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fixed point for Eq. ( 5.16 ) is the point @xmath . In this case, the
trajectories of solutions in the small neighborhood about this fixed
point form a spiral structure. As the radius @xmath of the trajectory
shrinks, the @xmath component of it increases.

Using the dynamical systems approach, general relativistic initial data
sets that evolve and form a critical solution can be seen as points in
an infinite-dimensional phase space. As shown in Section 5.1,
linearization can be performed in a small neighborhood of the critical
set, and its eigenvalues determine the nature of the trajectories of
these initial data sets in the neighborhood of the critical set. The
critical set is a semi-attractor that serves as a hyperbolic limit set
possessing infinite decaying modes but one growing unstable mode in its
neighborhood. Thus, trajectories are attracted to the critical set via
decaying modes that are tangent to the trajectories in the phase space,
but as they reach the critical set, they are repelled from the threshold
via the one growing unstable mode (Fig. 5.2 ). The subspaces that are
inhabited by these trajectories are manifolds. Manifolds that contain
trajectories leaving the critical set are unstable while those that
contain trajectories attracted to the critical set are stable. These
manifolds are tangent to their corresponding linear subspaces which are
obtained in the former linearization in the small neighborhood of the
critical set, and are of the same dimension as the latter [ 37 ] . The
nonlinearity of the system is what allows for the possiblity of the
critical set being a closed or periodic orbit rather than just a point.
In the case of a periodic orbit, the solution takes the form @xmath as
@xmath . As mentioned in Section 5.1, the critical set in gravitational
collapse scenarios can thus be either a limit cycle or a fixed point. In
Type II collapses, the critical set is a limit cycle when the the system
exhibits CSS, and a fixed point when it exhibits DSS. The stationarity
of the critical set thus precludes any possibility of its emission of
gravitational radiation by definition.

Recalling Section 5.1, in critical gravitational collapses, 1-parameter
variations of the initial data produce groups of initial data that
arrive at different end states. These end states are separated by a
threhold into two basins, ie. that of a black hole and that of
dispersion into infinity or a stable compact object. The closer the
initial data point is to the threshold, the longer its trajectory will
stay parallel to the threshold and the easier it gets attracted to the
critical set. As these initial data points are only very near but not
directly on the threshold, their trajectories are repelled by the one
unstable mode of the critical set and leave the threshold in a path
perpendicular to the threshold even before it reaches the critical set
(Fig. 5.2 ). The manifold that contains only trajectories leaving the
critical set is called the unstable manifold of the critical set. Points
that lie directly on the threshold by definition produce trajectories
that never leave the threshold (Fig. 5.3 ). This is due to the fact that
these trajectories will all lie within the stable manifold of the
critical set. We thus note that the critical set defines an
attraction basin , a region of the phase space near the threshold
inhabited by initial data points that produce trajectories that are
attracted to the critical set. The size of this basin can be described
in terms of its width along the direction perpendicular to the
threshold, and its breadth along the tangential direction. The
threshold, on the other hand, is a plane of codimension one in the phase
space separating between the black hole and dispersion/stable compact
object attraction basins. We denote the region in the phase space
situated between the stable and unstable manifolds as a hyperbolic
region where trajectories are both moving toward the critical set and
also moving away from the threshold. Strictly speaking, in the theory of
dynamical systems, the trajectories in this region are sequences of
points rather than a curve in the phase space.

The critical set itself however is denoted as the center manifold, as
all its eigenvalues have zero real parts, in contrast with the unstable
manifold in its neighborhood whose eigenvalues have positive real parts
and the stable manifold where the eigenvalues have negative real parts.
In dynamical systems theory, the center manifold is where bifurcation
occurs. Bifurcation describes the change in the qualitative structure of
the solutions when parameters in the defining differential equations are
varied and when they enter a range of values, called bifurcation values
. The bifurcation point is the point where the qualitative behavior
switches. The center manifold thus contains the bifurcation point, and
is tangent to the center linear subspace. Codimension one bifurcations
depend only on one parameter. We present here an example where a
particular type of bifurcation occurs, called the Hopf bifurcation. Let
us take the system of ordinary differential equations as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which can be rewritten as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The trajectories of solutions to Eq. ( 5.3 ) will be governed by the
signs of @xmath in Eq. ( 5.3 ) for different ranges or @xmath . If the
initial condition @xmath is such that @xmath , the solution @xmath
approaches the value of 1 as @xmath . However, when @xmath , the
solution goes to infinity as @xmath . Thus, the limit cycle where @xmath
is a repelling set, with the direction of the trajectories changing with
respect to the variation of the parameter @xmath in the initial
condition. We note however, in numerical simulations of nonlinear
infinite-dimensional systems where no exact solutions exist, bifurcation
is never actually seen, due to the fact that the evolutions cannot in
principle be carried out for @xmath . In effect, what we see is only a
jumping back and forth of initial data points in a small neighborhood
about the threshold. This is analogous to the introduction of a small
number @xmath in Eq. ( 5.3 ). The trajectories are therefore seen to
leave the threshold in either direction, never actually dwelling on the
critical solution as @xmath .

## Chapter 6 Critical gravitational collapse of neutron stars

### 6.1 Time scale comparisons with non-radiative pulsation modes of
neutron stars

In this section, we shall seek to clarify the different time scales
involved in axisymmetric neutron star critical collapse. Considering the
results obtained by Jin and Suen [ 47 ] , we obtain the time scale of
attraction of the system toward the critical solution and the dominant
frequencies of the oscillations of the critical solution. Fig. 6.1 shows
the evolution of the lapse, density and 4-scalar curvature at the center
of collision. Via a Fourier analysis, the dominant frequencies of the
oscillations of these three evolution variables are obtained. Fig. 6.2
indicates two dominant frequencies, namely, @xmath and @xmath ,
corresponding to the oscillation periods of @xmath and @xmath
respectively. These values are in units of solar masses and all values
henceforth in this chapter will be designated in these units. These
frequencies are found to be similar across all three variables. Using
the dominant frequencies, we then fit the critical solution with the
following equations:
lapse:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

density:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

4-scalar curvature:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are fit constants, @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are respectively the averages of the lapse, density
and 4-scalar curvature throughout the oscillation phase of the critical
solution, @xmath , @xmath are the ratio of the amplitudes of @xmath over
@xmath obtained from the Fourier transforms of the respective evolution
variables. The fit results are shown in Fig. 6.3 . From the fit, we find
that @xmath , which corresponds to the attraction time, @xmath , of the
system toward the critical solution, is similar across the three
evolution variables. We further observe that the attraction time is
similar to the departure time found in [ 47 ] which indicates that the
eigenvalues of the decaying mode and the unstable mode have degenerate
real parts. We note that these time scales are of an order of magnitude
smaller than the cooling time scales of neutron stars reported in the
astronomy and astrophysics literature [ 68 ] , [ 69 ] , [ 70 ] .
Therefore, there is a high possibility that real astrophysical systems
of cooling neutron stars pass through the threshold of critical
collapse. Further, systems that undergo slow accretion and angular
momentum loss with time scales larger than that reported here for the
neutron star critical solution may also pass through the threshold and
exhibit critical behavior.

In order to understand the time scales of the oscillation phase of this
critical solution, we now seek to compare the frequencies to that
obtained via a perturbative approach. We observe that the rest mass of
the object undergoing critical collapse is higher than the maximum
allowed mass for a TOV configuration with the same equation of state.
Therefore, we consider a static non-rotating equilibrium TOV
configuration having the same rest mass as the rest mass of the two TOV
configurations producing the critical solution added together, namely at
rest mass @xmath . We recall from Chapter 5 that the critical set is a
stationary or self-similar spacetime. In the case of axisymmetric
neutron star systems considered in [ 47 ] , black holes form with a
finite mass, and scale-invariance is not seen, therefore the critical
collapse is of Type I, and the critical set is thus a stationary
spacetime. In light of this, the critical set of this solution is
non-radiative in principle, and we can then employ the tools presented
in Chapter 4, ie. the l=0 and even parity l=1 mode perturbations, to
determine the non-radiative pulsations of a corresponding non-rotating
TOV configuration. We obtain the finite-differenced TOV solution, namely
the finite-differenced matter-energy density, the specific heat
enthalpy, the pressure and the ADM mass function of the solution with
respect to the isotropic radius of the configuration. We then manipulate
these functions accordingly and insert them into Eq.s (4.70) to (4.72),
and follow the rest of the procedure as mentioned in Section 4.3. Via
this method, the fundamental @xmath frequency for a static equilibrium
non-rotating TOV configuration is found to be @xmath . Similarly, for
the even-parity @xmath mode, we insert the manipulated functions of the
TOV solution into Eq. (4.75). The estimated fundamental frequency for
this mode is found to be @xmath . We note that @xmath and @xmath are
both one and two orders of magnitude smaller than @xmath and @xmath
respectively. This is a confirmation that the oscillations of the
critical set of the solution are not caused by non-radiative pulsations
of an equilibrium TOV configuration. There therefore exists the need of
performing perturbative analysis on non -equilibrium rather than
equilibrium background spacetimes in order to ascertain the nature of
the oscillations exhibited by the neutron star critical solution.

### 6.2 The neutron star critical gravitational collapse solution as a
semi-attractor

In [ 47 ] , the critical index is seen to be similar across variations
of different parameters of the initial data ie. the boost velocity,
initial separation and equation of state. In line with the reasoning
presented in Section 5.2, we acknowledge that via this method,
universality cannot be strictly claimed for the neutron star critical
solution. In this section, we present another method to prove
universality. In this approach, we construct a neutron-star like initial
data by solving the initial value problem where the matter field
consists of two packets of matter whose densities are characterized by
Gaussian distributions rotated about the axis of axisymmetry and follow
a polytropic equation of state, @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . The
Gaussian density distribution is as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are constants that can be adjusted to
yield different spacetimes. The normal coordinate condition @xmath and
the geodesic slicing condition @xmath are chosen for the initial data.
The 3-metric @xmath for the spacetime of this initial data is
approximately asymptotically flat. We shall comment further on how an
approximately asymptotically flat spacetime differs from one that is
exactly asymptotically flat in our analysis in Section 6.5. The tuning
of the height and width of the Gaussian density distributions produce a
new 1-parameter family of initial data. The evolution of these initial
data sets are carried out using the same numerical setup as used in [ 47
] , namely, using the @xmath -freezing shift and @xmath slicing
condition. The BSSN scheme is also used in all our simulations as in [
47 ] .

We first set up this initial data set on the same numerical
finite-differenced grid as that used in [ 47 ] , namely, on a thin slab
of @xmath points in the @xmath and @xmath -directions and @xmath points
along the @xmath direction. The Gaussian packets are then boosted to a
head-on collision. The boost is performed via a coordinate
transformation of the spacetime as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the boost velocity vector, @xmath and @xmath .
Therefore, the values of the boost velocity vector components do not
possess intrinsic physical meaning. However, the variation of the boost
velocity is non-degenerate and well-behaved, ie. we can say that the
increase or the decrease of the value of the boost velocity does
indicate the isomorphic increase or decrease in the physical boost
velocity of the objects in the system. The behavior of the axisymmetric
object formed is observed. We note that this initial data is in a
non-equilibrium state at the initial time, although it satisfies the
constraint equations. The constraint equations with the two Gaussian
distributions of matter and their boost velocities are solved using
York’s formulation (Section 3.4). Table 6.1 and Fig. 6.4 show the
configurations that are constructed and their density distributions
along the direction of collision respectively. These initial data sets
are distinct from the neutron star configuration in terms of their
spacetime and matter properties, as they are clearly not obtained by
varying different parameters of the neutron star configuration, nor are
bound by the TOV spacetime and matter configuration. They are also
different from each other in terms of their matter configurations. We
examine the evolutions of these initial data sets to see whether they
are attracted to the same oscillatory critical set of the neutron star
solution.

In order to clearly present this behavior of the evolution of these
initial data sets, we choose several variables, namely the trace of the
extrinsic curvature @xmath at the coordinate @xmath , the @xmath
-component of the momentum density at the matter density contour of
@xmath , and the maximum matter density of the system. In Fig. 6.5, we
draw the trajectories of these configurations using these variables.
From this figure, we see that these variables correlate with each other
such that they form bounded periodic orbits. In particular, we note that
the correlation between the momentum density of a fluid element away
from the center of collision and the matter density at the center of
collision is analogous to that between the position and momentum of a
simple pendulum. The oscillations of @xmath before reaching the critical
set is caused by the fact that the geodesic slicing is used at initial
time. As the slicing switches from geodesic to @xmath after the first
time step, the value of the lapse at the grid boundary jumps
discontinously from one value to another. We observe that these
configurations are all attracted to the same critical set of the neutron
star solution. This provides evidence that the neutron star critical
solution is a semi-attractor.

### 6.3 Phase space analysis on the neutron star critical gravitational
collapse threshold

In this section, we probe the structure of the critical solution in the
framework of phase spaces. We note that Gaussian initial data sets
possess additional degrees of freedom in the matter and in the spacetime
as compared to the neutron star initial data. Using the additional
degree of freedom in the matter configuration, we vary the boost
velocity of the Gaussian packets together with the Gaussian heights and
widths while maintaining the rest mass of the system at @xmath . In Fig.
6.6, we plot boost velocity with respect to Gaussian height. In this
phase space, we use the maximal slicing for the Gaussian packet initial
data. We observe negligible deviation of the evolutions of these initial
data sets with those of the Gaussian packet initial data sets in the
previous section that were set with geodesic slicing. A main feature of
the phase space depicted in Fig. 6.6 is that there is a turning point at
approximately @xmath . This is an indication that for a certain
compactness, the Gaussian packet system crosses two phase thresholds as
the boost velocity is increased, ie. from a neutron star-like phase to a
black hole phase and back to a neutron star-like phase. The cross from
the neutron star-like phase to the black hole phase is expected as the
boost velocity increases entails the increase of gravitational energy.
However, we note that the cross from the black hole phase back to the
neutron star-like phase when the boost velocity is increased further, is
a surprising physical behavior.

Given the limitation imposed by the grid size, we are unable to extend
the curve further to the left of the phase space. An initial data
configuration to the left of the critical surface collapses to a black
hole and one to the right results in a neutron star-like object. The
extent of this critical surface is indicative of the size of the
attraction basin of the neutron star critical set with rest mass 1.6389.
Beyond the right edge of the critical surface at this rest mass, no
critical collapse behavior is observed, ie. configurations with Gaussian
packets with compactness @xmath are not attracted to the critical
surface at all. To further explore the extent of the attraction basin,
we construct another phase space using the boost velocity and the
separation distance between the Gaussian packets. Fig. 6.9 shows two
critical surfaces of which the left is where the system at a fixed
separation distance passes the threshold from the neutron star-like
phase into the black hole phase and passes back into the neutron
star-like phase through the right critical surface. Both the critical
surfaces end at @xmath at the top of the phase space. The bottom extent
of the right critical surface is limited when the separation distance
between the two Gaussian packets decreases to the point that the packets
merge to become one single packet. As the total rest mass of this single
packet, ie. @xmath , is more than the maximum rest mass of an
equilibrium neutron star configuration, ie. @xmath for configurations
with @xmath , the system collapses into a black hole even when there is
no implosion velocity. We thus set the rest mass of the system to be
@xmath , which is below the maximum rest mass. As the maximum point of
the rest mass-central density relation for equilibrium star
configurations (Fig. 4.1) is not attracted to the critical set, we study
the transition of the neutron star critical set attraction basin by
increasing the central density of the Gaussian packets so that it
approaches the maximum point, ie. @xmath . We find that the oscillations
of the critical set decrease in amplitude. The average of the
oscillations in the central lapse function @xmath shifts up whilst that
of the central density shifts down. At @xmath , the threshold between
the black hole and neutron star-like phases disappear. At central
densities beyond this value, the system oscillates at the normal mode
frequencies of its corresponding equilibrium star configuration not only
when there is no implosion velocity but at all other values of the
implosion velocity up till @xmath . However, we observe that the
transition point across @xmath itself is characterized by a critical set
between the black hole phase and the neutron star-like phase, namely,
when the central density is more than this threshold value, the single
Gaussian packet settles into an oscillating state about a corresponding
equilibrium star configuration, while it collapses into a black hole
when the central density is less.

We also construct a phase space of the boost velocity and the rest mass
to compare with the critical surface found with that for the neutron
star initial data (Fig. 6.7 ). We note that there is also a turning
point behavior in both critical surfaces, similar to that found in the
boost velocity-Gaussian height phase space above. However, another
striking feature of Fig. 6.7 is that the Gaussian packet critical
surface is shifted to the bottom of the neutron star critical surface
due to the fact that the spacetime for the Gaussian packet initial data
is only approximately asymptotically flat, ie. the asymptotic value of
the 3-metric is slightly less than 1. This difference in the spacetime
causes the rest mass summed up over each hypervolume element of the
Gaussian packet initial data, given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

to be less by a scale with respect to that for the neutron star initial
data. However, based on the similarity of their evolution trajectories,
we emphasize that the critical solution represented by the Gaussian
packet initial data point with @xmath is the same as that represented by
the neutron star initial data point with @xmath , Gaussian @xmath the
same as neutron star @xmath , and so on. This represents a scaling
effect in the critical surface of the rest mass-boost velocity phase
space caused by the difference in spacetime as mentioned earlier in this
paragraph. We also vary the spacetime by changing the height and width
of the metric function in the region occupied by the Gaussian packets.
The black boxes in Fig. 6.7 represent critical solutions found when the
metric function is varied in such a manner.

To test universality, we set the spacetime of the Gaussian packet
initial data back to asymptotic flatness. The Gaussian critical surface
in this phase space shifts back up approaching that of the neutron star
as the asymptotic behavior of the Gaussian packet initial data spacetime
approaches that of the neutron star initial data (Fig. 6.8 ). We see a
common rest mass range but not a common boost velocity range. The
discrepancy in the boost velocity ranges is due to the fact that the
Gaussian packet initial data possess different coordinate systems than
the neutron star initial data. We observe that a critical surface with a
common boost velocity range can also be obtained, indicating that the
coordinate system of the initial data can be freely adjusted using the
additional degrees of freedom in the Gaussian packet configuration. In
fact, we are able to obtain a family of critical surfaces in the rest
mass-boost velocity phase space with a common rest mass range and within
the boost velocity range indicated in Fig. 6.6 for the rest mass of
@xmath , ie. between @xmath and @xmath . As rest mass is conserved, the
overlap in the rest mass range of both critical surfaces confirms that
neutron star-like systems evolve toward the same critical sets as the
neutron star system.

Using the ADM mass in replacement of the boost velocity, we find similar
critical surfaces with turning points (Fig. 6.10 and Fig. 6.11 ). The
ADM mass is calculated in our numerical simulations using a volume
integral as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

using the conformal variables that have been defined in Section 3.2 and
the matter-energy density as mentioned in Section 4.1. In line with the
definition that is also given in Section 4.1, this mass is the total
gravitational energy of a system that is isolated at spatial infinity,
and requires a quasi-isotropic gauge choice in which @xmath as @xmath [
85 ] , a condition that is instantaneously realized by the initial data
before it gravitationally radiates, even though in non-equlibrium
states.

In Fig. 6.10 , we also compare the rest mass-ADM mass critical surface
between that of the Gaussian system and that of the neutron star system.
Branch @xmath and branch @xmath of the critical surface in the rest
mass-ADM mass phase space represent two different phase thresholds. In
Section 6.5, we comment on the indices of these critical solutions and
their comparisons between the Gaussian system and the neutron star
system.

Results of this section thus indicate that the neutron star critical
solution is universal with respect to spacetime and matter configuration
and reinforces the claim in the previous section that the neutron star
critical solution is a semi-attractor. We will further support this
evidence by analyzing the properties of their critical indices in
Section 6.5.

### 6.4 Spacetime and matter properties of the critical solution

In this section, we explore the various spacetime and matter properties
of the neutron star critical solution. For this purpose, we first ensure
that our critical collapse simulations are converging with respect to
the finite-differencing resolution up till the duration of the critical
solution (refer to Appendix A). Fig. 6.12 shows the first-order
convergence in the Hamiltonian constraint violation of our simulations
using the GRAstro-2D code at @xmath , which is well into the fourth
oscillation of the matter density and 4-scalar curvature of the critical
solution at the center of collision.

The anomaly at @xmath is an expected effect caused by the truncation in
the finite-differencing at the center of symmetry which has been shifted
(to @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , and so on) by a staggered
grid. We then measure the baryonic mass enclosed within different
density contours throughout the merged object, the proper polar
circumferences of these density contours, and their equatorial and
proper radii, and observe their evolution throughout the critical set
oscillation phase. The measure of the baryonic mass enclosed between
different density contours throughout the merged object has the
advantage of being a fully-geometric measure. In Fig. 6.13 , we observe
that this measure exhibits oscillations that are correlated between
different regions of the merged object, whereas the corresponding proper
polar circumferences do not exhibit such well-defined oscillations
throughout the critical set dynamics, ie. on the time scale of @xmath .
The well-defined oscillations in the baryonic masses summed up between
the density contours thus indicate the existence of matter fluxes or a
slushing back and forth of the matter through the different density
contours inside the object and are not due to any correlated changes in
contour circumferences. The proper radii however exhibit prolonged
oscillations only within the region bounded by a specific density
contour. Fig. 6.14 shows the oscillations of these radii outside this
region exhibiting damping into a stationary state. These oscillations
are correlated between the polar and equatorial directions ie. the polar
proper radius is in phase with the oscillation of the central density
while the equatorial radius is out of phase. However, we note that the
proper radii oscillations presented here have not eliminated the effect
of the lapse at the outer limit of the proper radii integration. A good
method to isolate this effect is to set a diagnostic spacetime with the
normal coordinate choice and where the 11-component of the 3-metric is
set to 1. With such a spacetime, the hypersurface will always be
perpendicular to the timelike normal unit vector @xmath and the proper
radius oscillation will reflect the real oscillation of the density
contour of the neutron star [ 39 ] . In order to gauge the stationarity
of the merged object, we also measure the power of gravitational
radiation emission throughout the dynamical process leading to and that
of the critical set itself. Fig. 6.15 shows the power that is calculated
using the quadrupole formula ( [ 72 ] , [ 55 ] ), namely:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . From this figure we see that the energy radiated
gradually decreases as the system approaches the critical set at @xmath
, which is the approximate time of merge of the two neutron stars. The
power remains at values very close to zero until @xmath when it jumps up
to positive values that increase with time. We note that these sharp
jumps may be due to noise created by finite-differencing the time
derivatives of @xmath [ 55 ] . The average of the power throughout the
critical set dynamics remains very close to zero. This suggests that the
oscillations of the critical set may not damp out with time thus
pointing to the possibility that the critical set is a limit cycle
rather than a limit point. Also, it shows that at @xmath , when the
oscillation phase of the critical solution starts, the system has
already settled down to a configuration that is stationary enough and
therefore very near to an equilibrium state.

### 6.5 Properties of the critical index

As mentioned in Section 6.3, this section will contain further
elaboration of the properties of the critical indices of the different
Gaussian packet initial data configurations as compared to that of the
neutron star.

Analogous to Eq. (5.6), the critical index is calculated using two
departure thresholds @xmath , where the departure threshold is taken as
the time when the percent difference between the evolution variable of a
solution leaving the critical set and that of the critical solution
reaches a certain value [ 47 ] . In this case, we take the evolution of
the lapse at the center of collision. We denote the departure thresholds
as @xmath and so on according to the percent difference used. For each
critical point, we find that @xmath is linearly proportionate to @xmath
, where @xmath is any initial data parameter that we choose to vary
while fixing all others. In the case of Fig. 6.16 , the initial data
parameter varied is the boost velocity of the Gaussian packets. Straight
best fit lines are therefore obtained and the standard deviations of
their slopes are plotted as errorbars in this figure. We note that this
errorbar only represents one type of error, ie. the error affecting how
the evolution trajectories follow the power-law behavior characteristic
of critical and near-critical solutions. Other errors that affect the
numerical results include the error caused by the finite differencing
scheme and the error affecting how the evolution trajectories leave the
critical set in an exponential manner.

We check the convergence of the critical index with respect to the
finite-differencing resolution @xmath . Fig. 6.17 shows the critical
indices for different departure thresholds at three different
resolutions for a sample Gaussian system. At the departure threshold of
0.2, Fig. 6.18 shows an approximate first order convergence with respect
to the resolution. The grid boundary used for the simulations with
resolution @xmath , namely, @xmath , is slightly larger than that with
@xmath and @xmath , namely @xmath , due to the restrictions on the
number of grid points imposed by the multigrid initial value problem
solver, which accounts for the slightly larger than first order
convergence demonstrated by the @xmath point in this figure.

Fig. 6.19 shows the rest mass dependence of the Gaussian packet critical
index compared with that of the neutron star, where we observe that the
critical index for both the Gaussian packet and neutron star initial
data increases with rest mass of the system. This indicates that the
time scale of departure of a near-critical solution from the critical
set decreases as the rest mass of the system increases. The overlapping
of the critical indices of both the Gaussian and the neutron star
systems shows that the neutron star critical set is universal with
respect to different initial data, where for the same rest mass and
within a small interval of ADM masses, the Gaussian initial data
produces critical indices that are within the errorbars of those
produced by the neutron star initial data. The universality of the
neutron star critical index with respect to these different initial data
configurations is a crucial point in establishing the quality of the
neutron star critical set as a semi-attractor.

To answer the question of the parameter dependence of the critical
index, we consider the critical solutions represented by each point in
the ADM mass-Gaussian height phase space and study how the critical
indices change along this critical surface. Fig. 6.20 shows the
variation of critical index along this critical surface with respect to
the ADM mass fixing the rest mass at @xmath . The solid line is a fit of
the average of the indices obtained at departure thresholds @xmath and
@xmath . We note that the first order convergence of these critical
indices with respect to resolution holds for different departure
threshold regimes for configurations with different ADM masses. This is
due to the fact that for configurations with higher compactness, and
hence lower ADM mass, the grid boundary is further away from the
physical system than for configurations with lower compactness, or
higher ADM mass. Convergence is better achieved when the grid boundary
is further away from the physical system as there is less interference
in the spacetime due to gravitational radiation.

In Fig. 6.10 , we take the rest mass of @xmath and extract the critical
index for the critical points on both branches @xmath and @xmath of the
critical surface. In accordance with Fig. 6.20 , we also find a
discrepancy between these critical indices that goes beyond their
errorbars, indicating that critical points on branches @xmath and @xmath
of the critical surface represent two different phase thresholds
respectively. On branch @xmath of the critical surface with this rest
mass, the critical index obtained is @xmath at departure threshold
@xmath and @xmath at departure threshold @xmath , whilst on branch
@xmath , the critical index is found to be @xmath at departure threshold
@xmath and @xmath at departure threshold @xmath .

As mentioned in Section 6.3, the ADM mass of the initial data is
evaluated using Eq. ( 6.7 ). The constancy of the ADM mass guarantees
that Einstein’s field equations for the system are satisfied for all
time [ 33 ] . Therefore, it is by definition a conserved quantity.
However, when evaluated at a finite boundary for a system that
gravitationally radiates, it is seen to decrease with time as
gravitational energy is carried out of the finite computational grid by
gravitational radiation. The mass that is evaluated using Eq. ( 6.7 ) in
such a scenario does not have strict physical meaning although it can be
used in an approximate conservation equation primarily to monitor the
accuracy of @xmath numerical simulations [ 73 ] . The fact that the
quantity lacks a strict physical meaning is because the hypersurface is
not spatially isolated at a time after gravitational radiation. This is
evident in that no matter how far one pushes the computational boundary
spatially outward, one would encounter the gravitational radiation that
is propagating to null infinity. In other words, the ADM mass
measurement does not by construction separate the gravitational energy
of the physical system that we are interested in and that of
gravitational radiation. Even for Eq. ( 6.7 ) to hold approximately in
the computational grid, the boundary of the computational grid has to be
asymptotically flat and thus free from the presence of any gravitational
radiation, the ambient spacetime has to be fully stationary and fulfil
the right gauge conditions as mentioned earlier. Therefore, in order to
employ this equation even in an approximate sense to evaluate the
gravitational energy of a physical system after gravitational radiation
leaves it into the ambient spacetime, one has to do the measurement at a
very late time of the critical set dynamics when one is sure that
gravitational radiation is no longer present inside the computational
grid and is no longer interacting with the computational grid boundary
in any way. However, none of the initial data in numerical simulations
can be set directly on the critical threshold in principle, implying
that they will either evolve into a neutron star-like object or collapse
into a black hole at one point in time. Also, due to the accumulation of
numerical errors, in practice, we are not able to accurately simulate
the critical set dynamics until very late time. Intrinsically as well,
even though by definition stationary and an initial data that dwells
directly on the threshold will inevitably evolve into it, the critical
set itself is not a TOV equilibrium configuration. A measurement that is
based on a strict physical meaning however is the Bondi mass measurement
which evaluates the gravitational mass of the system isolated at null
infinity. This measurement puts any gravitational radiation to the past
of the null surface of the evolving physical system as the radiation
itself propagates to null infinity.

Considering the question of the parameter dependence of the critical
index on the above-mentioned conserved geometric quantities, we are
basically asking a question of how many classes of neutron star
semi-attractors exist according to the rest mass and ADM mass. A natural
approach to this question that we have employed is to vary the rest mass
and when the rest mass is fixed, to vary the ADM mass of the initial
data or the intrinsic gravitational energy of the physical system minus
the energy that will be radiated away during its evolution to the
critical set. We recall that the neutron star-like initial data that we
have constructed possess additional degrees of freedom in comparison to
the neutron star initial data, that enables us to fix the rest mass and
vary their intrinsic gravitational energies. This intrinsic
gravitational energy consists of the binding energy inherent in the
Gaussian packet system and in principle will not be radiated away unless
there is a physical mechanism that diffuses this energy, eg. neutrino
emissions, which is absent in our numerical simulations. Therefore, when
we vary the compactness of the Gaussian packets, we are intrinsically
providing different gravitational energies to these systems which will
be conserved in time. This is evidenced in the fact that when we fix the
boost velocity of the initial data sets and vary only the height of the
Gaussian matter distribution, and correspondingly the compactness of the
matter packets, by @xmath , we see a change in the ADM mass by @xmath .
This change is free from the factor of the mechanical energy inherent in
the boost velocity that can be radiated away by the gravitational
radiation - a physical system does indeed radiate more when it is moving
faster. If they are radiated away by some physical mechanism which we
can choose to impose on our numerical simulations, or by numerical
viscosity, and if we assume that the gravitational energies of the
remnants which in our case is the semi-attractors, are all the same, our
entire investigation of whether there exists a 2-parameter dependence of
the critical index becomes a meaningless endeavor, as the motivation of
the question depends on the premise that we are indeed able to
manipulate the additional degrees of freedom in our initial data sets to
vary the compactness and correspondingly the intrinsic gravitational
energies of the physical system. In other words, the premise of our
question in the first place is that the semi-attractors themselves can
have differing gravitational energies for the same rest mass. Also, the
critical index itself is a geometric quantity and is evaluated during
the semi-attractor dynamics. The observation that they indeed differ
even when we adopt the above assumption that the gravitational energies
of the semi-attractors are all the same, would result in the observation
that semi-attractors with the same gravitational energies have differing
critical indices, a confounding observation that not only is unlikely,
but throws this entire question of 2-parameter dependence meaningless.
Considering realistic astrophysical systems where dissipative physical
mechanisms which depletes the binding energies of the packets of matter
do indeed occur, it is still very unlikely that a fine-tuned balance
exists for the gravitational dynamics, where the gravitational energies
are all depleted by nonlinear physical mechanisms in just such a way
that they all end up the same for all the remnants. We cannot rule out
such a scenario, which would be an interesting physical property for
neutron star semi-attractors, but such a scenario would still violate
the premise of the 2-parameter dependence question as mentioned above.
In addition, we have to recall that the neutron star semi-attractor is
not a TOV equilibrium configuration, which does not allow us to draw
strict analogies with stable equilibrium TOV configurations which has a
unique ADM mass for each of its rest masses.

Fig. 6.21 shows the dependence of the critical indices with respect to
the averages of the gravitational masses, @xmath , measured by Eq. ( 6.7
) on the finite computational grid over the period of two oscillations
in the lapse function at the center of collision of each configuration
along the critical surface in Fig. 6.11 . Fig. 6.22 shows the evolution
of this gravitational mass calculated using Eq. ( 6.7 ) on the finite
computational grid, which we denote as just @xmath , for a sample
Gaussian packet system that evolves toward the critical set and dwells
there until @xmath for two differing resolutions and differing grid
sizes. The observation that the time shift in the curves for the
simulation with the boundary at @xmath from the one at @xmath , namely
@xmath measured at the first dips of the curves, which is comparable to
the spatial shift using @xmath , and that the oscillations do not
converge away with resolution, shows that the oscillations in @xmath is
caused by the interaction of gravitational radiation with the
computational grid boundary. As mentioned above, this renders the
measurement itself not only numerically inaccurate but without even an
approximate physical meaning. Nonetheless, we still see a dependence of
the critical index with respect to @xmath . As mentioned above, the fact
that the critical indices do vary when we vary the compactness of the
Gaussian packet systems, will not change whether we plot them with
respect to either the ADM masses or with @xmath , unless all the @xmath
values - assuming that they are even accurate and possess an approximate
physical meaning - end up being the same up to numerical error, which is
both physically unlikely and a violation of the premise of the question
that we sought to answer. Therefore, even though we do not rule out the
possibility that the premise of our question is unfounded, ie. that
indeed, neutron star semi-attractors cannot in principle, even though
they are not in a TOV equilibrium state, intrinsically possess differing
gravitational masses for the same rest mass, we conjecture from our
observations (Fig. 6.20 and Fig. 6.21 ) that there is still a high
likelihood that there exist classes of semi-attractors that can be
labeled by both the rest mass and the gravitational mass of the neutron
star-like system, due to the fact it would be a very rare although
interesting occurence that there exists a fine-tuned balance in the
gravitational dynamics such that gravitational energies of physical
systems with intrinsically different binding energies are dissipated by
nonlinear physical mechanisms in the matter to end up at the same value.
In addition, that there exist such classes of semi-attractors is also in
line with our observation of two distinct phase thresholds for the
critical surface in Fig. 6.10 at the same rest mass, where the distinct
phase thresholds represent two differing semi-attractors with the same
rest mass but with differing ADM masses.

Fig. 6.23 shows the convergence of the critical indices for two
configurations on the ADM mass-Gaussian height phase space, ie. the
configurations with @xmath and @xmath respectively, whereas Fig. 6.24
shows the convergence of the rest mass averaged over the period of the
first two oscillations of the lapse function at the center of collision,
which we will denote as @xmath , and Fig. 6.25 the convergence of @xmath
. We see that @xmath and @xmath converge on a higher order for the
configuration with higher compactness and vice versa, ie. for the
configuration with higher compactness, the @xmath and @xmath converge in
a fourth order manner and fifth order manner respectively, but for the
less compact configuration, they both converge in a second order manner.
However, the @xmath for both configurations converge to @xmath up to the
numerical error caused by the finite differencing, whilst their @xmath
values converge to different values on the order of @xmath respectively,
ie. @xmath for the more compact configuration and @xmath for the less
compact configuration, outside the error bars from the finite
differencing. The convergence of the @xmath to the same value is
expected due to the fact that the rest mass of the initial data have
been set to the same up to the eleventh decimal, and the fact that rest
mass is a conserved quantity even when evaluated on a finite
computational grid. The variations in the twelfth and above decimals of
the rest masses of the different initial data or in their @xmath values
in the limit of infinite resolution are completely random. As for the
critical indices, similar to @xmath , their values for both
configurations are observed to converge to different values, where the
more compact configuration exhibits first order convergence at a faster
rate than the one for the less compact configuration, which is to be
expected due to the different distances of the computational grid
boundaries from the physical systems as mentioned previously. These
observations imply that in the limit of infinite resolution, where a
large portion of numerical errors is eliminated, even though putting
aside the ambiguous physical meaning of @xmath , the critical index
depends on both the compactness, with its corresponding binding energy
present in the physical system, as well as the rest mass of the system,
which is in line with the conjecture we make that is mentioned earlier
in this section. Since we have seen that convergence of the critical
index is achieved at an even faster rate when the computational grid
boundary is located further away from the physical system, when the
boundary of the computational grid is pushed further out for each
configuration, we expect to obtain similar observations that point to
the above-mentioned conjecture.

## Chapter 7 Conclusion

### 7.1 Conclusions

In this chapter, we review the results obtained in this dissertation in
accordance with the objectives we had in mind. In order to understand
the time scales involved in non-rotating neutron star critical
collapses, we first study the time scales of non-radiative pulsation
modes of single static neutron stars. We find that these time scales are
an order of magnitude higher than the time scales involved in the
non-rotating neutron star critical collapses observed in simulations. We
thus confirm that the pulsations exhibited by the quasi-stationary
object during the critical collapse dynamics are not that of
non-radiative pulsation modes of single static neutron stars. This
points to the fact that the quasi-stationary object is not in a state of
TOV equilibrium.

Via curve fitting and Fourier transform, we determine the time scale of
attraction of the neutron star system toward the neutron star critical
set. This time scale is an order of magnitude smaller than that reported
of neutron star systems undergoing slow cooling. We thus conjecture that
dynamical neutron star systems with significant amount of kinetic energy
undergoing slow cooling via formation processes and radiation transport
or systems undergoing slow accretion and a gradual loss of angular
momentum have a possibility of undergoing critical collapse.

By constructing new neutron star-like initial data not restricted by the
TOV equations and studying the behavior of their evolutions, we confirm
that the neutron star critical set is a semi-attractor. We employ the
freedom in the gauge choice and the matter configuration to construct
different such neutron star-like initial data and by measuring their
spacetime and matter ’flows’, we observe that these initial data evolve
towards the neutron star critical set. The critical indices extracted
from these evolutions are the same up to numerical error as that
obtained from neutron star simulations with the same rest mass and ADM
mass. We thus reinforce the claim that the neutron star critical set is
universal with respect to initial data, going beyond the perturbative
regime of the critical set.

We further study the properties of the neutron star critical set
dynamics itself. We observe that the oscillations of matter contained
within different density thresholds of the object undergoing critical
collapse exhibit phase differences across a certain density threshold,
indicating the existence of matter fluxes across a certain density
threshold within the object. We also find that there exists an outer
envelope within the object that damps out at a rate higher than the
central region. In addition, the proper circumferences of different
density thresholds within object are nearly constant. To further shed
light on whether the semi-attractor is a limit point or a limit cycle,
we measure the power of the gravitational radiation emission throughout
the critical collapse dynamics. It is observed that the average of this
power during the critical collapse process is very close to zero,
suggesting that the oscillations of the critical collapse object may not
damp out with time and thus that the semi-attractor is a limit cycle.
Combined with the possibility of realistic neutron star systems
undergoing critical collapse based on the time scale study mentioned
above, this characteristic of the neutron star critical solution, which
is characterized mainly by the existence of a universal unstable mode
and its specific gravitational radiation signature, may cause a
queiscent effect on the gravitational radiation spectrum of realistic
neutron star systems.

Using the additional degrees of freedom available to us in the new
neutron star-like initial data we construct, we also investigate the
properties of the characteristic time scale of the neutron star critical
set, which is the time scale of its unstable mode, describing the time
scale of departure of a near-critical evolution from the critical set.
We find that this critical index depends almost linearly on the rest
mass of the system. We also observe that there is a possibility of a
2-parameter dependence of the critical index, where the parameters can
be taken as the rest mass and the ADM mass of the system, both of which
are conserved quantities. This indicates that there exist classes of
neutron star semi-attractors that can be labeled by both the rest mass
and the gravitational mass of the system. This finding extends the
observation that for a given rest mass, there exist two phase thresholds
through one of which the system passes from the neutron star to the
black hole phase at a lower ADM mass and through the other of which the
system passes from the black hole phase back to the neutron phase at a
higher ADM mass. We note that the observation of the existence of two
phase thresholds for a given rest mass is similar to that obtained from
the neutron star initial data.

We then analyse the phase space properties of the neutron star critical
set, by constructing phase spaces using the parameters of the rest mass,
ADM mass and central density of the new system. For both the rest
mass-ADM mass and ADM mass-central density phase spaces, we find turning
point features with the aforementioned two-threshold feature. We note
that the new system provides the additional degrees of freedom to
construct the ADM mass-central density phase space. The extent of the
critical surfaces in these phase spaces gives an indication of the size
of the attraction basin of the neutron star critical set. For a certain
rest mass, we determined the range of central densities and ADM masses
of configurations that exhibit critical gravitational collapses, which
helps us draw an approximation of the range of realistic neutron star or
neutron star-like configurations that can exhibit critical phenomena.

We further explore the boundaries of the attraction basin of the neutron
star critical set by constructing a phase space using the separation
distance and the boost velocity (which also corresponds to the ADM mass)
of the new system. In decreasing the separation distance, we move toward
an initial configuration that consists of a single neutron star-like
object with a varying implosion velocity. Fixing the rest mass at a
slightly lower value than the maximum rest mass allowable for a single
equilibrium TOV configuration with @xmath , we find that there exists a
boundary whereby the threshold disappears when we increase the central
density towards the maximum rest mass point.

### 7.2 Future work

In order to further clarify the implications of the results of this
dissertation on realistic astrophysical observations, we will extend the
analysis on neutron star systems that possess angular momentum. To do
this we intend to construct a similar neutron star-like initial data but
with the additional incorporation of angular momentum, in both the
irrotational and corotational orientations in accordance with the spin
orientations that have so far been observed in realistic neutron star
systems. This will also help us to see if an object that is
simultaneously rotating and oscillating can undergo a dynamical process
whereby the critical set is characterized by a limit cycle, which poses
an interesting scenario in the theory of general relativity itself.