This thesis is a study of various ways of measuring the size and
complexity of finitely generated @xmath -modules, where @xmath is a
Noetherian local ring, by attaching a number @xmath to each finitely
generated @xmath -module @xmath . The classical example is @xmath , the
multiplicity or degree of @xmath . Here we investigate several variants
of the degree function: the homological Dilworth number @xmath and the
family of cohomological degrees , such as the homological degree, @xmath
, and the extremal cohomological degree, @xmath .

A cohomological degree is a function @xmath which assigns to every
isomorphism class of finitely generated @xmath -modules a real number
@xmath subject to the following conditions: (1) If @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay, then @xmath ; (2) If @xmath and @xmath is a generic
hyperplane on @xmath , then @xmath ; and (3) @xmath .

The Dilworth number, @xmath , of a module @xmath is given by @xmath ,
where @xmath denotes the size of a minimal generating set for the
submodule @xmath . The Dilworth number is finite only in dimension
@xmath and @xmath . The homological Dilworth number extends the Dilworth
number to higher dimensions. Its definition is similar to the definition
of the homological degree.

Sally, Valla and others have established bounds for the number of
generators of ideals (or modules) in terms of multiplicities and other
numerical data, usually under the assumption that the ideal is
Cohen-Macaulay. We use cohomological degrees and the homological
Dilworth number in place of the classical degree to extend some of these
results from the Cohen-Macaulay case to the non-Cohen-Macaulay case.

We give particular attention to the following result: If @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay, then @xmath , and equality holds if and only if @xmath ,
viewed as a module over a polynomial ring, has a linear resolution. We
give extensions of this theorem to the non-Cohen-Macaulay case (Theorems
2.4.1 , 3.3.1 , 4.6.1 and Corollary 4.7.3 ). Our results are strongest
for the extremal cohomological degree, @xmath , and this provides an
avenue for connecting cohomological degrees with Castelnuovo-Mumford
regularity.
