##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Lattice QCD Formalism
    -    2.1 Basics of lattice QCD
    -    2.2 Momentum cutoff
-    3 Interquark Potential
    -    3.1 Interquark potential with the momentum cutoff
    -    3.2 Other conditions
    -    3.3 Comparison with an analytical model
-    4 Color Flux Tube
    -    4.1 Action density in vacuum
    -    4.2 Action density with a quark-antiquark pair
-    5 Meson Mass
    -    5.1 Meson mass with the momentum cutoff
-    6 Chiral Condensate
    -    6.1 Chiral condensate with the UV cutoff
    -    6.2 Chiral condensate with the IR cutoff
-    7 Dirac spectrum
    -    7.1 Eigenvalue and chirality
    -    7.2 Topological charge
    -    7.3 Connection with chiral random matrix theory
-    8 Summary

## Chapter 1 Introduction

#### Physics and scale

In physics, the scale is ranged from the smallest size (the Planck
scale) to the largest size (the universe). There exist a huge number of
physical phenomena. These phenomena are described in various ways
depending on their scales. The small-scale phenomena are described by
elementary particle physics, nuclear physics, and so on, and the
large-scale phenomena are described by cosmology, astrophysics, and so
on. The scale is one of the most fundamental and important concepts in
physics.

In quantum chromodynamics (QCD), there is a characteristic property
describing the nontrivial appearance of a scale. The QCD Lagrangian is
composed of gluons and quarks as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This Lagrangian has no dimensional parameter except for quark masses.
Thus, classical QCD is scale invariant in the chiral limit @xmath .
After the quantization, however, scale invariance is violated by the
trace anomaly, and a scale appears in a nontrivial manner. This is
called as dimensional transmutation. In this way, many dimensional
quantities are created in real QCD, such as “mass gap”, vacuum
condensates, and masses of hadrons.

As a result of the dimensional transmutation, the QCD running coupling
constant is a function of the energy scale (Fig. 1.1 ). At the one-loop
perturbation theory, the QCD running coupling constant is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath [ 1 , 2 ] . For this reason, the behaviors of QCD phenomena
are completely different among different energy scales. At high energy
or short distance, perturbative QCD is valid due to the asymptotic
freedom. At low energy or long distance, the interaction is strong
coupling and nonperturbative effects are important. The appearance of
the energy scale enriches QCD phenomenology.

In this study, our question is “which energy scale is relevant for each
QCD phenomenon?” It is often said that @xmath is the typical scale of
QCD. However, our aim is not to determine @xmath . @xmath is not a
quantitative scale of each phenomenon, but a typical scale of the whole
theory. Actually, even above @xmath , the running coupling constant is
still large and the nonperturbative effect is important. Since the
energy scale is abstract concept, we have to define the energy scale in
a more concrete way. We define the relevant energy scale for a QCD
phenomenon as the energy-momentum component of gluons inducing the
phenomenon. Thus, our question is rephrased as “which energy-momentum
components of the gluon field induce each QCD phenomenon?” By
definition, such a relevant energy scale is different from @xmath . It
is nontrivial whether the relevant energy scales are the same or
different between different phenomena, e.g., color confinement and
spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking. For a scale-dependent theory like
QCD, the knowledge of the relevant energy scale would be useful for
understanding physical phenomena.

To answer this question, we employ the numerical simulation of lattice
QCD. Lattice QCD is one of the most promising calculations for
nonperturbative QCD. In this thesis, we introduce a lattice QCD
framework to determine which energy-momentum components of the gluon
field induce QCD phenomena. Using the introduced framework, we discuss
the relevant energy scales, systematically, quantitatively, and
nonperturbatively.

#### Color confinement and spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking

We focus on two of the most significant phenomena in QCD; color
confinement and spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking.

In hadron phase, a color source, such as a quark or an antiquark, is
confined in hadrons. Color confinement symbolically reflects the strong
interacting nature of QCD. Phenomenologically, it has long been known
that color confinement is well described by a “string” or “flux tube” [
4 ] . The analytical derivation of color confinement has not yet been
achieved because of the nonperturbative and non-Abelian nature of QCD.
It is not only an important theme in physics but also an unsolved
problem in mathematics. Lattice QCD studies have shown that color
confinement is indeed realized, i.e., the Wilson loop obeys the area law
[ 5 , 6 ] . Color confinement is one of the main subjects in lattice QCD
[ 7 , 8 ] .

Although the QCD Lagrangian possesses chiral symmetry except for the
quark mass term, this symmetry is spontaneously broken into its subgroup
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking is one dominant origin of mass in
our world, and it is remarkably important in various aspects of hadron
physics [ 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 ] . Chiral symmetry itself is symmetry of
quarks, not of gluons. However, spontaneous breaking is dynamically
induced by the nonperturbative interaction of gluons. The gluon dynamics
is essential for spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking. The relation
between the eigenmode of quarks and chiral symmetry breaking is known as
the Banks-Casher relation [ 13 ] . On the other hand, the relation
between the energy-momentum component of gluons and chiral symmetry
breaking is nontrivial.

The connection between color confinement and spontaneous chiral symmetry
breaking is often discussed in QCD [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 ] . At finite
temperature, deconfinement and chiral symmetry restoring phase
transitions occur at almost the same temperature [ 18 , 19 , 20 ] . We
explore this connection in the viewpoint of the energy-momentum
components of the gluon field at zero temperature.

#### Outline of the thesis

The outline of this thesis is as follows. In Chapter 2, we briefly
review basics of lattice QCD, and introduce our framework to analyze the
relation between QCD phenomena and the energy-momentum component of the
gluon field. Using this framework, we determine the relevant energy
scale in SU(3) @xmath lattice QCD. To investigate color confinement, we
analyze the static quark-antiquark potential in Chapter 3, the color
flux tube in Chapter 4, and the meson masses in Chapter 5. To
investigate spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking, we analyze the chiral
condensate in Chapter 6, and the Dirac spectrum in Chapter 7. Each
simulation setup is shown in each chapter. Finally, Chapter 8 is devoted
to summary.

## Chapter 2 Lattice QCD Formalism

### 2.1 Basics of lattice QCD

#### Partition function

Lattice QCD is one of the most powerful tools to analyze nonperturbative
QCD phenomena [ 21 , 22 , 23 ] . In lattice QCD, the space-time is
discretized as a hypercubic lattice with the lattice spacing @xmath . In
the following, we consider the four dimensional space-time in the
Euclidean metric.

The QCD partition function is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The lattice action is constructed so as to reproduce the continuum
action in continuum limit @xmath . The expectation value of a physical
quantity is computed by Monte Carlo simulation as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The ensemble average is taken over the gauge configurations, which are
generated with the weight function @xmath . The fermion action in the
weight function is sometimes dropped for simplicity, which is called as
the quenched approximation . The quenched approximation corresponds to
neglecting the quark loop effects.

#### Gauge field

In lattice QCD, the SU( @xmath ) gauge field @xmath is represented as
the link variable

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The minimum gauge invariant combination of the link variable,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

is called as a plaquette . The simplest lattice gauge action is written
by this plaquette as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This lattice gauge action corresponds to the continuum gauge action in
continuum limit @xmath .

The expectation value of a gauge variant operator is automatically zero
without gauge fixing because of Elitzur’s theorem [ 24 ] . To calculate
a gauge variant operator, gauge fixing is necessary. Instead of the
Faddeev-Popov method, gauge fixing is realized by imposing the gauge
condition numerically. For example, the Landau gauge is implemented by
globally maximizing the quantity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

by the gauge transformation. In continuum limit, this condition is
equivalent to minimizing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it is a sufficient condition for the local condition @xmath .

#### Fermion field

The fermion action is the bilinear form of the quark field,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

If one naively discretizes the continuum Dirac operator @xmath , the
lattice Dirac operator suffers from the doubling problem [ 25 ] .
Several ways have been proposed to avoid the doubling problem.

One familiar lattice fermion is the Wilson fermion [ 26 ] . The Wilson
Dirac operator is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Wilson Dirac operator includes the @xmath term which breaks chiral
symmetry explicitly. The degree of freedom of flavor can be introduced
without restriction.

Another familiar lattice fermion is the staggered fermion [ 27 , 28 ] .
The staggered Dirac operator in the spinorless basis is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The staggered Dirac operator describes the degenerate @xmath Dirac
fermion in continuum limit. At finite lattice spacing, however, it
includes an @xmath term which violates the flavor symmetry, and the
symmetry is reduced to @xmath . Compared to the Wilson fermion, the
staggered fermion has the @xmath subgroup of the chiral symmetry which
is exact on the lattice, but is restricted in the number of flavor.

The above two fermions break the full chiral symmetry. As a result, the
anti-commutation relation @xmath , which holds in continuum QCD, is not
satisfied. There are other lattice fermions with better chiral property,
such as the overlap fermion [ 29 ] , the domain-wall fermion [ 30 ] ,
and so on.

### 2.2 Momentum cutoff

To investigate the relevant energy scale, we introduce a lattice
framework to remove some region of momentum space by a momentum cutoff.
By observing how a physical quantity is affected by the momentum cutoff,
we can determine the role of the removed energy-momentum component. This
concept has been applied, for example, in the Swinger-Dyson approach [
31 ] . We introduce this concept to lattice QCD, and analyze the
energy-momentum component of the gauge field. The framework is
applicable to both quenched and full QCD in the same way.

The framework is formulated as the following five steps.

#### Step 1

The SU(3) @xmath link variable @xmath is generated by Monte Carlo
simulation. Boundary conditions for the link variable are taken to be
periodic. As explained below, the link variable must be fixed with a
certain gauge. In the following, we mainly use the Landau gauge for the
numerical calculation, unless otherwise stated.

#### Step 2

The momentum-space link variable @xmath is obtained by the Fourier
transformation, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the lattice volume. The momentum-space lattice has the
same structure as the coordinate-space lattice. Its lattice volume is
@xmath , and the boundary conditions are periodic. The momentum-space
lattice spacing is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of lattice sites in each direction. The
momentum-space lattice spacing corresponds to the minimum unit of
momentum, and it has mass dimension. The first Brillouin zone of the
momentum space is @xmath .

#### Step 3

Some components of @xmath are removed by introducing a momentum cutoff.
In the cut region, the momentum-space link variable is replaced by the
free-field link variable,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The concrete form of the momentum cutoff can be taken arbitrarily. For
example, one natural choice is the cutoff by the four-momentum length
@xmath , which corresponds to a simple momentum cutoff in continuum
theory. The ultraviolet (UV) cutoff @xmath is introduced as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the infrared (IR) cutoff @xmath is introduced as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The schematic figures are shown in Fig. 2.1 .

#### Step 4

The coordinate-space link variable with the momentum cutoff is obtained
by the inverse Fourier transformation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is not an SU(3) @xmath matrix in general, @xmath must be
projected onto an SU(3) @xmath element @xmath . The projection is
realized by maximizing the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

By this projection, we obtain the coordinate-space link variable @xmath
with the momentum cutoff, which is an SU(3) matrix and has the maximal
overlap to @xmath .

#### Step 5

The expectation value of the operator @xmath is calculated from the link
variable @xmath instead of @xmath , i.e., @xmath instead of @xmath .

####

We repeat these five steps with different values of the momentum cutoff,
and observe the dependence of a physical quantity on the momentum
cutoff. Then, we can determine which energy-momentum component of the
gluon field is relevant for the physical quantity. Technically, we only
have to replace @xmath instead of @xmath , and its operation (mainly the
fast Fourier transformation) is numerically easy compared to other parts
of the simulations. This framework is applicable to almost all lattice
QCD calculations, and widely useful for QCD phenomena.

We comment on several points about this framework in the following.

1.  In general, since the gauge transformation is nonlocal in momentum
    space, the energy-momentum component of the gauge field is a
    gauge-dependent concept. The gauge fixing is needed and the result
    depends on the gauge choice. If we do not fix the gauge, the
    resulting expectation value is zero, even in the case of a
    gauge-invariant operator.

2.  It is possible that the projection in Step 4 contaminates the
    original condition on the momentum cutoff. To evaluate how the
    projection affects link variables, we calculated @xmath by repeating
    Steps 2-4 once again to @xmath , and check the overlap between them,
    @xmath . The overlap is found to be almost unity. For example, the
    average deviation from unity is about 0.1% at @xmath GeV. Thus, we
    can expect that the projection does not significantly affect the
    original momentum cutoff.

3.  In general gauges, since the gauge fixing and the momentum cutoff do
    not necessarily commute, it is nontrivial whether these two
    operations are satisfied simultaneously. In other words, @xmath can
    deviate from the gauge fixing condition which is originally imposed
    on @xmath . We have numerically checked that, in the case of the
    Landau gauge, @xmath almost completely satisfies the Landau gauge
    fixing condition, i.e., @xmath is maximized.

4.  The Landau gauge is known to suffer from the Gribov copy problem [
    32 ] . We numerically estimated the systematic uncertainty from the
    Gribov ambiguity by random gauge transformation. In the cases of the
    Wilson loop and plaquette, its systematic error is smaller than the
    statistical error.

## Chapter 3 Interquark Potential

The interquark potential is one of the most fundamental quantities in
QCD and hadron physics. We here calculate the static quark-antiquark
potential. The quark-antiquark potential, so-called the Cornell
potential [ 33 ] , is given as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the interquark distance. The physical value of the
string tension @xmath is approximately 0.89 GeV/fm, and the Coulomb
coefficient @xmath is approximately 0.26. The constant @xmath depends on
the regularization. The quark-antiquark potential includes both
perturbative and nonperturbative properties. In short range, it is
dominated by the perturbative one-gluon-exchange Coulomb potential. In
long range, it is dominated by the nonperturbative linear confinement
potential.

The quark-antiquark potential is extracted from the expectation value of
the Wilson loop, which is a gauge-invariant path-ordered product of link
variables along a loop. For statistical improvement, we used the APE
smearing method [ 34 ] . The simulation parameters are listed in Table
3.1 .

### 3.1 Interquark potential with the momentum cutoff

We show the quark-antiquark potential with the UV cutoff in Fig. 3.1 .
When the high-momentum gluon is removed by the UV cutoff, the
short-range Coulomb potential is gradually reduced. This is because the
short-range Coulomb potential is an UV property. The constant term
@xmath is also reduced by the UV cutoff. The constant term is mainly
given by the lattice regularization for the UV singularity. On the other
hand, the long-range linear confinement potential is almost unaffected
by the UV cutoff. At @xmath GeV, the quark-antiquark potential becomes
the linear potential in the whole region. Note that the quark-antiquark
potential would include @xmath term, so-called the Lüscher term [ 35 ,
36 ] . The Lüscher term is similar to the perturbative Coulomb
potential, but its origin is the nonperturbative string fluctuation. It
is nontrivial whether or not the long-range Lüscher term remains in this
calculation. To reveal this, one needs to carefully analyze the
functional form of the potential in long range with high precision.

We show the quark-antiquark potential with the IR cutoff in Fig. 3.2 .
The linear confinement potential is strongly affected by the IR cutoff.
At @xmath GeV and 1.0 GeV, the slope of the linear confinement
potential, i.e., the string tension, is reduced from the original one.
At @xmath GeV, the linear confinement potential completely disappears.
The potential becomes the Coulomb-like form.

From these results, we conclude as follows. The perturbative and
nonperturbative parts of the quark-antiquark potential are decoupled in
the momentum space of the gluon. The low-momentum gluon induces the
confinement potential, and the high-momentum gluon induces the Coulomb
potential.

Next, we quantitatively determine which energy-momentum component of the
gluon field induces the confinement potential. For a quantitative
argument, we need higher accuracy in momentum space. Since the minimum
momentum on lattice is the momentum-space lattice spacing @xmath , the
four-momentum length is restricted to discrete values as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can only take discrete variation on the value of the momentum cutoff.
For example, the lattice calculations in the range @xmath yield the same
result. This is, so to speak, a discretization error in momentum space.
In order to achieve a finer resolution in momentum space, we have to
calculate with smaller momentum-space lattice spacing, i.e., larger
coordinate-space lattice volume.

For this purpose, we calculate the quark-antiquark potential on @xmath
lattice with different three lattice spacings. As listed in Table 3.1 ,
the corresponding momentum-space lattice spacings are @xmath GeV, 0.55
GeV, and 0.77 GeV. We estimate the asymptotic string tension @xmath by
fitting the quark-antiquark potential with a linear function @xmath in
@xmath fm.

We show the asymptotic string tension with the UV cutoff in Fig. 3.3 and
with the IR cutoff in Fig. 3.4 . In these figures, the vertical error
bar represents the standard statistical error, and the horizontal error
bar is not the statistical error but the range which yields the same
result due to the discrete momentum. In Fig. 3.3 , the asymptotic string
tension is almost unaffected in @xmath GeV, and its value is still its
original value @xmath GeV/fm. In @xmath GeV, the asymptotic string
tension is drastically reduced. In Fig. 3.4 , the asymptotic string
tension is sensitive to the IR cutoff. In @xmath GeV, the asymptotic
string tension is almost zero and the confinement potential disappears.

From these quantitative analyses, we conclude that the relevant energy
scale of color confinement is below about 1.5 GeV, i.e., color
confinement is induced by the low-momentum gluon below about 1.5 GeV.

### 3.2 Other conditions

We have calculated with other conditions for the check of consistency: a
different gauge and the three-dimensional formalism. Here, we briefly
summarize these calculations and results.

#### Different gauge

Since our framework is not gauge invariant, it is important to take
other gauge choices. We calculate with the Coulomb gauge, instead of the
Landau gauge. The gauge-fixing condition for the Coulomb gauge is to
maximize the quantity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fitting results of @xmath are listed in the third column of Table
3.2 . The values itself are different, but the qualitative behavior is
the same as that of the Landau gauge.

Which energy-momentum component induces the confinement potential, in
principle, depends on the gauge choice. In the present framework, we can
calculate with any other gauges in the same way.

#### Three-dimensional formalism

Our framework can be easily extended to the spatial three-dimensional
formalism. We perform the three-dimensional Fourier transformation and
consider the cutoff by the three-momentum length @xmath . The results
are listed in the fourth column of Table 3.2 . The behavior is almost
the same as the case of the four-dimensional momentum cutoff. The
quark-antiquark potential with the UV cutoff @xmath is shown in Fig. 3.5
. The confinement potential is not affected in @xmath GeV, and is
affected in @xmath GeV. Thus, the confinement potential is induced by
the low-momentum gluon below about 1.5 GeV also in the three-dimensional
formalism.

### 3.3 Comparison with an analytical model

In this section, we analyze the Richardson potential, which is a
phenomenological model of the interquark potential [ 37 ] . We introduce
the momentum cutoff to the Richardson potential and compare it with the
lattice QCD result.

The Richardson potential is constructed so as to reproduce the Coulomb
plus linear functional structure. It is defined by the
one-dressed-gluon-exchange amplitude which is proportional to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is a parameter in this model. This
coupling is similar to the standard QCD coupling, except for 1 in the
argument of logarithm. To obtain the nonrelativistic (instantaneous)
potential, we calculate the three-dimensional Fourier transformation as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We set @xmath to compare this potential with the quark-antiquark
potential in quenched lattice QCD, and @xmath GeV so that the
coefficient of the linear potential is equal to the physical string
tension @xmath GeV/fm.

We can consider two types of the IR cutoff. One is the simple IR cutoff
by the three-momentum length on the Fourier transformation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The other is the change of the functional form as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The advantage of the latter way is that we can analytically calculate
the momentum integral. The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . The symbol @xmath indicates the principal value of the
integral, which is necessary in the case of @xmath . This functional
form becomes the original Richardson potential in the limit of @xmath ,
apart from an irrelevant constant.

These two ways to introduce the IR cutoff yield almost the same results.
The result of the former way is shown in Fig. 3.6 . The irrelevant
constant is arbitrarily subtracted in the figure. As in the case of
lattice QCD, the string tension decreases when the IR cutoff is
introduced. In @xmath GeV, the linear confinement potential disappears
and the interquark potential becomes a Coulomb-like potential. This
behavior is consistent with the lattice QCD result. While the Richardson
potential is only a phenomenological model and its confinement potential
is set by hand, it well reproduces the @xmath -dependence of the
interquark potential obtained by lattice QCD.

## Chapter 4 Color Flux Tube

In a meson, the gluon forms a string-like structure, the so-called color
flux tube, between the quark and the antiquark. The color flux tube is
considered to be essential for color confinement. Although the color
flux tube is not directly observed in experiments, it can be observed in
lattice QCD. In this chapter, we apply our framework to the analysis of
the color flux tube.

The color flux tube is measured by calculating the action density
distribution around a static quark-antiquark pair [ 38 , 39 ] . At the
positions of color sources, the action density distribution has the
peaks which is perturbative singularities of the self energies. The
color flux tube is formed between the peaks of color sources, but its
contribution is small compared to perturbative contributions. In Chapter
3, we found that the confinement potential originates from the IR gluon
below 1.5 GeV in the Landau gauge. Thus, if we remove the high-momentum
component above 1.5 GeV by the present framework, we can extract the
color flux tube from the action density distribution. In other words, we
can clearly observe the structure of the color flux tube apart from
unnecessary perturbative contributions. In this chapter, we consider the
three-dimensional UV cutoff explained in Section 3.2.

### 4.1 Action density in vacuum

Before the action density distribution with a static quark-antiquark
pair, we calculated the action density without color sources, i.e., in
vacuum. The action density @xmath is defined as Eq. ( 2.7 ). The vacuum
action density relates to the gluon condensate in continuum QCD, which
produces the trace anomaly. In the naive continuum limit, the action
density corresponds to the gluon condensate, however, at finite lattice
spacing, it is dominated by perturbative corrections [ 40 , 41 ] . In
short, a large part of the vacuum action density on the lattice is
perturbatively generated.

The vacuum action density @xmath with the UV cutoff is listed in Table
4.2 . The vacuum action density is translationally invariant, i.e.,
independent of @xmath . When the high-momentum gluon is removed, the
vacuum action density drastically decreases. For example, at @xmath GeV,
the vacuum action density is reduced to about 1 % of the original value.
The remaining small component would lead to nonperturbative properties
of QCD vacuum.

### 4.2 Action density with a quark-antiquark pair

The spatial distribution of the action density around a static
quark-antiquark pair is obtained by measuring @xmath around the Wilson
loop at a certain time slice. Its expectation value is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the value of the Wilson loop with the size @xmath . The
schematic figure is illustrated in Fig. 4.1 . The origin of the
four-dimensional coordinate is placed in the center of the Wilson loop.
We measured @xmath at the @xmath plane.

For statistical improvement, the translationally invariant quantities
are averaged over, if possible. For example, @xmath is given by the
convolution sum as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the position of the parallel-translated Wilson loop. To
enhance the ground-state component, the APE smearing method is applied
to the spatial link variables of the Wilson loop [ 34 ] . The action
density distribution @xmath is independent of the time slice if the
ground-state component is suitably dominated. Because of the smearing
method, the action density distribution is almost independent of @xmath
in the range of @xmath in the present calculation.

We introduce the UV cutoff to the action density distribution as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The arguments, such as @xmath , are abbreviated for simplicity. The
physical interpretation is the spatial distribution of the low-momentum
gluon around a physical quark-antiquark pair. As another choice, one can
introduce the UV cutoff not only for @xmath but also for @xmath , and
its result is expected to be qualitatively similar to Eq. ( 4.3 ).

In Fig. 4.2 , we display the action density distribution @xmath with the
UV cutoff @xmath GeV, 2.2 GeV, and 3.8 GeV. The interquark distance
between the quark and the antiquark is @xmath fm. The overall sign of
@xmath is flipped in the figure, which is only a matter of definition.
Because the absolute value of @xmath at @xmath GeV and 2.2 GeV is small,
these data in Fig. 4.2 are enlarged by a factor of five compared to the
other ones. The action density distribution in original lattice QCD
without the momentum cutoff is also displayed (“No Cut” in the upper
left); however, its statistical error is relatively large. In original
lattice QCD, the action density is strongly enhanced at the positions of
the quark and the antiquark. In contrast, the color flux tube is
difficult to observe because of such singular peaks and the large
statistical fluctuation. Both the singular peaks and the large
fluctuation originate from the perturbative part of the action density.
When the high-momentum gluon above 3.8 GeV is removed (the upper right),
these perturbative contributions are drastically suppressed, and the
flux-tube structure connecting the quark and the antiquark becomes
clear. At @xmath GeV and 2.2 GeV (the lower right and the lower left,
respectively), the two peaks seem to disappear, and the action density
is distributed around the origin.

Apart from the vacuum contribution, which is translationally invariant,
the action density at @xmath GeV is broadly distributed around the
midpoint between the quark and the antiquark. In the calculation of the
quark-antiquark potential in Chapter 3, this low-momentum gluon leads to
the linear confinement potential over the entire range of @xmath .
Therefore, this action density distribution corresponds to the color
flux tube inducing the confinement potential.

In Fig. 4.3 , we plot the action density distribution @xmath along the
@xmath -axis, i.e., in the longitudinal direction of the quark-antiquark
separation. In original lattice QCD without the UV cutoff (“No Cut”),
the action density has two self-energy peaks at the positions of the
quark and the antiquark, @xmath fm and @xmath fm, respectively. When the
UV cutoff is introduced, these self-energy peaks are drastically
suppressed. Moreover, the absolute values of the action density and the
statistical fluctuation become small, as the vacuum action density. The
results at @xmath GeV and 2.2 GeV are also shown in Fig. 4.4 . The
action density distribution has a maximum at the origin, and the
self-energy peaks seem to disappear. Although the self-energy peaks
would also include a nonperturbative contribution, it is too small to
distinguish from the flux tube. The endpoints of the flux tube are not
sharp, spreading outside the positions of the quark and the antiquark.
In the case of @xmath fm, the longitudinal shape of the flux tube
resembles a broad mountain rather than a plateau.

We also show the energy density distribution @xmath along the @xmath
-axis in Fig. 4.4 . The energy density @xmath is defined identically as
the action density by changing the relative sign between the spatial
plaquettes and the temporal plaquettes. The absolute value of the energy
density is smaller than that of the action density due to the
cancellation between the chromoelectric contribution and the
chromomagnetic contribution. Apart from the absolute value, the overall
shape of the energy density distribution is similar to that of the
action density distribution.

To estimate the width of the flux tube, we fit the action density
distribution along the @xmath -axis to a the Gaussian form, @xmath . It
is seen that the Gaussian form can well reproduce the lattice data, as
shown in Fig. 4.5 . The best-fit width parameter @xmath is 0.31 @xmath
0.01 fm at @xmath GeV, and 0.35 @xmath 0.01 fm at @xmath GeV. These
values are comparable to the flux-tube width of earlier works in the
standard lattice QCD [ 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 ] .

Next, we analyze how the flux-tube shape depends on the interquark
distance @xmath . As shown in Fig. 4.2 , the longitudinal length and the
transverse width are almost the same at @xmath fm and @xmath GeV. The
overall shape seems to be isotropic and far from a “string” or “tube”.
This is because the transverse width of the flux tube is fairly large.
To approach the distribution to the tube-like shape, the interquark
distance must be enlarged [ 43 , 44 , 45 ] . Here, we use a 32( @xmath
-axis) @xmath lattice instead of a @xmath lattice and extend the
interquark distance to @xmath fm. As shown in Fig. 4.6 , the
distribution is stretched in the longitudinal direction, and the
longitudinal length becomes larger than the transverse width. Compared
to the result of @xmath fm, the flux tube at @xmath fm approaches a
broad tube-like shape.

## Chapter 5 Meson Mass

In this chapter, we calculate the mass of a pion (pseudoscalar meson)
and a @xmath -meson (vector meson) in quenched lattice QCD. The physical
values are @xmath 140 MeV and @xmath 770 MeV. The ground-state mass of a
meson is extracted from the large-time behavior of the corresponding
meson correlator as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The interpolation operator @xmath is, for example, @xmath for a pion and
@xmath for a @xmath -meson. The dots contain the excited-state
components, which rapidly die out in large @xmath .

We used the clover fermion and the staggered fermion for the quark
propagator. The clover fermion is the @xmath -improved Wilson fermion,
and the quark mass is described in terms of the mean-field-improved
hopping parameter @xmath [ 46 , 47 ] . The setups of the gauge
configurations are shown in Table 5.1 . The clover fermion and the
staggered fermion are used on @xmath and @xmath lattices, respectively.

### 5.1 Meson mass with the momentum cutoff

In Fig. 5.1 , we show the meson masses with the UV cutoff with the
clover fermion. The data at @xmath GeV are the original lattice results.
As the high-momentum components are removed, both the pion mass @xmath
and the @xmath -meson mass @xmath gradually decreases. This is because
the UV gluon “dresses” the quarks in the mesons.

In Fig. 5.2 , we show the meson masses with the IR cutoff with the
clover fermion. As in the case of the UV cutoff, the meson masses are
reduced by the IR cutoff. In addition, the pion mass and the @xmath
-meson mass degenerate in @xmath GeV. In Chapter 3, we found that the
confinement potential disappears in this region. Thus, this degeneracy
suggests that the quark and antiquark become unbound or, if possible,
very narrowly bound. In such a state, the character of each meson is
lost, and the meson mass is equal to the sum of the quark and antiquark
masses. This state is called as “quasi-free”.

Next, we consider the dependence of the meson masses on the quark mass
with the staggered fermion. For chiral extrapolation, the squared meson
masses are fitted with quadratic functions as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are fitting parameters. We show the
results of chiral extrapolation in Fig. 5.3 and Fig. 5.4 . When the IR
cutoff is introduced, the @xmath -meson mass uniformly decreases but the
linear extrapolation form is unchanged. In contrast, the functional form
of the pion mass changes in @xmath GeV, where the pion mass degenerates
the @xmath -meson mass. The extrapolation function becomes a linear
function.

The pion mass is related to the chiral condensate through the
Gell-Mann-Oaks-Renner relation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In principle, we can examine spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking
through the behavior of the pion mass. However, especially when the
quarks are deconfined, we have to take care of the finite-volume
artifact. We directly analyze spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking by
calculating the chiral condensate in the next chapter.

## Chapter 6 Chiral Condensate

In this chapter, we analyze the chiral condensate. The chiral condensate
is an order parameter of spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking in the
chiral limit. It is nonzero in the symmetry-broken phase and zero in the
symmetry-restored phase. When the quark mass is finite, the chiral
condensate includes the effect of explicit breaking by the quark mass as
well as the dynamical effect. To extract the chiral limit in lattice
QCD, one calculates with several quark masses and extrapolates to the
chiral limit. We denote the absolute value of the chiral condensate as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the quark propagator.

We compute the chiral condensate with the staggered fermion in quenched
QCD and in full QCD. The full QCD configuration includes the two-flavor
staggered fermion. In full QCD, we use a single mass for the valence and
sea quarks, @xmath , of which the corresponding pion mass is about 500
MeV. The simulation parameters of gauge configurations are summarized in
Table 6.1 .

### 6.1 Chiral condensate with the UV cutoff

First, we show the chiral condensate with the UV cutoff in Fig. 6.1 .
Since there is no significant difference between the quenched and full
QCD results, we plot only the full QCD result. The right-side point at
@xmath GeV is the result of original lattice QCD without the momentum
cutoff.

Although spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking is expected to be caused
by nonperturbative gluons, the chiral condensate is drastically changed
by the UV cutoff. However, as shown below, this is mainly because the
chiral condensate is a renormalization-group variant and UV-diverging
quantity. It is dressed by perturbative gluons and its value strongly
depends on the UV regularization. In standard lattice QCD, the
perturbative contribution is several orders of magnitude larger than the
nonperturbative core of the condensate, as shown in Section 4.1.

To estimate the effect of renormalization, we calculate a
renormalization factor, so-called a Z-factor, nonperturbatively [ 49 ,
50 ] . The renormalization factor @xmath is determined from the
amputated Green function of the quark bilinear operator @xmath . The
renormalization condition is imposed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the appropriate projection operator. The wave-function
renormalization factor @xmath of the quark field is obtained from the
conserved vector current, i.e., @xmath . Note that @xmath is the
momentum of the quark field, not the momentum of the gluon field.

We calculate the renormalization factor @xmath of the scalar operator
@xmath , and plot the renormalized chiral condensate @xmath in Fig. 6.1
. The renormalized chiral condensate is almost independent of the UV
cutoff. As the UV gluon is removed by the UV cutoff, the bare chiral
condensate approaches the renormalized one. This means that the drastic
change by the UV cutoff is well explained in terms of renormalization.

### 6.2 Chiral condensate with the IR cutoff

Second, we analyze the chiral condensate with the IR cutoff. We show the
full QCD result in Fig. 6.2 and the quenched QCD result in Fig. 6.3 .
The quark mass is @xmath in both calculations. In the case of the IR
cutoff, the chiral condensate does not show the drastic change. Thus, we
expect the physical contribution to spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking
instead of an artifact of renormalization.

When the IR gluon is removed, the effective quark mass would be reduced
especially at a large distance. Thus, we must pay attention to the
finite-volume effect in @xmath , even though our lattice volume is large
enough at @xmath . We estimate the finite-volume effect by changing
boundary conditions of the quark propagator [ 51 ] . In Fig. 6.2 and
Fig. 6.3 , “PBC” and “APBC” mean periodic and antiperiodic boundary
conditions, respectively. Since the result is independent of the
boundary conditions if the lattice volume is large enough, the
difference between these data should be understood as the finite-volume
effect. As seen from Fig. 6.2 , the @xmath lattice of full QCD suffers
from the finite-volume effect in @xmath GeV. From Fig. 6.3 , the
finite-volume effect is fairly small for the @xmath lattice of quenched
QCD, although it gradually grows in @xmath GeV.

Both in Fig. 6.2 and Fig. 6.3 , the chiral condensate suddenly gets
small around @xmath . This jump around @xmath is caused by cutting only
the zero-momentum link variable @xmath . Despite the change at a single
point @xmath , the chiral condensate is about 40% reduced. Such a large
change is not observed in removing other low-momentum components.
Therefore, the zero-momentum gluon is special and it possesses a major
contribution to the chiral condensate. Note that “zero momentum” on
momentum-space lattice corresponds to the deep-IR region which is
roughly @xmath in the continuum.

The zero-momentum link variable corresponds to a spatially-uniform gauge
background. In general, the non-Abelian gauge field could have a
nontrivial effect even in spatially-uniform case, unlike the Abelian
gauge field. Our result actually suggests that the zero-momentum gauge
field contributes to the chiral condensate. Note, however, that it is
nontrivial whether spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking occurs only by
the spatially-uniform gauge background.

In large @xmath , since the lattice volume of full QCD is not large
enough, we analyze the quenched QCD result in Fig. 6.3 . When the
“nonzero-momentum” gluon of @xmath is removed by the IR cutoff, the
chiral condensate gradually decreases. Thus, not only the
“zero-momentum” gluon but also the “nonzero-momentum” gluon contributes
to the chiral condensate. The chiral condensate continues to decrease
even in @xmath GeV. Although it is difficult to perform an accurate
analysis in large @xmath because of the finite-volume effect, we can see
that the chiral condensate is affected by the gluon in the
intermediate-momentum region.

Next, we consider the chiral extrapolation of the chiral condensate.
When the bare quark mass @xmath is small, the chiral condensate is
expanded as a function of @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . @xmath represents spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking in
the chiral limit. We fit the quenched QCD result by the linear
extrapolation function @xmath . The fitting result is shown in Fig. 6.4
and Table 6.2 . Note that the data of “ @xmath GeV” corresponds to the
smallest IR cutoff, which cuts only the zero-momentum link variable, and
so the value “0.1 GeV” itself is not so meaningful.

As stated above, when the zero-momentum gluon field is removed, the
chiral condensate is largely changed. @xmath is about 40% reduced and
@xmath is about 30% reduced. As for the nonzero-momentum gluon, the
extrapolating line moves down parallel by the IR cutoff. @xmath is
gradually reduced and @xmath is almost unchanged. This indicates that
the nonzero-momentum gluon has small but finite contribution to
spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking.

In Fig. 6.4 , our result suggests another interesting possibility. At
least within the present numerical accuracy, the chiral condensate in
the chiral limit remains finite at @xmath GeV, which is the relevant
energy scale of color confinement. If this is true, this means that the
relevant energy scale of spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking is larger
than that of color confinement at zero temperature. Unfortunately,
however, we cannot make a decisive statement because of systematic error
of the chiral extrapolation. For more conclusive answer, we need the
full QCD calculation very close to the chiral limit, while the
finite-volume effect is severely crucial in large @xmath and small
@xmath .

The Banks-Casher relation states that the chiral condensate is related
to the spectral density @xmath of the Dirac operator as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the chiral limit [ 13 ] . The spectral density of the Dirac operator
is given in infinite volume as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the eigenvalue of the Dirac operator is @xmath . The zero mode of
the quark field is directly related to spontaneous chiral symmetry
breaking from this relation. In contrast, the gluon field is
nontrivially related to spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking. Our result
presents the connection between the energy-momentum component of gluons
and the zero mode of quarks. i.e., the energy scale of gluons and
quarks. We directly analyze the Dirac spectrum in the next chapter.

## Chapter 7 Dirac spectrum

In this chapter, we analyze the eigenvalue spectrum of the Dirac
operator. Although the Dirac equation is written in a simple form, the
Dirac spectrum tells us nontrivial properties of QCD. In particular,
zero modes of the Dirac operator have special roles on nonperturbative
properties induced by the gluon field, e.g., spontaneous chiral symmetry
breaking and topological charge. Moreover, the low-lying Dirac spectrum
shows the universal behavior of disordered systems, which is described
by chiral random matrix theory. It is important to clarify how the gluon
field induces these properties of the Dirac spectrum.

We computed the low-lying eigenvalues of the massless staggered Dirac
operator in quenched lattice QCD. The parameters of the gauge
configurations are listed in Table 7.1 . We here adopted the 1-loop
improved Symanzik gauge action with tadpole improvement [ 52 ] . The
tadpole coefficient is defined as the fourth-root of the average
plaquette value [ 47 ] . We generated four kinds of gauge
configurations. The @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath lattices are used to
analyze the eigenvalues and the chiralities, and the @xmath lattice is
used to discuss the connection with chiral random matrix theory.

### 7.1 Eigenvalue and chirality

The @xmath -th eigenmode of the Dirac operator is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Because the massless staggered Dirac operator is anti-Hermitian, the
eigenvalues always appear in pairs, @xmath . We only have to calculate
the positive eigenvalues @xmath . It should be understood that the
negative eigenvalues with the same magnitude exist.

As explained in Section 2.1, the lattice staggered fermion breaks the
flavor symmetry, i.e., the full SU( @xmath ) chiral symmetry. As a
result, the unimproved staggered Dirac operator fails to reproduce
nontrivial topological sectors [ 53 , 54 , 55 ] . This problem is
approximately settled by improving the lattice gauge action and the
lattice fermion action [ 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] . For the improved gauge
action, we adopted the 1-loop improved Symanzik gauge action with
tadpole improvement [ 52 ] . For the improved staggered Dirac operator,
we adopted the FAT7 @xmath ASQ operator [ 60 ] . The FAT7 @xmath ASQ
operator is constructed from the FAT7 link variable and the ASQ operator
[ 61 ] . The spatial boundary conditions are periodic, and the temporal
boundary condition is antiperiodic.

In the top of Fig. 7.1 , we show the low-lying 10 positive eigenvalues
of one typical gauge configuration of @xmath . This improved operator
strongly suppresses the flavor-symmetry breaking lattice artifact. The
four-fold degeneracy, i.e., the four-flavor symmetry, is satisfied with
high precision. In addition, zero eigenvalues are approximately
reproduced. Such zero modes are called as “would-be” or “near” zero
modes. Because the negative eigenvalues with the same magnitudes exist,
the topological charge of this gauge configuration is @xmath .

In Fig. 7.1 , we also show the Dirac spectrum of the same gauge
configuration with @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV. For @xmath GeV, while all
the eigenvalues change, the four-fold degeneracy is still satisfied. The
would-be zero modes disappear. This means that the topological charge is
broken. For @xmath GeV, the low-lying 10 eigenvalues become close to the
eigenvalue of free fermions, which is about 0.39 for this case. Also in
this case, the topological charge becomes zero.

Next, we discuss the correlation between the eigenvalue and the
chirality. The chirality is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

For nonzero eigenvalues, their chiralities are zero. On the other hand,
for zero eigenvalues, their chiralities are @xmath or @xmath . In the
top of Fig. 7.2 , we show the scattering plot of all the low-lying 30
eigenvalues of 50 gauge configurations of @xmath . There exists a clear
separation between the nonzero modes, which is @xmath , and the would-be
zero modes, which is @xmath . The reason why the chirality deviates from
@xmath is that it requires a renormalization [ 62 ] .

In the middle of Fig. 7.2 , we show the scattering plot with the UV
cutoff @xmath , 4, and 3 GeV. As the high-momentum component is removed,
the eigenvalue spectrum is gradually changed. For @xmath GeV, all
eigenmodes are @xmath . Therefore, all gauge configurations fall into
the trivial topological sector. In the bottom of Fig. 7.2 , we show the
scattering plot with the IR cutoff @xmath , 2, and 3 GeV. When the
low-momentum component is removed, many of the low-lying eigenvalues
approach the free eigenvalue, which is @xmath and @xmath . Compared to
the case of the UV cutoff, the changes of the eigenvalues are sensitive
to the IR cutoff. This result is consistent with our expectation that
the low-lying Dirac eigenmode interacts with the low-momentum gluon. For
@xmath GeV, we cannot identify would-be zero modes since all eigenvalues
are almost degenerate. From these results, except for the
very-high-momentum components, the relatively broad region of momentum
components of the gluon field is related to the low-lying Dirac
spectrum.

When the momentum cutoff is imposed, the clear separation between
would-be zero modes and nonzero modes is lost. This is because the
staggered Dirac operator does not have exact zero modes. This situation
will be improved by the overlap operator, which has exact zero modes [
29 , 63 ] .

### 7.2 Topological charge

The numbers of zero modes determine the topological charge @xmath of the
background gauge field through the Atiyah-Singer index theorem [ 64 ] .
The index theorem states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the numbers of right-handed and left-handed
zero modes, respectively [ 64 ] .

From the number of would-be zero modes, we extracted the topological
charge @xmath . We set the criterion for would-be zero modes as @xmath ,
and for nonzero modes as @xmath . This criterion clearly separates
would-be zero modes in the original case, as shown in the top of Fig.
7.2 . For the cases in which the clear separation between would-be zero
modes and nonzero modes is lost, this criterion could be subtle. The
results are summarized in Table 7.3 .

For a consistency check, we also extracted the topological charge in
another way. We directly calculated the topological charge by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Its discretized form is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the plaquette. We measured this topological charge after
the APE smearing steps [ 34 , 55 ] . The smearing coefficient and the
number of the smearing step are set to 7.0 and 200, respectively. The
results are shown in the parentheses in Table 7.3 . The obtained
topological charge is roughly consistent with the estimate by the
would-be zero modes, especially in the original lattice QCD, as
expected. These two estimates deviate from each other in some cases with
the momentum cutoff, e.g., @xmath GeV. This is partly because it is
difficult to identify the would-be zero modes in these cases, and partly
because the APE smearing steps change the local topological structure.

We can see that the topological charge is destroyed by removing the
broad momentum region of the gauge field. This behavior is seen in the
both cases of the UV and IR cutoffs. Thus, there is no typical energy
scale of the gauge field inducing the topological charge. This is
different from the case of color confinement, which is induced only by
the narrow low-momentum component of the gauge field, as shown in
Chapter 3.

In Table 7.3 , we show the numerical results calculated in the Coulomb
gauge, instead of the Landau gauge. The results are almost consistent
with those of the Landau gauge.

### 7.3 Connection with chiral random matrix theory

Another interesting property of the low-lying Dirac spectrum is that it
is successfully described by chiral random matrix theory. Chiral random
matrix theory is an effective theory which describes the universal
behavior of disordered systems [ 65 , 66 , 67 ] . Chiral random matrix
theory suggests that the low-lying Dirac spectrum depends only on the
global symmetries of the system, and not on the details of the
microscopic structure. Once the validity of chiral random matrix theory
is guaranteed, chiral random matrix theory enables us to predict the
low-lying eigenvalue distribution by a simple and universal function.

We compared the lattice data with a prediction of chiral random matrix
theory, using the gauge configurations of @xmath . We analyzed the
@xmath sector with the criterion for nonzero modes as @xmath .

We calculated the probability distribution of the lowest nonzero
eigenvalue @xmath . In chiral random matrix theory, the probability
distribution of the lowest eigenvalue is given as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

for the SU(3) quenched gauge field with @xmath [ 68 ] . If one directly
calculates the chiral condensate in infinite volume, this function is
parameter free. In this study, we treated @xmath as a fitting parameter.
The lattice data and the best-fit result of Eq. ( 7.6 ) are shown in
Fig. 7.3 . In the original lattice QCD, the lattice data is well
reproduced by chiral random matrix theory. The best-fit value is @xmath
.

For @xmath GeV, the qualitative behavior does not change. The lattice
data is still reproduced by Eq. ( 7.6 ). Thus, the high-momentum gluon
is irrelevant for the universality of the lowest eigenvalue
distribution. The best-fit value of @xmath is changed by the UV cutoff.
This is because the chiral condensate is renormalization-group variant
and UV divergent. By definition, the UV divergent quantity depends on
the UV cutoff, although this might be irrelevant for phenomenology.

For @xmath GeV, the lowest eigenvalue distribution becomes to
concentrate on the vicinity of the free eigenvalue. The lattice data
drastically deviates from Eq. ( 7.6 ). Therefore, the low-momentum gluon
is crucial for the validity of chiral random matrix theory. In other
words, the low-momentum component induces the strong-interacting and
disordered nature of the gauge field.

In the calculation of the chiral condensate in Chapter 6, the
zero-momentum component has a large contribution to the chiral
condensate. To check it, we calculated the Dirac spectrum with the small
IR cutoff @xmath GeV. For @xmath GeV, the lattice data can be fitted by
Eq. ( 7.6 ) with the best-fit value @xmath . The contribution of the
zero-momentum component is indeed large, about 15% of the total. This is
qualitatively consistent with the result in Chapter 6. Note, however,
that this is quantitatively different because the lattice action and the
lattice spacing are different.

## Chapter 8 Summary

We have introduced the lattice framework to analyze the relation between
a QCD phenomenon and the energy-momentum component of the gluon field.
In this framework, using the Fourier transformation of the link
variable, we construct the momentum-space link variable, remove some
energy-momentum components, and reconstruct the coordinate-space link
variable. This framework is applicable to many lattice QCD calculations.
We have applied this framework to the analysis of color confinement and
spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking.

As for color confinement, we have analyzed the quark-antiquark
potential, the color flux tube, and meson masses. From the quantitative
analysis of the quark-antiquark potential, we have found that the
confinement potential is induced by the low-momentum component below 1.5
GeV in the Landau gauge. The low-momentum component below 1.5 GeV
produces the linear interquark potential, and the high-momentum
component above 1.5 GeV produces the Coulomb-like interquark potential
without confinement. As one application of this result, by restricting
the gluon field to the high-momentum component above 1.5 GeV, we can
extract the color flux tube from the action density distribution. In
addition, when this low-momentum component is removed, the two quarks in
mesons are not confined and become quasi-free.

As for spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking, we have analyzed the chiral
condensate and the Dirac spectrum. The chiral condensate is induced by
the broad low-momentum region, even above 1.5 GeV. This behavior is also
observed in the analysis of the Dirac spectrum. This dependence on the
momentum cutoff is different from that of color confinement. The present
result suggests that spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking is induced by
higher energy-momentum component of gluons, compared to color
confinement. This behavior is consistent with phenomenological models [
14 , 15 ] . For more conclusive statement, we have to take into account
many systematics, especially, the sea quark effects in the case of
realistic QCD.

We have also analyzed topological charge in the two ways: the fermionic
way through the Dirac zero mode and the field theoretical way through
the gauge field distribution. The momentum cutoff gradually affects the
Dirac spectrum and the zero modes, and then changes the topological
charge. This is similar to the behavior of the chiral condensate.

In this framework, we need gauge fixing, and the obtained result depends
on the gauge choice. Nevertheless, this analysis is important in the
following theoretical viewpoints.

First, the relevant energy scale, i.e., the energy-momentum component
inducing a QCD phenomenon, would be useful for developing effective
theories. An effective theory has some cutoff to simplify physics or to
reduce degrees of freedom. Although the value of the cutoff should be
based on some physical reasoning, its microscopic derivation is
difficult in many cases. The relevant energy scale obtained by lattice
QCD would provides a physical reasoning for the cutoff value. For
example, by setting the UV cutoff to be 1.5 GeV in momentum integral, we
can safely pick up the contribution to color confinement. Further, the
relevant energy scale determines degrees of freedom which appear in the
effective field theory [ 69 ] .

Second, this analysis reveals the relation between different QCD
phenomena in terms of the energy-momentum component of the gauge field.
We studied the connection between color confinement and spontaneous
chiral symmetry breaking. Such connection would be important for
understanding their underlying mechanisms. Also, based on the connection
between the confinement potential and the color flux tube, we succeeded
in extracting the color flux tube from the gluon distribution.

Third, this framework has a technical advantage in numerical simulation.
As shown in Chapter 4, the statistical fluctuation of the action density
is strongly suppressed by removing the UV components. This is because
the statistical fluctuation is mainly given by the high-frequency mode,
i.e., the UV component of the link variable. The statistical error is
one major difficulty in lattice QCD. This framework can reduce the
statistical error without changing the target IR physics [ 70 ] .

## Acknowledgments

The author is very grateful to the adviser, Hideo Suganuma, for all the
discussions and collaborations in this work. He kindly supported the
research activity in graduate school.

The author would like to thank all the collaborators in other works,
Teiji Kunihiro, Akira Ohnishi, Berndt Müller, Andreas Schäfer, Toru T.
Takahashi, and Hideaki Iida. The author also thanks the members of
Nuclear Theory Groups in Kyoto University and in Yukawa Institute for
Theoretical Physics.

The author is supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
and a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research [(C) No. 20 @xmath 363].

The lattice QCD simulations were carried out on Altix3700 BX2 and SX8 at
YITP in Kyoto University, and SX8 at Osaka University.