## 1 Introduction

The problem of the dynamical evolution of a globular cluster can be
stated very simply. The only important force is the mutual attraction
between the stars of the cluster; the other forces (like radiative
pressure, electromagnetic forces, relativistic effects, etc.) are
negligible. Therefore, the topic is the classical @xmath -body problem:
finding the motion of @xmath points of given masses, mutually attracting
themselves as the inverse square of their distance.

This exposition, whereas simple, relates to an extremely arduous
mathematical problem. Despite a large number of studies, it has not been
possible to find an explicit solution, which very likely does not exist.
Hence, one can think of the numerical integration. This way, von Hoerner
( 1960 ) computed the evolution of artificial clusters comprising up to
16 stars, thanks to an electronic device. But high values of @xmath are
out of reach with such a method, as the computational time becomes
rapidly extreme, even for a machine; the case of @xmath already
corresponds to a system of 96 simultaneous differential equations.

In the globular clusters, @xmath is of the order of magnitude of @xmath
. Such a high value naturally suggests to give up following the
individual motions, and to use a statistical method. The structure of
the cluster is then defined at all times thanks to a distribution
function in a 7-dimensional space: 3 position coordinates, 3 velocity
coordinates, and the mass. One can write a system of equations that
allows, in principle, to calculate the evolution of this function, given
its initial form. Unfortunately, the numerical resolution seems
absolutely out of reach with this general form: indeed, one faces an
integro-differential system with 8 independent variables!

Thus, it is necessary to make simplifications, or additional hypotheses.
Two of them are classical and well valid:
(H1) we assume that the cluster is spherically symmetric;
(H2) we assume that the cluster has reached the steady state;
The number of independent variables is then reduced from 8 to 4 (see
Equation 2.2 below); but the equations are still too involved.
Therefore, one must make new simplifications, much more arbitrary, that
are often only justified by their practical utility. The main one
consists in considering the structure and the evolution problems
separately. This is how a series of studies (e.g. Plummer 1911 , 1915 ;
Eddington 1916 ; Jeans 1916 ; Chandrasekhar 1942 Section 5.8, Camm 1952
; Woolley & Robertson 1956 ; Hénon 1959 ) has focussed on the structure
of the clusters, without considering the evolution. In this case, the
distribution function can take any form; it is set by an additional,
arbitrary hypothesis, changing from one author to the other. The models
obtained this way represent well the observed clusters; however this
agreement does not mean much, because one of the fundamental equation of
the problem as been suppressed, and replaced by an ad hoc hypothesis.

Other works have, on the contrary, studied the evolution by assuming a
known structure for the cluster (among others, see Spitzer 1940 ;
Chandrasekhar 1943b , c ; King 1958a , b , c ; Spitzer & Harm 1958 ; von
Hoerner 1958 ; Agekian 1959 ; Hénon 1960 ; King 1960 ; Michie 1961 ). In
most of the cases, it is assumed that the cluster is homogeneous and
that the gravitational potential is uniform; the advantage of this is to
get rid completely of the space variables. However, the results obtained
(the major one being the escape rate of the stars from the cluster)
often disagree from one author to the next (see Figure 10 ), as a
consequence of the arbitrary hypothesis, that has been introduced here
again.

In fact, the two aspects, structure and evolution, cannot be told apart;
they are intimately related. Equations show this clearly (see Equation
2.22 below). First solving the problem of the structure of the cluster,
and then finding out its evolution, or the other way round, is not
possible. All the equations have to be treated and solved as a whole.

We hope that the present work constitutes a first step toward this. The
homologous model presented in Chapter V is obtained by solving
simultaneously the equations of structure and evolution. However, this
model is far from being a satisfactory solution to the problem. Indeed,
it has been necessary to keep two arbitrary hypotheses, to avoid a too
high complexity in the calculations:
(H3) we assume that the distribution function only depends on the total
energy (this is equivalent to assuming that the velocity distribution is
everywhere isotropic);
(H4) we assume that all the stars have the same mass.

It is difficult to known how these simplifications affect the
correctness of the results. Therefore, the conclusions should be taken
carefully, and considered as illustrations instead of definitive
statements. In fact, the main goal of this work is not to immediately
obtain useful informations, but rather to set a more rigorous theory by
getting rid of one of the arbitrary postulates it used to have, and by
pointing at those that remain to be narrowed (see Chapter IX).

One can ask whether it would be possible to make progress thanks to
direct observations, and thus to circumvent or at least diminish, the
difficulties of the theoretical work. Unfortunately, it seems that such
a method is not very successful. Observing globular clusters is
difficult, because of a number of reasons: the stellar density varies a
lot from the center to the outskirts, so that it is impossible to get a
satisfactory image of all the parts of the cluster on a single plate;
one only observes the projected density and not the spatial density;
measurements of individual proper motions are impossible to make;
measurements of radial velocities are very imprecise, because of large
distances. Worst, one observes only the brightest stars of the cluster;
these stars only contribute to a small fraction of the total mass. In
other words, the essential structure of the cluster remains invisible.

Observations of globular clusters bring too little information if one is
to derive the theoretical model, characterized by a multi-variable
function. This point can be illustrated thanks to the following quotes
about the comparison between theoretical models and observed clusters: [
T.N. : in english in the original version] “the law … represents the
structure of a globular cluster with close approach to accuracy
everywhere, with the exception of the region immediately surrounding the
center” (Plummer 1911 ) ; “this model appears to fit the variations of
brightness of the observed disk” (Camm 1952 ) ; “calculations with this
model give projected densities which agree much better with observations
than do those of the simple isothermal case” (Woolley & Robertson 1956 )
; “with the first models we can obtain a rather fair fit” (von Hoerner
1957 ) ; “l’amas isochrone … ressemble d’une manière surprenante aux
amas réels” [ T.N. : the isochrone cluster … looks surprisingly similar
to the real clusters] (Hénon 1959 ) . But each time, the model is
different…

Thus, we can say that the agreement with observations is a necessary,
but not sufficient condition for the validity of a theory on the
dynamics of the clusters. Observations can be a final test for the
theory, but not a starting point.

However, the theory can precisely progress in a purely deductive way,
only owing to its own strengths. As we have seen, the physical problem
can be translated into a system of equations describing it, if not
perfectly rigorously, at least with a very good precision. This system
encloses all the information required to solve the problem. That is, we
feel that efforts should be made in this direction. Obviously
difficulties exist; but they are only technical, mathematical
difficulties, not conceptual ones. Thanks to the powerful computing
machines nowadays, it does not seem impossible to solve the problem
anymore.

## 2 Equations

### 2.1 Definitions and hypotheses

Let

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

be, at time @xmath , the number of stars of mass between @xmath and
@xmath and whose the six spacial and velocity coordinates lie between
@xmath and @xmath … @xmath and @xmath . As we will see, this
distribution function @xmath fully describes the structure of the
cluster.

We assume that the cluster is spherically symmetric and that it has
reached a steady state or, strictly speaking, a quasi-steady state
because evolution makes it change slowly (see Spitzer 1940 ; Kuzmin 1957
) . One can show (Jeans 1915 ; Kurth 1955 ) that the distribution
function depends on the position and velocity coordinates only through
two invariants (or strictly speaking, quasi-invariant):
@xmath , the angular momentum of the star;
@xmath , the total energy of the star, per unit mass (we will refer to
this quantity as total energy, for conciseness).
Therefore, we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is given by the fundamental relation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the gravitational potential, and @xmath is the velocity
of the star.

Here comes our first arbitrary hypothesis. We assume, for the rest of
the paper, that @xmath does not depend on the angular momentum @xmath .
This is equivalent to assuming that the velocity distribution is
isotropic (i.e. spherically symmetric) everywhere in the cluster, as
shown in (2.3). Thus, the distribution function shrinks to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thanks to this hypothesis, one can have the following reasoning. The
mutual perturbations of the stars tend to establish a Maxwellian,
therefore isotropic, velocity distribution everywhere. The escape
phenomenon goes, as we know, against such a distribution: every star
rising above a certain critical velocity leaves the cluster (see
Chapter III). But this limitation only concern the modulus of the
velocity and not its orientation; in other words, it is itself
spherically symmetric. We can therefore assume that the Maxwellian
equilibrium, which is impossible to establish in term of the
distribution of the velocity moduli, does occur in term of the
distribution of the orientations, i.e. the velocity distribution becomes
isotropic everywhere, after a sufficient time.

But this reasoning is ambiguous: the stars travel across the entire
cluster, and thus, it is forbidden to consider the evolution of a small
region in isolation. Therefore, the validity of our hypothesis is not
ensured ¹ ¹ 1 Michie ( 1961 ) highlights an increase of the anisotropy
in the external regions, for a particular model. . We will examine the
perspectives about this point in Chapter IX.

### 2.2 Equations of structure

These equations are well-known. The density at a given point comes from
the distribution function through:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

or, using the isotropy of the velocities and (2.3):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore, @xmath , @xmath and the distance to the center @xmath are
linked through Poisson’s equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We note that @xmath depends on both @xmath and the time @xmath because
of the evolution of the cluster: @xmath . In the same way: @xmath . The
equations (2.6) and (2.7) give @xmath and @xmath , i.e. the structure of
the cluster, once the distribution function @xmath is known. It remains
to write an essential equation: the one ruling the variation of @xmath
with time.

### 2.3 Local evolution equations

If the potential of the cluster was perfectly regular, every star would
keep its total energy forever and no evolution would occur. In reality
however, the potential is created by a discrete distribution of masses
and yields irregular features, that are random and change with time. As
a consequence, the total energy of the star experiences perturbations.
This question has often been addressed (see e.g. Chandrasekhar 1942 ,
Section 2.1) ; one showed that the star mostly experiences many small
perturbations, whose cumulative effect leads to a slow,
quasi-continuous, variation of the total energy of the star.

This total effect is proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the
maximum distance to the perturber stars, and @xmath is the “impact
parameter”, i.e. the distance by which two stars have to be separated to
be deviated by an angle of 90 @xmath . That is, even the very distant
stars have a non-negligible effect. However, @xmath is very small: one
can show that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the radius of the cluster. (Recall that @xmath is the
total number of stars.) Consequently, the majority of the perturbations
are caused by relatively close stars: e.g., if the cluster counts @xmath
stars, @xmath equals @xmath , and 80% of the perturbations would come
from stars closer than @xmath . Therefore, in order to calculate the
perturbations at a given point in the cluster, we will admit that the
distribution of the velocities is the same in this point as everywhere
else. This approximation probably leads to an error of about 10%, which
is acceptable given the current state of the theory.

The distribution function depends on @xmath and @xmath , through @xmath
; to emphasize this, we set:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this entire Section, we will study what happens at a given point in
the cluster, at the distance @xmath from the center. The function @xmath
defined in (2.9) describes the velocity distribution at this point.

Rosenbluth, MacDonald & Judd ( 1957 ) gave the equation of evolution of
such a distribution, with the effects of perturbations, in the very
general case where there is no symmetry for the velocities, as well as
in the case of axisymmetry. In our case of spherical symmetry for the
velocities, their equation becomes (after some calculations) ² ² 2 This
equation has recently been cited and used by King ( 1960 ) . :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where, for simplicity, we set @xmath . The maximum distance @xmath to
the perturber stars has been taken equal to the radius of the cluster.
The subscript @xmath reminds us that the variation of @xmath is due to
perturbations.

### 2.4 Global evolution equations

It is now time to focus on the entire cluster. Let’s consider the subset
of stars of given mass @xmath and energy @xmath , at time @xmath . These
stars are situated at different locations in the cluster; but, according
to our hypotheses, they all corresponds to the same value of @xmath ,
thus of @xmath . And yet, after a very short time, the functional form
of @xmath has changed. This modification, given by (2.10), is different
from one position in the cluster to another, in general. As a
consequence, @xmath does not take the same value over the entire subset
of stars anymore. In other words, the perturbations instantaneously
destroy the steady-state regime.

However, the steady-state re-appears almost immediately, because of the
rapid circulation of the stars within the cluster; the perturbations
become equal for all the stars of the subset, so that @xmath takes the
same value for all of them, once again.

Thus, the actual variation of @xmath , after the equalization, is
obtained when computing the derivative of (2.9), i.e.:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we write that @xmath , given in (2.11), is equal in average to
@xmath , given in (2.10).

Let @xmath be the total number of stars in the subset. One has:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integral is with respect @xmath . The maximum value @xmath
taken by @xmath for a given energy @xmath , is set by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the velocity @xmath is given in (2.3), i.e.:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation (2.12) becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the number of stars in the subset changes as:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.16)
  -- -- -- --------

We write that this integral remains the same whether using (2.10) or
(2.11). The second term in the integral is the same in both cases;
therefore we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the equation of evolution we were looking for ³ ³ 3 This
equation has already been presented, in a slightly different form
however, by Kuzmin ( 1957 , Equation 2.5) . .

By changing @xmath and @xmath into @xmath and @xmath and using (2.14),
it becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

We can switch the operations @xmath and @xmath , because the quantity
between square-brackets becomes zero for @xmath . Then, we switch the
order of the integrations over @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , by recalling
that @xmath and @xmath do not depend on @xmath . Furthermore, we set:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

([ T.N. : The upper limit of the integral is missing in the original
version]) and thus,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

After these transformations, (2.18) takes its final form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(Hereafter, the symbol @xmath indicates the partial derivative with
respect to @xmath : @xmath , and so on.).

We note that the structure of the cluster is present in this equation
only via the function @xmath , defined in (2.19). This function will
play a very important role in the following.

We now have the complete system of fundamental equations that rule the
structure and the evolution of the cluster: these are the four
equations (2.6), (2.7), (2.19) and (2.22), linking together the four
quantities @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . But before actually
solving this system, we first have to modify it.

### 2.5 Equal masses

In the rest of this paper (except in Chapter VI), we limit ourselves to
the study of the case where all the stars have the same mass. This is
our second arbitrary hypothesis, less critical than the first one
however. Indeed, whereas it is obvious that the masses of the stars are
different in real clusters, one can imagine a fictitious cluster where
all masses would be equal. In other words, the system we study
corresponds to a physically plausible situation, while being simpler
than the real systems.

Therefore, the distribution function reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass of each star, and @xmath is the Dirac’s
distribution [ T.N. : Dirac delta function]. Performing the integrations
over @xmath in (2.6) and (2.22) is immediate.

### 2.6 Normalized variables

In order to get rid of the numerical constants, we define “normalized
variables”:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The four fundamental equations become:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In addition, we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., thanks to a partial integration and by taking into account that
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so that (2.25d) can be re-written:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.7 Canonization

We know (see e.g. Kurth 1955 ) that every theoretical cluster model
includes two dimensional parameters; or, in other words: one can apply
to the model an homology based on two arbitrary parameters. This can be
easily checked with the equations: at a given time @xmath , the cluster
is completely defined by the distribution function @xmath . The most
general homologous transformation would be to multiply @xmath on the one
hand, and @xmath on the other, with two arbitrary constants. (We assume
that the masses of the stars are set; thus, it is not possible to change
them through a homology.)

It is interesting to use this possibility of homology to set any cluster
model to a canonical form defined by two chosen conditions. This allows
one to highlight the very structure of the model, in a way that is
independent of its size. The two conditions could be, for example:
masses and radius equal to defined values. However, we will choose
others, more convenient (see Chapter IV, Equation 4.6).

In the case of a model in evolution, which we study here, this model
will always be set to the canonical form thanks to a proper homology.
Therefore, the two parameters of the homology will be functions of time.
This has the great advantage to allow us to split two aspects of the
evolution of the model: (1) the evolution of the size, represented by
the variation of the parameters of the homology; (2) the evolution of
the structure itself, dimensionless, represented by the variation of the
canonical form.

Therefore, we set:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the two fundamental parameters of the
homology, chosen so that the new model, defined by @xmath , is
canonical. By replacing this in the equations, we find out that the
transformation formulae of the other quantities are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

One can easily check that the first three equations of the system (2.25)
remain the same with the new variables. The fourth one changes however,
because of derivatives with respect to time. From (2.31a) and (2.32e),
we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allows us to compute:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

By use of (2.31b) and (2.32d), this becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Let:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With the new variables, the system (2.25) becomes:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(The symbol @xmath indicates here the derivative with respect to @xmath
, and not @xmath any more.)

### 2.8 Secondary equations

We write here the equations that allow us to compute several interesting
quantities.

#### 2.8.1 Partial mass and partial kinetic energy

Let @xmath be the subset of stars whose total energy is less than @xmath
. The total mass of this subset @xmath is, when using (2.14):

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.38)
  -- -- -- --------

and its total kinetic energy is

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.39)
  -- -- -- --------

Switching the order of the integrations and using (2.19) and (2.20), one
obtains:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We assume all the masses to be equal and we introduce the normalized
variables defined as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which results in:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These relations allow us to give a physical meaning to the integrals
found in the evolution equation (2.25d). We also note that if we set
@xmath , the subset @xmath matches the entire cluster and the equations
(2.40) and (2.42) give the total mass and the total kinetic energy of
the cluster.

We switch to the canonical variables by setting:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 2.8.2 Another partial mass

The mass within the sphere of radius @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which becomes, after transformations as in (2.41a) and (2.43a):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

One must be careful not to mix up @xmath , the mass within the radius
@xmath , with @xmath , the mass of the stars whose energy is less than
@xmath .

#### 2.8.3 Projected density

The projected density of the cluster, i.e. the mass observed per unit
surface, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We switch to the normalized, and then canonical, variables with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.8.4 Projected mass

The mass enclosed within a circle of radius @xmath in the projection of
the cluster is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., through canonical variables and transformation as in (2.41a) and
(2.43a):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.9 Homologous evolution

The system of equations (2.37) allows us to compute the evolution of the
cluster from a given initial state. However, a few tests revealed that
even with a powerful machine (IBM 704), this calculation is extremely
long. Furthermore, the circumstances of the birth of a globular cluster
(and even more, the initial energy distribution) remain unknown at
present time. The choice of the function describing the initial state of
the cluster is, therefore, quite arbitrary.

Consequently, it seems more rational to face the problem from the other
side, and to first look for what the final evolution of the cluster will
be. An analogy with gases suggests indeed that the stellar systems
should tend toward a defined final state, independent of their initial
state; and the similarity of the globular clusters as we observe them
today (von Hoerner 1957 ) seems to confirm this assumption. This final
state should be deduced from the system of equations (2.37) alone; it is
the equivalent, in a way, to the Maxwellian distribution of velocities
for a gas in equilibrium.

However, it is well-known that the final state of a cluster cannot be
equilibrium. The stars which gain enough energy through perturbations
escape forever from the cluster, whose total mass therefore decreases.
Hence, a stationary state stricto sensu , does not exist.

How then, can we imagine the final evolution of the cluster? It is time
to go back to the distinction made above between the evolution of the
size and the evolution of the structure. The escape of stars only
implies the evolution of the size; it does not forbid the existence of a
model for which only the dimensions would vary, while its structure
would remain the same; in other words, a model where the evolution would
only consist in “expansions” or “contractions” of the physical
quantities. We call such a process homologous evolution .

Therefore, it seems natural to seek whether the final evolution of the
cluster would be of this kind. This is what we will do in the next
Chapters. The answer will be yes: we will see first (Chapters III to V)
that the system (2.37) allows one and only one solution in homologous
evolution, which we will name homologous model ; second we will show
(Chapter VII) that this model represents indeed the final state toward
which all the clusters tend.

Writing of the above in mathematical terms is very simple. A model in
homologous evolution allows an invariant canonical form: @xmath , @xmath
, and so on, are independent of the time. Thus, in particular:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the last equation of the system (2.37) shrinks to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This way, the system becomes independent of time.

Before focussing on the numerical solution, we still have to examine the
boundary conditions. This will be the topic of the next two Chapters.

## 3 Boundary conditions

### 3.1 Effect of the galactic field

Globular clusters are not isolated systems: they are subject to the
gravitational field of the galaxy, an effect that cannot be neglected.

Let @xmath be the galactic potential. The dimensions of a cluster being
much smaller than those of the galaxy, this potential can be described
with sufficient precision by a Taylor series truncated to the second
order; in a reference frame centered on the cluster, moving with it, and
with the right orientation, the series reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, we almost have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

because the density of the galaxy is very small in the regions where the
globular clusters are found. As a consequence, at least one of these
three main curvatures is negative. We assume that the one along @xmath
is the most negative.

The potential created by the cluster is, in the external regions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

[ T.N. : the subscript @xmath stands for amas : cluster.], where @xmath
is the total mass of the cluster. Thus, the total potential along the
@xmath -axis is (Figure 1 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

It reaches a maximum for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows that every star that goes beyond this point escapes from the
cluster forever. This implies that the stars that have a radial,
oscillatory, trajectory along the @xmath -axis cannot have a total
energy greater than @xmath ; therefore, for these stars:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

But, as we supposed that the distribution function depends only on
@xmath , (3.6) is, in fact, a general property: no star can have an
energy higher @xmath . In @xmath , the distribution function has what
Chandrasekhar ( 1943d ) calls an “absorbing barrier”, and that we call
here, in a more illustrative way, a “leak”. We know that, in this case,
the function @xmath is zero for @xmath , but its derivative is not; the
value of the latter is proportional to the escape rate of the stars
(Chandrasekhar 1943d , Equations 25 and 33) .

The galactic field has also the effect of modifying the potential inside
the cluster. However, the equations (3.1) and (3.2) show that @xmath is
zero in average on a sphere centered on the cluster; as a consequence,
in our approximation of spherical symmetry, the galactic field has no
effect inside the cluster. Its effect reduces to the creation of a
“leak” at @xmath .

The boundary of the cluster is defined by the equation @xmath ; it is a
closed surface, with a shape of a lemon, elongated along the @xmath
-axis (on which it has two conic points for @xmath ). Therefore, the
“radius” of the cluster is a function of the angle; but in the case of
the spherical symmetry approximation, we will limit ourselves to
considering its mean value. It is obtained from (3.3) and (3.4), by
replacing the galactic potential @xmath with its mean value @xmath ,
which gives out

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is this mean value that we will refer to as the radius of the
cluster, from now on.

The relation (3.7) links the radius to the mass of the cluster. The
curvature of the galactic field can be considered as constant: we know
that the dynamical evolution of the galaxy is much slower than that of
the clusters. It is true that the cluster travels along an orbit in the
galaxy; but this motion is much faster than the evolution of the
cluster, and we can use the mean value of the curvature of the field
along the orbit in (3.7). Thus, the relation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Isolated cluster

For future applications, we will also consider the case of an isolated
cluster, which would experience no external gravitational field. Indeed,
it seems that several systems (galaxies, galaxy clusters) are almost in
this situation. In this case, at a sufficiently large distance from the
center, the total potential reduces to @xmath , given in (3.3). It does
not yield a maximum but rather increases with distance. Therefore,
escapes can occur only if the distribution function ranges up to @xmath
, corresponding to an infinite radius for the cluster. Furthermore, we
find out from (2.20) and (3.3):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to have a finite total mass (which is given by Equation 2.40),
the distribution function must decrease steeper than @xmath for @xmath .
It follows that its derivative is zero at the leak point @xmath ,
leading to an escape rate of zero. This result has already be shown by
means of another method (Hénon 1960 ) ; it is confirmed by the behavior
of the artificial clusters of von Hoerner ( 1960 ) from which no stars
escape, even after a time much longer than the relaxation time.
Therefore, for an isolated cluster, one has:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.2 Mass-radius relation

The two relations (3.8) and (3.10) can be represented by the unique
form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath for globular clusters (and for any system in a non-uniform
external field in general) and @xmath for isolated clusters. We will use
this general form (3.11), so that the formulae obtained could be
eventually applied to the case of isolated clusters; but all the
numerical calculations, in the present paper, will be done for @xmath .

Using (2.32c), (2.43a) and (2.36), we switch to the canonical variables,
and the relation (3.11) becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the model is in homologous evolution, @xmath and @xmath are
independent of time, and we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that the mass-radius relation translates into a definite relation
between the two parameters of the homology.

### 3.3 Choice of a reference level for the potential

The potential @xmath is defined up to an additive constant. We set this
constant by writing:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the potential is zero at the boundary of the cluster,
negative inside, positive outside. The total energy of a star is always
negative, @xmath corresponding to the escape threshold.

## 4 Central conditions

### 4.1 Infinite central density

A priori , one could expect the density profile of the model we seek to
have the classical shape of Figure 2 with, in particular, a well-defined
central density; and our first attempts have been set to find this.
However, the calculations of the evolution from such an initial state
revealed an unexpected phenomenon: no matter how big the initial value
of the central density is, it always increases, without limits. As an
example, Figure 2 shows the spacial density computed at two successive
times. The horizontal axis is normalized to the external radius; this
way, we see that the increase only concerns the central region of the
cluster ⁴ ⁴ 4 Michie ( 1961 ) has also observed a flux of stars toward
the center of his model. . This increase cannot be diminished by means
of an homologous transformation; indeed, one can measure it by computing
the ratio between the central density and the mean density of the
cluster, and this ratio does not change in an homology.

Therefore, we have been led to consider, for the final state of the
cluster, a model with infinite central density . This can seem
physically absurd at first sight. However, one should not forget that
the density considered here is a probability density. The cluster is not
made of a continuous medium, but rather of separated particles. For the
model to have a physical meaning, the integral of the probability
density must be finite over any finite volume; and we will see it is
indeed the case.

In order to better emphasize this important point, we have created, from
a table of random numbers, an “artificial cluster” , that follows the
projected density law

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

This cluster, shown in Figure 3 , looks like a real galactic cluster;
the fact that its theoretical density is infinite in its center is not
visible, and if we would plot the density profile from Figure 3 , as one
would do for real cluster, we would likely state that the curve shows a
finite maximum in the center!

The functional form of (4.1) is indeed the one we will find near the
center of the model (see Equation 5.9). Note that the number of stars
inside a circle of radius @xmath is proportional to @xmath , and thus
tends toward zero when the circle becomes smaller and smaller.

In Chapter VIII we will study in detail how this central singularity of
the density arises. For the time being, we only focus on the final
state, and thus we assume that the singularity exists.

### 4.2 Asymptotic expressions near the center

@xmath being infinite at the center, the function @xmath must become
infinite too, as shown in (2.6). As a consequence, the first two terms
of the equation (2.53), which are of the order of @xmath , become
negligible with respect to the first one which is of the order of @xmath
, and we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., after integration,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are two constants.

Let’s assume first that @xmath and @xmath are zero. In this case, using
(2.27) and (2.28), (4.3) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

which immediately integrates as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are two constants, necessarily positive, because
@xmath must be positive and increasing for @xmath .

This way, we find a Maxwellian distribution of the energies near the
center, independently of the particular functional form of @xmath , i.e.
of the structure of the cluster. This result is in agreement with what
one could expect: in the central regions, which are very dense, the
perturbations are very active and almost establish the Maxwellian
equilibrium ⁵ ⁵ 5 often called “isothermal equilibrium”, which is a
misuse of language, because the concept of temperature is meaningless in
stellar dynamics. . We are now to set the two conditions that define the
canonical form of the cluster (see Equation 2.31 and the following): we
assume that @xmath and @xmath have been normalized so that the constants
@xmath and @xmath equal unity. The distribution function near the center
is then:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

This choice of the canonical conditions has the advantage of simplifying
the formulae and the calculations a lot.

From (4.6), using successively (2.37a), (2.37b), (2.37c), we easily find
the expressions of the various quantities near the center:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.74)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that (4.7b) is obtained as the unique solution of the differential
equation (2.37b) for which @xmath is infinite at the center of the
cluster. We have, near the center:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also note that the potential is, near the center:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, it tends logarithmically toward @xmath in the center: the
cluster yields an infinite “potential well”. As a consequence, the
energy of the stars can take any value from @xmath to @xmath .

Finally, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.77)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Let’s go back to (4.3) in the general case where @xmath and @xmath are
not zero. For small values of @xmath and @xmath , the solution of (4.3)
can be expanded as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are function yet to be determined. By setting
this in (4.3) and using (4.7c), we obtain two differential equations for
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which can be solved as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.80)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath are arbitrary constants. The terms @xmath are, in fact,
parasite solutions coming from a bad normalization of @xmath ; we can
get rid of them by modifying this normalization. Then, @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term of this expansion becomes negligible with respect to the
first one, for all @xmath and @xmath , when @xmath is small enough. As a
consequence, the expansion (4.14) is valid near the center, not only for
small @xmath and @xmath , but for any values they can take. Thus, we
have found the general solution of (4.3), i.e. the functional form of
the distribution function, for @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 The expression (4.14) can
be considered as an expansion of @xmath up to the second order in @xmath
; however, it has been obtained using the expansion of @xmath up to the
first order, (4.7c). This method is valid because @xmath cancels when
@xmath takes the form (4.6), for all @xmath ’s. We easily find out that
the expansion of @xmath up to the @xmath -th order depends on the
expansion of @xmath up to the @xmath -th order, and on the expansion of
@xmath up to the @xmath -th order only. Therefore, it is possible to
consider one term less in the expansion of @xmath than in those of
@xmath .

### 4.3 Flux of matter and flux of energy toward the center

We are going to calculate the flux of matter and the flux of energy
through the surface @xmath cst, in the six-dimensional space of
positions-velocities. This calculation will allow us to give a physical
meaning to the constants @xmath and @xmath , and to specify the
conditions the model must fulfill near the center of the cluster. Let’s
go back a second to the study of the local properties and let’s
consider, in one point in the cluster, the subset of stars whose
velocity is smaller than a given @xmath . The density of this population
is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the local distribution function, defined in (2.9). In
analogy with (2.23), we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this, and using (2.10), we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This quantity can be physically interpreted as the flux of stars, in
velocity-space, through the surface @xmath cst.

The total mass of the stars in the subset @xmath (stars whose total
energy is less than a given @xmath ) is (see Equation 2.38):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

which becomes, after differentiation while keeping @xmath constant:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the flux of the stars through the surface @xmath cst, in the
six-dimensional space. The subscript @xmath of the first term can be
removed, because the equalization of the perturbation occurs between
stars of same energy, and does not affect the value of @xmath .
Furthermore, from (2.14):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituing into (4.19), then changing the variables, switching the
operations the same way as in Chapter II, and using (2.19), (2.20) and
(2.21), we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We notice that when using (2.40a), we can easily go from this relation
to the fundamental equation of the evolution (2.22), which is thus
proved again. On the other hand, it is not possible to go from (2.22) to
(4.21), because an integration constant remains undefined; that is why
we had to go back to the basic equations to establish (4.21).

We switch to normalized variables thanks to (2.24) and (2.41a), which
gives, using (2.29):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let’s compute, in the same way, the flux of energy through a surface
@xmath cst. At a point in the cluster, the subset of stars which
velocity is less than @xmath has a total energy density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose variation is

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.91)
  -- -- -- --------

The total energy of the subset @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will not give the details of the calculation, which is similar to the
previous one, but slightly longer; one must do several integrations by
parts. We set, in analogy with (2.41b):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we obtain the expression of the flux of total energy through the
surface @xmath cst:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is interesting to note that by computing the derivative (4.22) and
(4.27) with respect to @xmath , we find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation can be proved more directly. Indeed, let @xmath be the
subset of stars whose total energy is between @xmath and @xmath ; the
mass of this subset is: @xmath , and its total energy is: @xmath . Thus
comes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the relation (4.28). However, here again, it is not possible to use
(4.22) and (4.28) to demonstrate (4.27), because an integration constant
would remain undefined.

(The quantity @xmath , that we called “total energy of the subset @xmath
”, has been computed by simply adding the total energies @xmath of its
members, which is not correct, because by doing this, we count twice the
mutual potential energy of the stars of @xmath . However, this effect is
negligible if @xmath only counts a small fraction of the stars of the
cluster, which is the case for @xmath .)

Near the center, one can neglect the last term of (4.22), and the two
last terms of (4.27), which are of the order of @xmath ; we also replace
@xmath with its value, given in (4.3) and (2.32f), and we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.97)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, the two constants @xmath and @xmath represent, up to a factor, the
fluxes of mass and of energy toward the center of the cluster. This
result is unexpectedly simple.

Note that we can switch to the canonical variables thanks to (2.32e) and
(2.43); @xmath has still the same dimension as @xmath . By neglecting
once more the terms in @xmath , we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.98)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We are now going to examine the physical meaning of these fluxes. Let’s
focus first on the flux of mass. (4.30a) shows that, near the center, it
takes a constant value, independent of @xmath ; this means that a flow
of matter enters or exits the cluster (depending on the sign of @xmath )
through the central singularity. The fundamental equations do not rule
out such a flow; one can even, as we will see, create an infinite number
of models obeying the equations and yielding a non-zero flow of matter
in the center. However, from a physical point of view, such a flow
obviously does not make sense. This leads us to write the additional
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

The need of writing a separate condition for the mass conservation in
the center can be more easily explained: at the center of the cluster,
the quantities become infinite and the fundamental equations are
meaningless; thus an additional condition is required for this
particular point. For that matter, we have already noted, just above,
that it is impossible to go directly from the equation of evolution
(2.22) to the Equation (4.21) which states the conversation of the mass;
one constant is missing, which is precisely the value of the central
flow.

However, the models with a non-zero central flow are useful: we will see
them again in Chapter VII, while studying the initial stages of the
evolution, during which the central density slowly increases until it
becomes infinite. Then, the flow of matter toward the center exists and
simply corresponds to the slow “filling” of the central part of the
density profile (see Figure 2 ).

Let’s consider now the flux of energy, given by (4.30b). This flux is
also constant near the center: therefore the center of the cluster
creates or absorbs energy. One could think that, in analogy with what is
true for the mass, the flow of energy must be zero in the center. But
the numerical computation shows (see the next Chapter) that the
previously written condition (4.32) completed the definition of the
solution of the system of equations, which is now unique; and this
solution corresponds to a value of @xmath that is positive and non zero.
Thus, we have to admit that a flow of energy toward the center exists;
more precisely: the center of the cluster absorbs some negative energy .

We will come back with more details to this strange and very interesting
phenomenon in the Chapter V, and we will see how it can be physically
interpreted.

### 4.4 Follow-up on the expansions near the center

To prepare the numerical computation, it is useful to push further the
expansions of the various quantities near the center. Taking the
relation (4.32) into account and setting

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the expansion (4.14) of @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By using successively the fundamental equations (2.37a), (2.37b),
(2.37c), we find out the two-terms expansions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.102)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

that make (4.7) more precise. From a remark made above, we can compute
the expansion of @xmath at the third order by putting in (2.53) the
expansion of @xmath at the second order only, given by (4.35c). The last
two terms of (2.53) must now be taken into account. We find:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The third term in the expansion of @xmath is zero.

We stop the expansions here because the calculation of the terms of
higher order is much more involved: the third term of @xmath is not
constant but proportional to @xmath and its coefficient depends on the
entire function @xmath . Therefore, we will use the expansions (4.35)
for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Finally, we note the expansions of the
two integrals:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.104)
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

## 5 The homologous model

### 5.1 Summary of the equations

The model that we propose to compute is defined by the set of equations
and conditions (2.37a, b, c, d), (2.53), (3.6), (3.13), (4.34), (4.35b)
obtained in the previous Chapters. Some transformations are yet
necessary to set the equations in a form that most favors the numerical
computation:

1.  In the differential equation (2.37b), we will consider @xmath as the
    independent variable. Furthermore, @xmath varies rapidly near the
    boundary, and it is useful to switch to a new variable @xmath
    defined as:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.105)
      -- -------- -- ---------

2.  The integral (2.37c) is transformed by means of an integration by
    parts.

3.  The equation (2.53) is replaced with its integrated form with
    respect to @xmath ; we have seen in Chapter IV that the integration
    constant is zero.

All the equations, modified this way, and the boundary conditions are
gathered below:

Equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.106)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.107)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The unknown functions are: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
defined from @xmath to 0; the unknown constants are: @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . @xmath equals 1/3.

### 5.2 Numerical solving method

The form of the system does not allow the solution to be computed
directly; one has to proceed by trial and error. Experience leads us to
adopt the following iterative method:

1.  Choose a temporary form for the function @xmath , that fulfills
    (5.3a) and (5.3c), with a temporary value of @xmath ;

2.  compute @xmath using (5.2a);

3.  compute @xmath by integrating (5.2b) from the center to the
    boundary; the initial conditions are given in (5.3d);

4.  compute @xmath by means of (5.2c) and (5.2d);

5.  choose temporary values for @xmath and @xmath ; compute @xmath using
    (5.2f);

6.  integrate (5.2e), which is equivalent to a differential system of
    the fourth order, from the center to the boundary; the initial
    conditions are given in (5.3c), (4.36a) and (4.37);

7.  in general, this integration gives the final values of @xmath and
    @xmath that are different from zero; go back to point [5.], modify
    @xmath or @xmath and begin the integration again; grope around this
    way for the values of @xmath and @xmath until @xmath and @xmath
    vanish;

8.  go back to point [2.] with the new function @xmath .

This way, we obtain a series of approximations for @xmath ; we stop when
two successive approximations are equal, up to the desired precision. In
practice, the convergence is quite fast: the errors are divided by about
5 at each iteration.

The computation has been done thanks to the IBM 650 device of the
Observatoire de Meudon; 8 hours of computation are required to get the
solution with a precision of 1/1000.

### 5.3 Results: structure

The four fundamental functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are
given in Table 1 and plotted in Figure 4 . The table covers the range
@xmath ; below @xmath (or @xmath ), the functions are represented with a
sufficient precision by the expressions (4.34) and (4.35). The values
found for the constants are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.108)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, the interesting physical quantities take the following
values:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------
        @xmath   @xmath      (5.109)
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The spacial density @xmath is plotted in Figure 5 as a function of the
radius. It increases very rapidly toward the center, as expected from
(4.8). The structure of the model is perhaps better rendered in Figure 6
, which shows the mass fraction @xmath enclosed in a sphere of radius
@xmath (see Equation 2.45). Near the center, @xmath is proportional to
@xmath . We note that half of the total mass is enclosed inside the
radius @xmath , i.e. only about 1/7 of the external radius.

The potential @xmath vanishes at the boundary of the cluster, according
to our conventions; outside the cluster, its form is obtained by
integrating (2.45):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular, for @xmath , the potential tends toward:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(This is the potential created by the cluster only.)

The projected density, computed from (2.49) is given in Table 1 , column
6, and plotted in Figure 5 as a function of the distance to the center
(see also Figure 15 and Figure 16 ). Near the center, from (4.35a) et
(4.35b), the spatial density is expressed as a function of the radius
as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant which depends on the entire function D . By
linking the formula (5.9) with the values of Table 1 , one finds @xmath
.

The projected mass (mass enclosed, in projection, inside a circle of
radius @xmath ), computed from the formula (2.51), is given in Table 1 ,
column 7. In particular, we find out the value of the median radius
@xmath of the cluster, defined as the radius of the circle which
contains, in projection, half of the total mass. This quantity has the
advantage of being easily measured for real clusters, while the external
radius is, on the contrary, almost impossible to observe. We find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We note that this median radius @xmath is about 10 times smaller than
the external radius @xmath .

### 5.4 Evolution

When integrating (2.36), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.115)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The “time” @xmath is defined by the differential equation (2.32e); it is
not proportional to the physical time @xmath . It is, somehow, the
“proper time” of the cluster; its variation is measured with a scale
which is proper to the cluster, and which always varies according to the
evolution. To avoid any confusion, it is preferable to consider @xmath
as a simple parameter which measures the level of evolution of the
cluster, as it is in (5.11).

The relation between @xmath and the physical time @xmath , found from
(2.32e) and (5.11b), is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(by setting the origin of time at @xmath for @xmath ). This relation is
plotted in Figure 7 . We see that the evolution does not last forever,
but rather ends abruptly at a time @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath , the mass of the cluster becomes zero, as we will see below;
it is therefore the time when the cluster disappears, after the escape
of the last stars.

However, the curve extends forever in the past: the age of the cluster
can be anything, it is not possible to give it an upper limit.

When introducing (5.12) in (5.11), and taking (5.4c) into account, we
obtain the variation laws of the two parameters of the homology:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.118)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We derive, from (2.32), (2.43), (2.48), the variations of the various
physical quantities as functions of time. In particular, for the total
mass, we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which shows that the mass decreases linearly with time . The absolute
escape rate is thus constant.

The radius is proportional to @xmath , thus decreases quite slowly. The
density is constant, and as a consequence, the orbital period of the
stars within the cluster is also constant. The velocities decrease as
@xmath . The total energy of the cluster decreases (in absolute value)
as @xmath , thus faster than the mass.

### 5.5 Accumulation of negative energy in the center

As we have seen in the previous Chapter, a non-zero value of @xmath
implies the existence of a flow of energy toward the center. This energy
cannot vanish; we must admit that it constitutes an energy reservoir.

Thus, the total energy of the cluster is always made of two parts:

-   a “point” energy @xmath , accumulated in the center of the cluster;

-   a “diffuse” energy @xmath , distributed within the entire cluster.

Let’s look at how these two fractions of the energy vary with time. The
variation of @xmath equals the flux of energy toward the center, i.e.,
from (4.30b) and (4.33):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The diffuse energy @xmath is, from the virial theorem:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the total kinetic energy of the cluster; this relation
remains valid as soon as the potential is set to zero at infinity
(instead of the convention @xmath adopted up to now). Therefore, from
(2.43b) and (5.2f), we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can finally compute the total variation of energy @xmath of the
cluster. This variation is only due to the fact that the stars escape
taking some energy away with them. The difference of gravitational
potential between the boundary of the cluster and infinity is @xmath
given by (5.7). Therefore, each star that escapes takes away a mass
@xmath and a negative energy, equal to @xmath . The escape rate is, from
(2.43a) and (5.2f):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and thus,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The comparison of (5.16), (5.18), (5.20) shows that we must have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which expresses the conservation of energy. This relation between the
parameters of the model provides a useful verification of the
calculations. When using the numerical values (5.4) and (5.5), and when
omitting the factor @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.126)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The conservation of energy is quite well verified; the discrepancy that
remains comes from the errors in the computation (mainly the error made
in @xmath ).

Thus, in the course of the evolution, the diffuse energy @xmath , always
negative according to (5.17), decreases in absolute value; the numerical
values (5.22) show that about one third of the negative energy is taken
away by the stars that escape, while the other two thirds go in the
center.

It remains to explain the mechanism of this accumulation of energy in
the center. It is not associated with an accumulation of matter; we have
supposed that the flux of matter toward the center of the cluster is
zero (and this is indeed necessary, because a central condensation of
mass would create an additional potential that would modify the
structure of the cluster; for example the potential would vary as @xmath
and not @xmath anymore, near the center). Thus, the negative energy
@xmath must be stored without any increase of the number of stars.
Apparently, there is only one process that allows this: the formation of
tight binary or multiple stars in the center of the cluster .

The direct observation cannot confirm the existence of this phenomenon:
the images of the stars are sorely separated [ T.N. : resolved] in the
central region of the globular clusters, and it would be impossible to
discover there the presence of a particularly compact group of stars. On
the other hand, von Hoerner ( 1960 ) has computed numerically the
evolution of artificial clusters; by this means, it is possible to
observe the mechanism of the evolution, in as much detail as desired.
von Hoerner has indeed noted the frequent formation of binaries in the
center of the cluster; in one case, a compact group of 4 stars appeared.
This seems an excellent confirmation of the process that we have been
led to admit.

Note again that this central accumulation of energy does not affect the
structure of the cluster, except for the few stars that support it;
thus, it can develop independently of the global evolution of the
cluster. In fact, we have seen that the absolute value of the central
energy increases, while that of the diffuse energy decreases. At the end
of the evolution, about two thirds of the initial negative energy is in
the central condensation, and one third only has left the cluster,
carried by the stars. It would be very interesting, although not
possible here, to study in more detail the process of accumulation and
to answer in particular the following questions: how do multiple stars
form? How many are there? What happens to them after the cluster has
disappeared?

## 6 Stars with different masses

The case of a cluster with an arbitraty mass distribution seems much
more involved than the simple case of equal masses that we have
considered so far; thus we shall not seek to treat it in the general
case. But we are going to see that some simplified cases allow easy
calculations, and provide, not a complete and rigorous solution, but at
least several indications about the effect of the dispersion of the
masses. We will first assume that we add a small number of stars of
different masses to a cluster that contains equal mass stars, and will
study the behavior of this secondary population. Later, this study will
help us to obtain an approximate solution to the general case.

### 6.1 Simplified model made of two populations

We suppose that the cluster is made of the mix of a main population 1 of
stars of mass @xmath , and of a secondary population 2, numerically
negligible with respect to the first one, of stars of mass @xmath . The
distribution function is not (2.23) anymore but rather:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The population 1 is almost not affected by the presence of the
population 2; it alone determines the structure and the evolution of the
cluster; as a consequence, all the results obtained in the previous
Chapters still work for it. We assume that the population 1 has reached
the final state represented by the homologous model of the Chapter V.

Furthermore, by setting @xmath in (2.22), one gets a new equation, that
describes the evolution of @xmath . One can neglect the perturbations
between the stars of the population 2, and the equation becomes, after
applying the transformation of (2.24):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we set:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This equation has the dimension of @xmath ; therefore, we can apply an
homologous transformation to @xmath , independently of those of @xmath .
Thus, we set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore the homology now depends on the three parameters @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . We set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and when continuing the calculation, as in the Chapter II, we obtain the
equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In this equation, @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are the
functions and constants of the homologous model, given in the Chapter V;
the function @xmath and the constant @xmath are unknown.

The boundary conditions are only:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which tells us that the stars of the population 2 escape when they reach
the boundary of the cluster.

Near the center, on the other hand, we can neglect the last terms of
(6.7) in a first order approximation, and use the asymptotical
expressions (4.6) and (4.7c) for @xmath and @xmath ; the equation
becomes:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant. The equation (6.10) is as
expected: indeed, it shows that the Maxwellian equilibrium is realised
in the central region of the cluster between the two populations.

#### 6.1.1 The @xmath case

This functional form for @xmath has a strange consequence. The mass of
the subset of stars of the population 2 whose energy is below @xmath is,
from (2.40a):

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.137)
  -- -- -- ---------

i.e., when switching to normalized variables, and then to the canonical
variables,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is given near the center by (4.7c), i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When using this form and (6.10), we immediately see that the integral
(6.12) diverges if

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In other words, in this case, the mass of the population 2 is infinite,
because of a too rapid increase of the distribution function (and of the
density) toward the center.

This anomaly is easy to explain. We have assumed in (6.2) that @xmath is
always negligible with respect to @xmath ; however, when comparing the
asymptotical forms (4.6) and (6.10) of these two functions, we can see
that when @xmath is greater than unity, @xmath increases faster than
@xmath for @xmath , and that, a value of @xmath below which @xmath
becomes larger than @xmath always exists, however small the constant
@xmath . This critical value is (from Equations 2.31b and 6.5)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the formula (6.13) for @xmath is only meaningful when @xmath . On
the contrary, for @xmath , @xmath becomes negligible with respect to
@xmath . Then, we can obtain the new forms of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
by using (6.10) and the fundamental equations. In particular, we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

[ T.N. : The @xmath subscript is missing in the original version.] and
with this correct form, the integral (6.12) does not diverge anymore.
The quantity @xmath yields a maximum in the vicinity of @xmath and
exponentially decreases in both sides. We can compute the mass @xmath in
an approximate way by assuming that @xmath is given by (6.16) when
@xmath and by (6.13) when @xmath ; we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath does not depend on @xmath anymore; indeed, because of the form of
@xmath , almost all the stars of the population 2 have an energy of the
order of magnitude of @xmath , therefore are part of @xmath for @xmath .

We focus here on the extreme case where the population 2 is negligible
with respect to the population 1; therefore @xmath must be very small
compared to unity. For @xmath , (6.15) shows that @xmath . This way, we
obtain the following result: the stars whose mass is greater than @xmath
times the mean mass are almost all gathered near the center of the
cluster . Obviously, this conclusion is related to the simplified mass
distribution that we have adopted, and should not be extended without
further study to the case of an arbitrary mass distribution.

We also notice that @xmath is not proportional to @xmath : the power of
@xmath in (6.17) is less than unity. As a consequence, for @xmath , the
last term of the equation (6.7) decreases slower than the others, which
are proportional to @xmath . In the limit, the equation becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let’s divide all the terms of (6.7) by @xmath ; the last term is then,
for @xmath , an indeterminate form @xmath . Let @xmath be its value;
@xmath is a new constant yet to be determined, which replaces @xmath .

#### 6.1.2 Expansion near the center

Substituting in the equation for the expansions (4.35c), (4.36a),
(4.37), we get, after some calculations, the expansion of @xmath near
the center. For @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally, for the special case @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

#### 6.1.3 Method of solution

Equation (6.7) is integrated from the center toward the boundary. The
initial conditions are given by one of the expansions (6.19) to (6.21).
The value of the factor @xmath does not matter here; in practice, one
sets @xmath . Proceeding by trial and error, we find the value of the
parameter @xmath or @xmath for which the condition (6.8) is fulfilled at
the boundary.

### 6.2 Results: structure

The calculation has been done for several values of the relative mass
@xmath . The value of the parameter is given in Table 2 , column 2 or 3.
Figure 8 plots the ratio of the distribution function @xmath to its
asymptotical form @xmath . This ratio tends toward unity when @xmath
goes to @xmath ; toward the boundary, it becomes smaller and smaller,
which expresses the discrepancy between the real distribution and a
Maxwellian distribution ⁷ ⁷ 7 Spitzer & Harm ( 1958 ) have computed
these functions in a simpler case: the structure of the cluster was
supposed to remain constant and was represented by a constant potential
inside the cluster, zero outside; furthermore, the distribution function
@xmath of the main population was supposed to be Maxwellian. The curves
obtained by these authors have some similarities with ours but are
arranged in reverse order! This peculiarity is probably linked to the
too rough approximation made to the potential. .

Figure 9 and Table 3 give, for several values of @xmath , the product
@xmath of the projected density and the radius, as a function of the
radius; we will see in the Chapter VIII that this function is the one
that best allows for a comparison with the observations. The factors
have been adjusted so that all the curves cross at the same point:
@xmath for @xmath . The values of @xmath are given in the last row of
Table 3 .

For @xmath , we naturally retrieve the distribution of the homologous
model; near the center, the quantity @xmath tends toward a constant (see
Equation 5.9). For @xmath , it tends toward zero; for @xmath , it tends
to infinity. Toward the boundary, the curves tend to become parallel.

### 6.3 Escape rate

From the formula (6.11) we find out that the total mass @xmath of the
population 2 is proportional to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a consequence, the relative escape rate of the stars of the
population 2 is given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is given in Table 2 column 4, and plotted in Figure 10 as a
function of @xmath . From (6.18), we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, in our simplified model, the stars more massive than @xmath
time the mean mass do not escape .

Between @xmath and @xmath , the escape rate decreases regularly, as one
would expect. The very low-mass stars ( @xmath ) escape about 3.5 times
faster than the mean-mass stars.

The escape rates computed by Chandrasekhar ( 1942 ) and by Spitzer &
Harm ( 1958 ) , normalized so that they all take the same value for
@xmath , are also plotted in Figure 10 . We can see that the three
curves are very different, especially for the low masses. This shows
strikingly the lack of rigor of the cluster theory, in its present
state.

It is quite obvious, however, that the less massive stars must escape
faster. The fact that the curve from Chandrasekhar yields a maximum and
then decreases for the low-mass stars is due to excessive
simplifications. Indeed, in his computation he assumes that the stars
must first adopt a Maxwellian distribution (and thus, high velocities
for the low-mass stars), before being able to escape. In reality, as we
have seen, the stars escape almost as soon as they have reach their
escape velocity.

Previous works (van den Bergh 1957 ; Takase 1960 ) used the escape rate
provided by Chandrasekhar to calculate the initial mass function of open
clusters from their present-day mass function; it would be advisable to
do these calculations again with a more exact escape rate. In
particular, the abnormal lack of low-mass stars, found by Takase in the
initial distribution of the Pleiades, is likely to disappear.

### 6.4 Approximation in the general case

We are going to show that the results obtained above in the case of the
very special mass distribution (6.1) allow us to solve in an approximate
way the general case of any mass distribution.

In general, the distribution function takes the form (2.4): @xmath . Let
@xmath be the number of stars of the cluster whose mass is between
@xmath and @xmath ; we easily derive (see Equations 2.38 and 2.40)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath depends on @xmath and also on @xmath , because of the escape.

The total number of stars and the total mass are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.151)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The mean mass and the quadratic mean mass are defined by means of the
classical formulae:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.152)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This done, let’s consider the fundamental equations (2.6) and (2.22). We
can switch the order of integration with respect to @xmath and @xmath .
Then, we notice that @xmath can be removed if we introduce the two
functions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.153)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

@xmath and @xmath are “mean distribution functions”, obtained by
weighting in two ways the distribution functions corresponding to the
different values of the mass. To come back to equations already solved,
we have to make an approximation: we suppose that theses two mean
distribution functions are similar up to a factor. In this case, the
equations (6.24) and (6.26) show that @xmath and @xmath must be
proportional to @xmath and @xmath respectively, and thus we set

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.154)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

When using these expressions in the fundamental equations, they become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.155)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The other two fundamental equations, (2.7) and (2.19), do not involve
the mass, and thus are not modified. We now define the normalized
variables by means of transformations, slightly different from (2.24):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.157)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We easily check that, this way, we retrieve the equations (2.25) which
have been obtained for the case of equal mass stars. (The equation 6.30
must be multiplied by @xmath and integrated.) As a consequence, the
structure of the cluster, given by the functions @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , is that of the homologous model, and the mean distribution
function @xmath , introduced in (6.28), also matches that of the
homologous model.

Furthermore, when setting

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and replacing @xmath with @xmath , we find that the equation (6.30)
transforms into (6.3), i.e. the equation obtained at the beginning of
this Chapter for the simplified model. It follows that the detailed
distribution function @xmath is represented, for the different masses,
by the solutions @xmath of the simplified model taking (6.32) into
account.

From the previous relation, we note that @xmath is the relative mass
computed by considering the mass unit to be, not the mean mass @xmath ,
but rather

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is different, in practice, by a factor greater than 2 (see
Equation 8.9, below).

Finally, we note that the transformation equations (2.41) and (2.47)
must be replaced with:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.160)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

## 7 Approach of the homologous model

In this Chapter, we are back to the hypothesis of equal masses, and we
are going to try to extend the results of the homologous model in
another direction: we will study the evolution of a cluster whose shape
is close to those of the homologous model, but not identical. We will
first consider the case of a cluster that differs from the homologous
model because its central density is finite; then the case of a cluster
with infinite central density but with differences in the global
structure. In both cases, the calculation will only be approximate.
Finally, the results will be combined to draw a general picture of the
evolution of the cluster.

### 7.1 Formation of the central singularity

Let’s consider a cluster that matches the homologous model everywhere,
except in a small central region, where it differs so that its central
density is finite. The central potential is then also finite; let’s call
it @xmath . Near the center, the radius @xmath is proportional to @xmath
; From (5.2d), we easily derive that @xmath is proportional to @xmath .
If we assume that the distribution function @xmath also remains finite
in the center, we find that @xmath is proportional to @xmath near the
center. It will be useful, for the next calculations, to have a formula
for @xmath as simple as possible; therefore, we define a simplified
model by means of the following conditions: below a given value @xmath ,
@xmath is proportional to @xmath ; above this value, it is as the
homologous model. In addition, the function and its derivative must be
continuous for @xmath (Figure 11 ). These conditions translate into:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.161)
     @xmath   @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We now suppose that the formula (7.1) is valid not only initially, but
always, although the central potential @xmath is a function of the time.
Thus the evolution of the cluster consists in two phenomena that
overlap: the normal homologous evolution, and the variation of the
structure of a small central region. We will see that the latter can
quite easily be computed when considering the fluxes of mass and energy
toward the center of the cluster.

The partial mass of the stars whose energy is less than @xmath is, for
the model considered here (see Equation 2.42)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the homologous model, this mass would be, from (4.10b)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, the mass of the stars whose energy is greater than @xmath
is the same for both models. The difference of mass between the present
model and the homologous one is therefore

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the same way, we compute the total energy of the stars whose [ T.N. :
individual] energy is less than @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.165)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

thus,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The definition (7.1) of the model is partly arbitrary. One can redo the
calculations above for other definitions (for example, when supposing
that @xmath rather than @xmath is represented by a parabola near the
center); we note that the results are always

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.167)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are two numerical constants, the values of which
are slightly different from one model to the other. In the present case,
we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.168)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

By computing the derivative of (7.7) with respect to time, we obtain the
fluxes of mass and energy toward the center:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.169)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

These fluxes are related, through the equations (4.31), to the factors
@xmath and @xmath that appear in the expansion (4.14) of @xmath . It is
more handy to write this expansion as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.170)
  -- -------- -- ---------

by setting

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.171)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Then, we obtain the relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.172)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, we have seen in Chapter V that the boundary conditions
require two relations for the parameters of the model. In the case of
the homologous model, @xmath is zero, and the other two parameters
@xmath and @xmath are determined uniquely. Here, there are three
parameters: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the boundary
conditions require, after canceling of @xmath , a relation between
@xmath and @xmath . As the models considered here are close to the
homologous one, @xmath is slightly different from zero, and we can
assume that the relation is linear, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.173)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the value taken by @xmath in the homologous model, and
@xmath is a constant.

To find this constant, two models have been computed with a non-zero
@xmath . The procedure is as in Chapter V, but the initial condition
(5.3c) has to be replaced with (7.10); the other initial expansions
have, of course, to be modified accordingly. While doing this, we assume
that the first order expansions (4.7) are still valid; indeed these new
models differ significantly from the homologous model only in the small
central region, i.e. for very small values of @xmath or @xmath . Near
the boundary, the modification only affects the second order terms in
the expansions, as visible for example in (7.10).

The results about the relation between @xmath and @xmath are:

  @xmath         @xmath   
  -------- ----- -------- --------
  0              -0.      938464
  -0       .01   -0.      931757
  -0       .1    -0.      87028

( @xmath corresponds to the homologous model; the value obtained here is
slightly different from that of Chapter V, Equation 5.4a, because of a
larger integration step). We verify that these figures match well a
linear relation of the type (7.13) with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.174)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When combining the relations (7.12) and (7.13), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This differential equation allows to compute the variation of the
central potential @xmath as a function of time, and thus to solve our
problem. Its explicit solution is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.176)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant. This relation is plotted in Figure 12 . We
first note that the central potential @xmath decreases with time, which
corresponds to an increase of the central density, and to getting closer
to the homologous model. Furthermore, this decrease gets faster and
faster, so that the central potential becomes @xmath after a finite
timelapse: the cluster reaches the structure of the homologous model at
a given time @xmath , and keeps it afterwards.

Substituting (7.15) into (7.9), we obtain the explicit expressions of
the fluxes near the center:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.177)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The flux of mass is first positive and then decreases; it becomes zero
at the time @xmath and remains null afterwards. The flux of energy is
always negative; its absolute value is first decreasing; at @xmath , it
reaches the value of -0.6464, that its keeps afterwards (see 5.22a).
These results confirm the reasoning made in Chapter IV.

At the beginning of its life, the cluster is likely not very
concentrated; let’s assume that @xmath has initially the largest value
allowed by (7.15), i.e. @xmath . By assuming that @xmath at the initial
time, we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.178)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is, in canonical variables, the time needed to form the central
singularity.

### 7.2 Proper differences

We now suppose that the central density has already become infinite, but
that the cluster as a whole has not completely reached the final state
represented by the homologous model.

Let @xmath be the distribution function of the homologous model; the
distribution function of the cluster considered here would be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.179)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is small with respect to @xmath . @xmath is time-dependent.
In the same way, we set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.180)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The function @xmath is assumed to be in the usual canonical form,
defined by (4.6). The parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , would all
have slightly different values than those of the homologous model:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.181)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The cluster obeys the relations (5.2) and (5.3), as soon as the terms
including time derivatives, which were zero for the homologous model
(see Equations 2.37e, 2.53, 3.12 and 3.13), are put back in (5.2e) and
(5.2f). These equations become

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By substituting the expressions (7.19) to (7.21) into the previous
equations, and neglecting the second order terms, we obtain a set of
linear equations that have the dimensions of @xmath , @xmath , etc., and
their derivatives with respect to time. We know that the general
solution of such a system is (unless a degeneracy exists) a linear
combination of particular solutions of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.183)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , … do not depend on the time, and @xmath is a
constant, real or complex. As in the classical terminology, we shall
call such a solution proper difference , and @xmath , the associated
proper value [ T.N. : eigenvalue]. By substituting (7.23) into the
equations, and dividing by @xmath , we obtain a system that is
independent of time, but which involves a new parameter: @xmath .

#### 7.2.1 Method of solution

In practice, instead of writing and solving the system of equations of
@xmath and @xmath , etc …, it is easier to keep the equations of @xmath
, @xmath , etc …, to compute a slightly different model from the
homologous one by means of these equations, and to obtain the
differences by simply computing the differences between the values of
the two models. The differences should not be too large (so that the
second order terms are indeed negligible), nor too small (so that one
can get them with a sufficient accuracy); experiment led us to fix the
amplitude of these differences by setting

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.184)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Taking into account that the device we use computes with 8 significant
digits, we can obtain the differences with a precision of the order of
1/1000.

Hence, the system to solve is as (5.2) and (5.3), as soon as (5.2e) and
(5.2f) are replaced with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and when (7.24) is added.

The method of solution is an extension of the one used for the
homologous model (Chapter V):

1.  choose a value for @xmath ;

2.  choose a temporary form for the function @xmath that satisfies
    (5.3a) and (5.3c), with @xmath set by (7.21) and (7.24);

3.  compute @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ;

4.  adopt temporary value for @xmath and @xmath , and integrate (7.25);

5.  re-do after changing @xmath and @xmath , until the final conditions
    (5.3a) and (5.3b) are fulfilled;

6.  go back to point 3 with the new function @xmath ;

7.  when two consecutive approximations of @xmath are equal: compute the
    right-hand side term of (7.26). It is not zero in general. Modify
    the value of @xmath , go back to point 2; grope around this way with
    @xmath until (7.26) is true.

The computation is quite long, because of the trial and error required
on three parameters: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ; that is why we limited
ourselves to the exact computation of the proper differences
corresponding to the two smallest proper values @xmath . (We will see
later that the possible values of @xmath are real, positive and form a
discrete series.) These differences are the most interesting in
practice, because they are those which decay the slowest. The other
differences will be treated in a more approximate way later in this
Chapter.

#### 7.2.2 Results: first proper difference

We find that the smallest proper value is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.187)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The differences @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath of the four
fundamental functions and the projected density are given in Table 4 .
The differences of the parameters and the characteristic quantities are:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.188)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

Figure 13 compares the projected densities of the usual homologous model
( @xmath ) with those of the homologous model modified by the first
proper difference; here we have set @xmath so that the difference is
well-visible. (As for its amplitude, the sign of @xmath is arbitrary; we
could have chosen a negative @xmath ; in this case, the difference with
the homologous model would have been in the opposite sense.) We see that
the difference mostly affects the external regions of the cluster: the
first proper difference mainly consists in a variation of the external
radius of the cluster . The structure of the internal region differs
little; the total mass and kinetic energy vary much less than the
radius, as shown by the values (7.28).

This is naturally explained by the fact that the perturbations between
the stars are more efficient in the center of the cluster, where the
density is higher; as a consequence this region becomes close to the
final state, represented by the homologous model, earlier.

#### 7.2.3 Results: second proper difference

The second proper value is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.189)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We only give the differences of the parameters:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.190)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

The profile of the projected density (not shown here) shows that the
second proper difference, like the first one, mostly consists in a
variation of the external radius.

### 7.3 Stability of the homologous model

Up to now, we have implicitly assumed that the clusters naturally tend
toward the homologous model. For this to be true, the model has to be
stable, i.e. any difference with respect to this model is decreasing. On
the other hand, the stability of the homologous model, if demonstrated,
will be, if not a rigorous proof, at least a very strong clue that the
model is indeed the final state toward which all clusters tend.

For the homologous model to be stable, it is necessary and sufficient
that all the proper values @xmath yield a positive real part. Thus, we
are going to study the complete family of the proper values @xmath ,
thanks to a very approximate calculation, yet sufficient for the goal we
seek.

We first assume that the central expansion (4.34) of @xmath is valid up
to @xmath . (This approximation, as all which will follow, has been
suggested and checked by the exact computation of the first two proper
functions.) Hence, for @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.191)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Between @xmath and @xmath , we consider the exact equation (7.25). By
calculating the derivative of this equation, neglecting the terms in
@xmath and @xmath (because @xmath vanishes at the boundary), replacing
(7.19) etc …, and subtracting the equation of the homologous model, we
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

[ T.N. : The upper limit of the first integral is missing in the
original version]

Furthermore (7.26) becomes, when neglecting the term in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.193)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The expansions (4.35) show that we have, near the center,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.194)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We shall suppose that these expressions are valid up to the boundary. In
(7.32), we can neglect the second and the fourth terms, because the
integrals do not change much. We also neglect the terms in @xmath , as
they are small with respect to @xmath . By taking @xmath from (7.33) and
substituting it in (7.32), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally, we neglect the term in @xmath , whose factor is relatively
small, and the term in @xmath . The equation shrinks to:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.196)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are two functions of @xmath . This is a second
order differential equation for @xmath ; it must fulfill the boundary
conditions (7.31), as well as the condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.197)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These three conditions would be simultaneously fulfilled only for
certain values of @xmath , which are the proper values we seek.

The numerical computation of the functions @xmath and @xmath shows that
they can be quite well fitted, in the range (-1,0), with the expressions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.198)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

By replacing this in (7.36), we find that the general solution of this
equation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are two arbitrary constants, and @xmath , @xmath
are the roots of the equation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.200)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.201)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

By writing the boundary conditions (7.31) and (7.37) for the formula
(7.39), and then eliminating @xmath and @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.202)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The equations (7.41a) and (7.42) make a system of equations for @xmath
and @xmath that can be solved numerically. We do not give the details of
this solution, which is long but without difficulty; we find that @xmath
and @xmath are necessarily of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.203)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is real, and @xmath . The possible values of @xmath
constitute an infinite series; the first ones are given in the table
below, as well as the corresponding values of @xmath , found from
(7.41b).

  @xmath         @xmath   
  -------- ----- -------- -----
  1        .21   1        .22
  3        .82   7        .47
  5        .43   14       .6
  8        .28   33       .2
  9        .91   47       .3
  12       .8    78       .3
  14       .4    99       .6
  17       .3    143      
  18       .9    171      
  21       .8    227      

That is, all the proper values @xmath are real and positive; therefore,
the homologous model is stable , and it is likely the final state toward
which all the clusters tend.

The fact that @xmath never yields an imaginary part shows that the
clusters tend toward the homologous model through a simple “relaxation”,
with no oscillations.

The first two values of @xmath are in rough agreement with the exact
values (7.27) and (7.29); the differences are not surprising, given the
great number of approximations we made.

Note that the values of @xmath increase very fast which shows indeed
that only the first values are interesting, in practice; the next ones
corresponds to differences that vanish very quickly.

Finally, we note that these results allow us to define rigorously the
“relaxation time” for the entire cluster: this would be the time
required for the amplitude of the first proper difference to be divided
by @xmath .

### 7.4 General picture of the evolution

We have identified three distinct evolutionary phenomena:

1.  the normal homologous evolution;

2.  the formation of the central singularity;

3.  the decrease of the differences.

We are now going to compare their timescales.

The normal homologous evolution can be illustrated through the variation
of the total mass given by (5.15) and plotted as a straight line on
Figure 14 . The cluster disappears after a time @xmath given in (5.13):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.204)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The formation of the central singularity can be seen as the variation of
@xmath , difference in mass with respect to the homologous model. This
variation is given in (7.7a) and (7.16), in homologous variables; we
switch to non-homologous variables by means of (5.12) and (5.15). The
resulting curve is plotted in Figure 14 (for all the curves of this
figure, the mass or the mass difference is normalized with respect to
its own value at @xmath ).

We immediately see that the formation of the central singularity is
relatively rapid: it ends at the time @xmath , computed from (7.18) and
(5.12):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.205)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and thus occurs for only the first sixth of the lifetime of the cluster.

Finally, the decrease of the proper differences will also be represented
as variations of the mass differences. In homologous variables, we have,
from (7.23),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.206)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we switch back to non-homologous variables by means of (5.12) and
(5.15), which gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.207)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This variation is plotted in Figure 14 , for the first two proper
differences. We see once more, that the decrease of the differences is
rapid with respect to the homologous evolution.

In reality, the three evolutionary phenomena overlap. The initial
amplitude of the differences with respect to the homologous model cannot
be determined in the framework of this theory; it could only be found
thanks to a detailed study of the formation and the initial phases of
the evolution (see Chapter IX). However, there is no reason for the
initial state of the cluster to already be close to the homologous
model, and thus the initial differences in the various quantities are
likely of the same order of magnitude as the quantities themselves.
Therefore, we can suppose that the curves of Figure 14 , normalized to
unity for @xmath , roughly represent the relative importance of the
various effects.

The evolution of a cluster can be describe in a broad outline as
follows: the central density first increases, faster and faster;
simultaneously, the differences with respect to the homologous model
decrease everywhere in the cluster. After a time @xmath , the central
density has became infinite; the remaining difference is practically
limited to the first proper difference; the cluster has only lost 1/6 of
its mass, through escapes. Then, the first proper difference continues
to decrease; after a time @xmath , it has almost vanished; the cluster
takes the form of the homologous model and keeps it until it disappears,
at the time @xmath .

We will see in the next Chapter how these results can be used to
estimate the age of globular clusters.

## 8 Application to globular clusters

We are going to compare the theoretical results from the previous
Chapters to observational data of globular clusters. The first goal of
this comparison is to check that the theory is compatible with the facts
(but this would not be a proof of the correctness of the theory, for the
reasons detailed in Chapter I); the comparison will give us information
that is out of reach of the direct observation, in particular about the
mass-luminosity relation and the age of the clusters.

### 8.1 Artificial cluster

In order to get a concrete picture of the theoretical model, an
“artificial cluster” has been built by calculating the spacial
coordinates of the stars, from a table of random numbers, so that it
reproduces the density law of the homologous model. More precisely, let
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath be three random number, taken between 0 and 1,
with an uniform probability density function; the spherical coordinates
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath of the star are computed by means of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.208)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Figure 15 plots the two-dimensional projection of the cluster obtained.
The number of stars is 1320. The figure covers only a fraction of the
surface of the cluster (see the scale at the bottom of the figure), but,
however, contains all the stars; this is because the projected density
is extremely small in the external regions.

Figure 16 is a zoom-in on the central region of the cluster.

Globally, this artificial cluster resembles well the real clusters; the
similarity would not be perfect because the artificial cluster of Figure
15 corresponds to the case of equal masses, while the real clusters
yields an extended mass spectrum, of which we only observed the upper
end. The central condensation in Figure 16 is likely to be too high
(King 1961a ) .

### 8.2 Comparisons of the projected densities

A more precise comparison of the homologous model with real clusters can
be obtained when plotting the density profiles. It seems better to do
the comparison for the projected densities, and not the spacial
densities. Indeed, the theoretical curves can be obtained with an
arbitrary accuracy and going from the theoretical spacial density to the
theoretical projected density is errorless; on the contrary, going from
the observed projected density to the spacial density strongly amplifies
the errors, that were already not negligible. This is shown in Figure 17
where the spacial density of the cluster M3, derived from the
observations thanks to two different methods (Kholopov 1955 ; Oort & van
Herk 1959 ) is plotted.

Generally, it seems better to transform the observational data as little
as possible, therefore to compare theory and observations not at an
intermediate level, but rather at the very level of the observations.

We shall use, not the projected density itself, but its product with the
distance to the center: @xmath . This has several advantages:

1.  in the theoretical model (case of equal mass stars), this quantity
    tends to a finite value in the center, while the projected density
    becomes infinite.

2.  @xmath varies more slowly than the projected density (recall Figure
    5 and Figure 9 );

3.  the observations are often counts of stars in concentric rings of
    constant width. The number of stars in a ring is

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (8.209)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Because this function is smooth and does not yield a strong
    curvature, we can write

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (8.210)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    with:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (8.211)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    That is, the observed numbers @xmath immediately give, up to a
    factor, the values of @xmath .

#### 8.2.1 Projected density: star counts (M3)

Sandage ( 1954 , 1957a ) has made detailed counts of stars in the
cluster M3 = NGC 5272; the results have been published by Oort & van
Herk ( 1959 ) . These counts corresponds to the stars brighter than a
given magnitude, and situated in concentric rings. It would be
necessary, in principle, to derive the numbers of stars in successive
magnitude ranges by subtraction; however, attempts showed that this
strongly increases the spreading of the points, because the errors
accumulate, while the number decreases. Furthermore, because the
luminosity function rapidly grows with the magnitude (see Sandage 1957a
) , the stars brighter than a given magnitude are almost all gathered in
a small range of magnitude, and thus all have similar masses (we assume
a well-defined mass-luminosity relation). It is therefore better and
allowed to accept that the observed numbers correspond, for each limit
in magnitude, to stars of a given mass.

That is, the points on Figure 18 mark the observed numbers of stars
brighter than a given magnitude @xmath , in rings of width 30” situated
at the mean distance @xmath from the center. These numbers must be
compared to the theoretical curves obtained in Chapter VI (Figure 9 ).
By trial and error, we find that the best match is obtained for

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.212)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We note that this gives out an external radius

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.213)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For each group, the curve is fitted, by playing with two parameters: the
relative mass @xmath , and factor @xmath , i.e. the number of stars in
the group; a variation of @xmath corresponds simply to a vertical shift
of the curve.

The values of @xmath and @xmath determined this way are given in Table 5
, columns 4 and 5. The curves are plotted in Figure 18 ; we see that the
agreement is as good as possible, given the accuracy of the
observations. Only the brightest stars are not well-retrieved near the
center of the cluster, which can easily be explained by two reasons: (1)
we have seen in Chapter VI that the simplified theoretical model is
likely to be wrong near the center, where it predicts a too high density
of massive stars; (2) the observation underestimates the number of stars
in the very populated central regions.

#### 8.2.2 Mass-luminosity relation of the stars

Table 5 , column 3, gives the mean absolute magnitude @xmath of each
group, computed from the luminosity function (Sandage 1957a ) . We
notice that the difference between this mean magnitude and the maximum
magnitude is never big, which confirms what has been said above.

The values of @xmath and @xmath allow us to plot the mass-luminosity
relation of the cluster (Figure 20 ); @xmath is proportional to the mass
@xmath of the stars, according to (6.32). The bolometric correction has
been uniformly taken equal to -0.1. In order to extend the relation as
much as possible for the faintest stars, we made an exception and
considered the group of stars whose magnitude is between 4.6 and 6.3 (in
the case of the narrower group @xmath , the dispersion of the points is
too large and we cannot plot a curve). This group is compared to the
closest theoretical curve in Figure 19 ; the parameters are given in the
last row of Table 5 .

The points in Figure 20 show a well-defined relation ⁸ ⁸ 8 von Hoerner (
1957 , Figure 8) has obtained a similar curve, from the same
observations, but with a different theoretical model. Our results
indicate a larger variation of the mass as a function of the luminosity.
. We observe a strong bend at @xmath , which corresponds exactly to the
bend in the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, and which marks the beginning
of the zone of rapid evolution of the stars; the stars with a magnitude
below 3 almost have all the same mass. The slight increase of the points
on the left-hand side is likely not real and comes from errors when
computing @xmath .

It is interesting to compare this mass-luminosity relation, deduced from
the purely mechanical considerations, to those provided by the stellar
evolution theory. Sandage ( 1957b , Table 6) has computed the relation
between the present-day magnitude and the initial magnitude of the stars
of M3, thanks to a semi-empirical method based on the observed HR
diagram and on the theoretical evolutionary tracks. We get the mass from
the initial magnitude, assuming that the initial mass-luminosity
relation is that of the main sequence, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.214)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This way, we get the present-day mass-luminosity relation, the solid
line on Figure 20 ; the two relations have been vertically shifted so
that their horizontal parts match.

The two curves are clearly in disagreement. The position of the bend is
more or less the same; but on the low luminosities end, the “dynamical”
masses decrease much faster than the mass found from the evolution.

It is hard to tell which curve is wrong. Neither is very reliable. The
finding of the dynamical masses relies on an approximate calculation
(Chapter VI), which may lead to large errors when (as is the case for
globular clusters) the mass spectrum is very broad. On the other hand,
the hypothesis stating that the initial mass-luminosity relation of the
cluster would match the main sequence, should be taken carefully,
because of different chemical abundances.

We will explore the possibilities of progress in the computation of the
dynamical masses in the last Chapter.

The adjustment of the vertical scales gives an interesting piece of
information: when compared to (6.32), we find that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.215)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This value can also be computed from the mass spectrum of the cluster.
From the initial luminosity function @xmath given by Sandage ( 1957a ,
Table 2 and Figure 2) and the mass-luminosity relation of Kuiper ( 1942
) , we obtain the initial mass spectrum. The present-day spectrum is
derived by assuming that all the stars heavier than @xmath have been
evolving down to this value through their transformation into white
dwarves. The effect of escape can be neglected. We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.216)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

in very good agreement with the value (8.8).

This previous finding is quite sensitive to the mass chosen for the
white dwarves, @xmath [ T.N. : The subscript @xmath stands for naine
blanche : white dwarf.]. For @xmath , we find @xmath ; for @xmath , we
find @xmath . The comparison of the two findings seems to confirm that
the white dwarves have the limit mass of Chandrasekhar, @xmath .
However, here again, the uncertainties of the theory and of the
determination of the mass spectrum question the validity of this
conclusion.

#### 8.2.3 Projected density: brightness measurements (47 Tuc)

Gascoigne & Burr ( 1956 ) have obtained the curves of projected density
of the clusters 47 Tucanae and @xmath Centauri from a photometric
method. The disadvantage of this procedure is to provide only the total
brightness, without distinguishing the stars of different magnitudes;
however, it allows for a precise measurement of the density from the
center of the cluster up to quite remote distance.

The case of @xmath Centauri will be studied later. Figure 21 plots the
observed values for 47 Tuc = NGC 104 and the closest theoretical curve,
which corresponds to:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.217)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The external radius is then:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.218)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The value of @xmath found here can been seen as a particular “mean
mass”, obtained by weighting the stars proportionally to their
luminosity. It is only slightly lighter than the mass of the heaviest
stars ( @xmath from the results obtained for M3) which contribute to the
major part of the total brightness.

Figure 21 shows good agreement (the small systematic deviations of the
points from the theoretical curve can be explained: the data of
Gascoigne & Burr does not directly come from observations, but has
rather been read on a smoothed curve). Near the center, the theoretical
curve is too high, for reasons already listed in relation to M3.

Gascoigne & Burr have measured the total luminosity in a series of
circles of small radius around the center of the cluster. For each
circle, we can compute the mean value of @xmath , by using (8.3), with
@xmath ; the crosses on Figure 21 mark the value obtained. We clearly
see that @xmath tends toward a well-defined central value. This seems to
be a good confirmation of the shape predicted by the theory near the
center, and in particular of the fact that the central density is
infinite ⁹ ⁹ 9 However, King ( 1961b ) has observed the central region
of several clusters in detail and concluded that a high but finite
central density exists.

### 8.3 Mass-radius relation

The relation (3.7) links the mass of a cluster with its radius and the
mean value of the negative curvature of the galactic field along its
orbit. Unfortunately, the exact motions of the globular clusters in the
Galaxy are unknown; the radial velocities can be measured with a good
precision (Mayall 1946 ; Kinman 1959 ) , but the proper motions stand at
the limit of the observational possibilities, and have been obtained for
9 clusters only (Gamalej 1948 ) , with a low precision. It seems even
not possible to know wether the orbits of the clusters are in average
rather radial or circular (von Hoerner 1955 ; Kurth 1960 ) . That is why
we will consider the curvature of the galactic field to be the same for
all the clusters, for want of anything better.

The radius and the mass of the globular clusters should be linked, at
least approximately, through a relation like (3.8). We are going to
check this using observational data. To limit the effect of
observational errors, we will only use a series of homogeneous
observations, done by the same author, under the same circumstances.

The distances have been taken from Kinman ( 1958 ) . In order of
preference, we take the distances derived from the position of the main
sequence, from the magnitude of the variable stars, or from the
magnitude of the 25 brightest stars. If none of these three estimates
exists, the cluster is not considered.

Christie ( 1940 ) made very precise measurements of the apparent
magnitudes of the clusters. From them, we derive the absolute
photographic magnitudes @xmath ; the possible effect of absorption is
cancelled, because the distances themselves are derived from the
apparent magnitudes of the stars.

Then, we assume that the ratio of the total mass to the total luminosity
is the same for all the globular clusters; by taking the mass estimate
of M3 by Sandage ( 1957a ) as reference, we find that the mass @xmath of
a cluster is given as a function of its absolute magnitude @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.219)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is confirmed by the study of Zeliakh ( 1957 ) who, after a detailed
discussion on several clusters, arrived at a quite similar value for the
constant: 1.94 instead of 2.00.

Finally, we take the apparent external radii measured by Shapley & Sayer
( 1935 ) ; they appeared to be more precise that those published more
recently by Mowbray ( 1946 ) . To derive the real radii, we should, in
principle, use the distances corrected for absorption. However, as
indicated by Shapley & Sayer ( 1935 ); Shapley ( 1949 ) , absorption
induces two opposite effects: an overestimate of the distance and an
underestimate of the apparent radius. A quantitative study shows that
these two effects balance each other almost exactly (Parenago, Kukarkin,
& Floria 1949 ; Lohmann 1952 ) . Therefore, we can completely neglect
the possible existence of absorption. For that matter, this is very
fortunate because the absorption is not quite well known.

Table 6 gives the list of the 35 clusters for which the three
measurements exist, with their mass (in solar masses), and their radius
(in parsecs). The mass-radius diagram is plotted in Figure 22 : we see
that, despite the dispersion of the points, a defined relation arises.
The main source of error comes from the estimation of the external
radius, which is difficult to observe precisely; this error alone is
enough to explain the dispersion of the points, and it is even
remarkable that it does not induce a larger dispersion. (This shows the
quality of the measurements of Shapley & Sayer; if one uses the radii
from Mowbray 1946 , the dispersion is much larger.)

In addition, the small dispersion justifies the hypothesis of constant
curvature of the galactic field for all the clusters.

The largest error being on @xmath , we shall compute the means in the
horizontal direction. This way, we find that the data points are well
fitted with the relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.220)
  -- -------- -- ---------

i.e.,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.221)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in agreement with the theoretical formula (3.8).

The isolated point in the bottom-left corner of the figure is NGC 4147.
This cluster is easily distinguishable from the others; Shapley & Sayer
qualify it as “abnormal”. The point on the top-right corner is @xmath
Cen, also abnormal, as we will see later.

#### 8.3.1 Correction of the external radii

The observed external radius is, in fact, systematically smaller than
the real radius. Indeed, the projected density decreases very rapidly
toward the outskirts and becomes very small long before reaching the
boundary of the cluster. This clearly appears in the artificial cluster
of Figure 15 : a direct estimate of the radius of this cluster, from its
aspect, gives a value of the order of 0.6 times the real radius, and
this without any background effect. Table 1 indicates that only 3% of
the total mass of the cluster is situated (in projection) beyond half of
the radius. That is, even without absorption, the radius may be
underestimated by a ratio of about 1/2. A good confirmation of this
value can be obtained in the case of the two clusters studied above: for
M3 and 47 Tuc, the observed radii are 11’ and 28.2’, i.e. 0.49 and 0.53
times the real radii derived from the theory and the projected density
profiles, and given in (8.6) and (8.11), respectively. Furthermore,
there is no absorption for these clusters.

Thus, we will systematically make a correction, assuming that the real
radii are twice as large as the observed radii , given by Shapley &
Sayer. As a consequence, the relation (8.14) must be replaced with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.222)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This relation between the mass and the real external radius is plotted
in Figure 22 as a dashed line. All the observed radii stand on its left
side, as expected.

#### 8.3.2 Curvature of the galactic field

When comparing (3.7) and (8.15), we find the mean curvature of the
galactic field for the clusters:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (8.223)
  -- -- -- ---------

For comparison, we can compute the curvature in the solar neighborhood;
it derives from the Oort’s constants @xmath and @xmath (the numerical
values are taken from Allen 1955 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.224)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The mean curvature of the galactic field for the globular clusters is
thus about 3 times smaller than in the solar neighborhood. This result
is plausible, because the clusters travel in average at a quite long
distance from the center of the Galaxy, and not in its plane. A more
detailed comparison of the value (8.16) with the known structure of the
Galaxy would be interesting, but is out of the scope of this work.

### 8.4 Evolution

Knowing the mass @xmath and the radius @xmath of a real cluster, we can
compute the parameters @xmath and @xmath of the homology, using the
transformation relations (6.31b), (6.34a), (2.32c), (2.43a). We get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.225)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This allows us to go from any quantity of the homologous model to the
corresponding physical quantity, using the transformation formulae
(2.31), (2.32), (2.43), (2.48), (6.31) and (6.34). In particular, we
obtain:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.226)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This relation gives the time scale of the evolution of the cluster,
because @xmath is, as we have seen (Chapter V), a parameter that
measures the level of evolution of the cluster, while @xmath is the real
time. @xmath and @xmath are given in (5.5). We use the value @xmath
found from the observation of M3 (Equation 8.8). The factor @xmath does
not vary much for the different globular clusters; we use the typical
value @xmath . Finally, the radius is linked to the mass through (8.15),
found from the observations. Thus, we find the very simple relation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.227)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is in years and @xmath in solar masses.

(6.22) provides the escape rate of the stars of given mass, which also
reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.228)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that @xmath is the number of stars whose mass is between @xmath
and @xmath . @xmath is given in Table 2 and can be fitted with the
relation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.229)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, we can compute the variation of the total mass, by using (6.25b),
(6.32) and (6.26). We find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.230)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We note that this result does not depend on the mass function.

When comparing with (8.20), the mass @xmath cancels, and we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.231)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus: the mass of a globular cluster decreases by @xmath per billion
years ; this rate is almost the same for all the globular clusters, and
it also remains constant with time. The simplicity of this result is to
be noted.

In fact, the rate is not exactly constant. The term @xmath changes with
time, which would lead to slight slowdown of the evolution near the end.
On the other hand, the term @xmath increases because the lightest stars
escape faster. This effect is opposite to the previous one and likely
stronger. For example, in the cluster M3 which is still at the beginning
of its evolution, the value observed is @xmath ; near the end of its
evolution (in about @xmath ), only the heaviest stars will remain and we
will get @xmath , thus a multiplication of the evolution rate by a
factor 1.8.

### 8.5 Mass function of the globular clusters

The evolution law of the masses of the globular clusters partially sets
the present-day mass distribution of these masses. We are going to see
whether a confirmation of (8.24) can be obtained this way.

From the apparent magnitudes and the apparent distance moduli provided
by Lohmann ( 1952 ) for 94 clusters, we compute the absolute magnitudes
and then the masses using (8.12).

The mass function we obtain is plotted in Figure 23 , using the dotted
line on the left-hand side. The two most massive clusters are off the
figure: M2 and @xmath Cen of masses @xmath and @xmath . We must also
investigate the effect of observational selection. By looking at the
apparent magnitudes @xmath of the clusters, we see a clear upper limit
at @xmath ; we assume that this value marks the highest observable
magnitude. As a consequence, the clusters of given absolute magnitude
@xmath are observed only if their apparent distance modulus is smaller
than @xmath . That is, we can compute, for each value of @xmath , the
observable fraction of the clusters, as soon as we know the distribution
of clusters as a function of the apparent modulus. This distribution
(that we assume to be independent of the absolute magnitude) is easily
found thanks to the brightest clusters, for which observational
selection does not play any role.

The solid line in Figure 23 is the corrected mass function. It can be
fitted with a smooth curve. In particular, we note that this curve takes
a finite value for @xmath . But if we assume that all the globular
clusters formed in the past and that no more are born now; and if the
evolution of the masses is as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.232)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can easily find that the present-day mass function must be
proportional to @xmath near the origin [ T.N. : i.e. for @xmath ].
Therefore, this mass function must be zero for @xmath if @xmath is
negative, and become infinite if @xmath is positive; it can take a
finite value only if @xmath . Therefore, the observed mass function
seems to confirm the evolution law (8.24).

The validity of this point is slightly weakened because it relies on the
number of the least massive clusters, that are the least well observed;
but we can argue that the correction for observational selection (Figure
23 ) is not very important; the conclusion would have been the same
without the correction.

Note also that (8.25) is not fanciful but in fact covers all the
evolutionary models already studied by several authors. The formulae of
Chandrasekhar ( 1943b , c ) assume @xmath ; the model from King ( 1958b
) corresponds to @xmath and the similar model of von Hoerner ( 1958 ) to
@xmath .

The evolution formula (8.24) translates into a simple shift of the mass
function toward the left; or alternatively, into a shift of the
zero-mass toward the right. The upper axis of Figure 23 indicates the
position of this zero-mass at different times, past and future. In
particular, the [ T.N. : vertical] dashed line on the left-hand side
marks the position of the zero-mass point at the time of birth of the
clusters, assuming it occurred @xmath ago (see the next Section). By
extrapolating the observed curve a little, we obtain the initial mass
function. We find that about 62 globular clusters have disappeared since
the origin of the galaxy. Nowadays, one cluster disappears every @xmath
, in average. Every cluster that has survived has lost @xmath as
escaping stars since its birth. For all the clusters, the mass of the
escapers since their birth is: @xmath .

In the future side, we find that half of today’s clusters will be gone
in @xmath ; but the most massive ones will survive much longer: @xmath
Centauri will reach @xmath .

Up to now, we have neglected the phenomenon of gas ejection by the
massive stars. von Hoerner ( 1958 ) showed that this phenomenon is only
relevant at the beginning of the life of the cluster: 30% of the initial
mass is lost in the gaseous form within the first billion years, then
only 6% during the next @xmath . The results obtained above are
therefore valid, as soon as we put aside the initial evolutionary phase,
lasting about one billion years.

### 8.6 Age of the globular clusters

When a cluster reaches the homologous state, any sign of its past (in
particular its initial structure and its age) is lost. That is, one
should specially care about the clusters that still show significant
differences with the homologous model. According to the theory (see
Equation 8.20), the most massive clusters are those which evolve the
slowest, therefore, those where the largest differences should remain.
That is, we are interested in @xmath Centauri, the most massive of all
globular clusters.

But precisely, @xmath Centauri yields a peculiar structure, very
different from those of the other clusters. The difference already
arises as its concentration class in Shapley’s classification is VII,
while all the other high luminosity clusters lie in classes I to V. The
difference is even more visible in the work of Gascoigne & Burr ( 1956 )
who observed @xmath Cen and 47 Tuc under the same circumstances. The
Table II and the Figure 2 from these authors perfectly show that the
light from a small circle of radius @xmath surrounding the center of the
cluster is proportional to @xmath in the case of @xmath Cen, and to
@xmath for 47 Tuc. In other words: in 47 Tuc, the projected density goes
as @xmath near the center; but in @xmath Cen, it is almost constant. The
central density of @xmath Cen is finite .

The theoretical interpretation comes immediately: 47 Tuc has already
reached the stage in its evolution where the central density becomes
infinite; @xmath Cen, being more massive, has not reached it yet. (It
seems to be the only globular cluster in this case.)

This confirms the theory, and we now have a simple way of estimating the
age of the clusters. When comparing (2.32e), (7.44), (7.45) and (8.20),
we find that the time required for the infinite central density to
appear is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.233)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is in years, @xmath is the initial mass of the cluster and
@xmath its mass at the time when the infinite central density appears.
The present-day masses of 47 Tuc and @xmath Cen, obtained as in the
previous Section, are: @xmath and @xmath . We conclude that the age of
these clusters (assuming it is the same) must be between

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.234)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, the most recent estimates of the age of the globular
clusters from the stellar evolution theory (Sandage 1961 ) are

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath      (8.235)
     @xmath      @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

That is, two completely independent methods lead to values in agreement
for the age of the globular clusters. This result is very encouraging,
both for the theory of the dynamical evolution of the clusters and for
the theory of stellar evolution. It also emphasizes the discrepancy
underlined by Sandage ( 1961 ) between the ages of the globular clusters
and the recent models of an expanding Universe.

According to theory, @xmath Cen should have more differences with
respect to the homologous model; the first proper difference should
still exist with a non negligible amplitude. We have seen (see Figure 13
) that this difference affects mostly the external radius. And we
precisely note that that the radius of @xmath Cen is far too large,
given its mass (Figure 22 ).

Finally, the strong ellipticity of @xmath Cen is likely the remnant of
an initial difference from spherical symmetry, that has not enough time
to vanish yet.

## 9 Conclusions

We are going to summarize the major results obtained in this work, and
then list the directions in which it would be good to develop the
research, in order to improve the theory and extend the range of its
applications.

### 9.1 Results obtained

By making two hypotheses: (1) isotropy of the velocities and (2) equal
masses, we have obtained the system of equations (2.25), which,
supplemented by the right boundary conditions, allows us to compute the
evolution of a cluster from a given initial state. We have looked for an
homologous solution, i.e. a model that remains self-similar, the
evolution being limited to the scaling of the various physical
quantities; we have found that this model exists and is unique. Its mass
and its radius are finite. The projected density matches the
observations as much as their precision allows. Near the center, the
homologous model yields unexpected properties: the central density and
the central potential are infinite; a continuous flux of negative energy
goes toward the center where it is absorbed by the formation of multiple
stars. Furthermore, the escape of stars through the boundary of the
cluster leads to a linear decrease of the total mass with time.

Then, we have supposed that the main population of the cluster is mixed
with a second population, much less numerous, of stars with a different
mass, and we have computed the distribution of this secondary population
and its escape rate. These results allow for an approximate solution in
the case of any mass function. By comparing with the observations, we
obtain in particular the approximate mass-luminosity relation of the
stars in clusters.

Finally we have studied the evolution of clusters close to the
homologous model. We found that if the central density is finite, it
rapidly increases and becomes infinite after a certain time. Generally,
any difference with the homologous model decreases with time; a cluster
becomes almost identical to the homologous model after the first third
of its lifetime. In particular, these results lead to an estimate of the
age of the globular clusters.

### 9.2 Desirable improvements and extensions

1.  The most debatable hypotheses of the present model is indubitably
    the isotropy of the velocities. We could, as a first step, make the
    distribution function more general by adding an anisotropic term,
    small compared to the main term; this would allow us to quantify the
    error made when using the isotropy hypothesis. In a more ambitious
    second step, we would eliminate any restriction for the distribution
    function @xmath ; but in this case, the equation of local evolution
    would become extremely complex (see Rosenbluth, MacDonald & Judd
    1957 , Equation 31).

2.  In the study of the approach to the homologous model made in
    Chapter VII, we assume that the cluster is already similar enough to
    the homologous model that we can linearize the equations of the
    differences. It would be very interesting to also study the
    evolution of clusters far from the homologous model; this would
    allow us to describe the beginning of the evolution of a cluster,
    from a given initial state. To do so, we would have to come back to
    the real [ T.N. : physical] variables and directly solve (2.25), by
    computing step by step the successive forms taken by the cluster in
    time ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 A similar calculation has been done, in the much
    simpler case of a homogeneous plasma, by MacDonald, Rosenbluth &
    Wong ( 1957 ) . . The results could be applied to a detailed
    explanation of the structure of @xmath Cen and to a precise estimate
    of its age. They would also allow for a more rigorous demonstration
    of the statement that clusters tend toward the homologous model,
    whatever their initial state is.

3.  The previous paragraph implies the knowledge of the initial state of
    the clusters, therefore the building of a more or less approximate
    theory for the formation of the clusters and the initial phase
    during which the steady state is established. We could assume, for
    example, that the protocluster is an homogeneous sphere with a
    density slightly higher than the critical density (therefore,
    favoring a contraction), with negligible internal velocities. The
    evolution equations for this initial phase would be completely
    different from those we have considered here; on the one hand, the
    steady state is not reached and thus the distribution function does
    not only depend on @xmath and @xmath , and on the other hand,
    because this phase is very short, the effect of perturbations can be
    neglected. Fortunately this implies that there is no need for the
    knowledge of the time of formation of the stars.

4.  The hypothesis of equal mass stars is likely to be far from reality.
    In Chapter VI, we have obtained a more general solution but at the
    cost of a quite arbitrary approximation. Hence, we should extend the
    investigations to the case of any mass function. But then a big
    difficulty appears: the escape rates of the stars of different
    masses not being the same, their relative importance always changes
    and the structure of the cluster varies too; as a consequence a
    homologous solution cannot exist . In other words, if one introduces
    the mass as an additional variable, one must also consider the time
    variable, and the complexity of the calculations is suddenly hugely
    increased.

    There are two possibilities to overcome this. First, we could seek a
    better model than the homologous one, that would allow us to
    separate the time variable; this model would necessary count, in
    addition to the two dimensional parameters, one or more other
    parameters depending on time. Second, the mass function could be
    initially described as a sum of [ T.N. : Dirac’s] @xmath
    distributions. The simplest case of the sum of two @xmath
    distributions (i.e. a cluster made of the mix of stars of two
    different masses, in any proportion), would already be a great
    improvement and would allow us to estimate the actual effect of a
    spread of masses.

5.  We have only considered the value @xmath of the power of the
    radius-mass relation (3.11), with the perspective of globular
    clusters. The calculations could be re-done with different values of
    @xmath , and in particular, with @xmath , which correspond to the
    isolated cluster, and seems to better fit the cases of galaxies and
    galaxy clusters. The other values of @xmath do not seem to
    correspond to existing objects, but could be useful to describe some
    intermediate states.

6.  The hypothesis of spherical symmetry is valid for most of the
    clusters; but some are clearly elliptical. Furthermore, we could
    foresee the application of the models to other objects (see point 8
    below). Thus, we should study the non-spherical models. The
    ellipticity can originate from a global rotation; a first
    approximation would consider that the rotation is small and only
    implies a correction term. We would likely find a model similar to
    the homologous one, but slightly flattened. It would be particularly
    interesting to find whether the escaping stars take away a little or
    a lot of angular momentum, and thus, if the flattening increases or
    decreases.

    We should also study the case of an angular momentum distribution
    without spherical symmetry, but still with no global rotation. Such
    an asymmetry would probably decrease, with a relaxation time of the
    same order as those found in Chapter VII for the radial differences.

    Finally, it would be good to consider the effect of the asymmetry in
    the galactic field (see Chapter III). But this effect is likely not
    so important for the applications, because it only affects the
    external regions, which are invisible because of their very low
    density (King 1961a ) .

7.  From the observational side, it seems that much remains to be done.
    Accurate counts per luminosity class, as those made by Sandage for
    the cluster M3, would be very useful for other clusters.
    Furthermore, errors could probably be reduced by repeating the
    counts for several photographs of the same cluster. ( Tayler 1954
    noted big differences between the plates obtained with two different
    telescopes.)

    The comparisons of accurate observation with a sufficiently
    elaborated theory would particularly allow for:

    -   a precise physical determination of the mass-luminosity
        relation; to push this relation as far as possible toward the
        low luminosities, one should particularly study the closest
        clusters. In the future, space observatories would allow us to
        reach much higher magnitudes;

    -   an estimate of the age of the clusters, and perhaps information
        about their formations, when analyzing the differences between
        the present-day structure of the clusters and their theoretical
        final structure. However, these differences are small for most
        of the clusters, so that this analysis would require a high
        precision for the observations. One should start with the most
        massive clusters, where the largest differences remain;

    -   a study of the galactic field and of the orbits of the globular
        clusters.

8.  Here, we have only focussed on globular clusters. The models
    obtained could be applied to other objects: galactic clusters [ T.N.
    : star clusters in the disk of the galaxy, as opposed to the
    globulars that are further away in the halo], elliptical galaxies
    and cores [ T.N. : central, spherical regions] of spiral galaxies,
    galaxy clusters. But in every case, difficulties appear, making the
    application of the theory more doubtful or more complex. That is, we
    think that the theory should first focus on describing properly the
    relatively simple case of globular clusters (which it is still far
    from doing) before extending its ambitions to more involved
    problems.

    The galactic clusters would be extremely interesting, for many
    reasons: being closer, less massive stars are visible there; their
    ages are not all the same and thus we can observe all the phases of
    the dynamical evolution; and it is possible to measure individual
    velocities. Unfortunately, there are two major difficulties: the
    number of stars is small, so that statistical fluctuations forbid an
    accurate estimate of the projected density and of the other
    quantities; and above all, as Spitzer ( 1958 ) showed, the evolution
    of the cluster is largely influenced by passages near interstellar
    clouds.

9.  Finally, we note some minor issues: the enhancement of the
    computation of the perturbations between the stars; the study of the
    accumulation of central energy as multiple stars and the final
    evolution of the cluster (see the end of Chapter V); the influence
    of the motion of the cluster within the galaxy on the escape of
    stars (this could be simplified as a three-body problem: galactic
    center, cluster, star).

One sees that there is no shortage of work. Stellar dynamics is a rising
science, where almost everything remains to be done. It looks today much
more like a collection of isolated attempts than like a homogeneous
doctrine. These attempts have only led to isolated results, with limited
range; the major problems, far from being solved, have remained almost
untouched.

As we have seen, the issues do not arise from a poor knowledge of the
physical mechanisms involved, but only from the complexity of the
calculations. But today, a new, extremely powerful, weapon exists to
overcome this kind of issues: the electronic computers. That is, we
think that stellar dynamics should now leave the relative state of
neglect where it has been left and spark off the interest and the
long-term efforts of a growing number of researchers. It seems worthless
to underline the importance of the results that could be obtained: the
understanding of the collective dynamical phenomena is directly linked
to the solving of the major cosmogonical and cosmological problems, and
thus to our understanding of the Universe. We hope that the present
essay, although it has a very limited scope, will contribute to the
illumination of the new perspectives and give to others the wish to
explore them.

## Acknowledgments

My acknowledgements go to Prof. A. Danjon, director of the Institut
d’Astrophysique; to Prof. E. Schatzman, my supervisor from whose
teaching I got the initial idea of this work, and who always encouraged
and helped me; to Messieurs L. Malavard and J.F. Denisse, who accepted
to be my research sponsors; to J. Arsac, who created and organized the
Service de Calcul Numérique de l’Observatoire de Meudon and taught my
colleagues and myself the computational techniques on an electronic
device; to the staff of this department, as well as the Bureau de Calcul
de l’Institut d’Astrophysique, to Mrs Hernandez, Mrs Lagorce, Messieurs
Charbey and de Postel, who assisted me for the technical realization of
this work.

List of the main notations

The number is those of the equation where the notation is used first.

  -------- ------ -------- ------ -------- ------ -------- ------ -------- ------ -------- ------
  @xmath   2.9    @xmath   2.23   @xmath   5.5    @xmath   2.19   @xmath   2.1    @xmath   5.1
  @xmath   2.2    @xmath   2.31   @xmath   2.39   @xmath   2.24   @xmath   2.24            
  @xmath   2.36   @xmath   6.1    @xmath   2.1    @xmath   2.32   @xmath   2.32   @xmath   4.3
  @xmath   2.36   @xmath   6.5    @xmath   2.41   @xmath   2.7    @xmath   2.3    @xmath   4.3
  @xmath   6.6    @xmath   2.12   @xmath   2.43   @xmath   2.8    @xmath   2.32   @xmath   2.31
  @xmath   6.10   @xmath   4.26   @xmath   3.12   @xmath   2.13   @xmath   3.5    @xmath   2.31
  @xmath   2.24   @xmath   4.31   @xmath   2.51   @xmath   2.24   @xmath   3.1    @xmath   6.5
  @xmath   2.32   @xmath   4.33   @xmath   2.45   @xmath   2.32   @xmath   7.1    @xmath   6.22
  @xmath   2.47   @xmath   7.10   @xmath   2.38   @xmath   3.12   @xmath   5.7    @xmath   3.11
  @xmath   2.48   @xmath   4.7    @xmath   3.3    @xmath   7.23   @xmath   2.3    @xmath   6.4
  @xmath   2.2    @xmath   2.41   @xmath   I      @xmath   2.27   @xmath   2.1    @xmath   2.5
  @xmath   2.31   @xmath   2.43   @xmath   6.24   @xmath   2.32   @xmath   2.1    @xmath   2.46
  @xmath   2.2                    @xmath   6.21                   @xmath   2.1             
  -------- ------ -------- ------ -------- ------ -------- ------ -------- ------ -------- ------

The symbol @xmath indicates the derivation with respect to @xmath or
@xmath .

The subscript @xmath corresponds to the values taken by the quantities
at the boundary of the cluster.

The symbols in capital letters ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , …) generally
represent the “normalized variables”; the bold font ( @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , …) represent the “canonical variables” (see Chapter II).
