My thesis deals with a fundamental question of high energy gamma-ray
astronomy. Namely, I studied the cut-off shape of the Crab pulsar
spectrum to distinguish between the leading scenarios for the pulsar
models.

Pulsars are celestial objects, which emit periodic pulsed
electromagnetic radiation (pulsation) from radio to high energy
gamma-rays. Two major scenarios evolved in past 40 years to explain the
pulsation mechanism: the inner magnetosphere scenario and the outer
magnetosphere scenario. Both scenarios predict a high energy cut-off in
the gamma-ray energy spectrum, but with different cut-off sharpness. An
exponential cut-off is expected for the outer magnetosphere scenario
while a super-exponential cut-off is predicted for the inner
magnetosphere scenario. Therefore, one of the best ways to confirm or
rule out these scenarios is to measure the energy spectrum of a pulsar
at around the cut-off energy, i.e., at energies between a few GeV and
a few tens of GeV. All past attempts ( @xmath ) to measure pulsars with
ground-based instruments have failed while satellite-borne detectors had
a too small area to study detailed spectra in the GeV domain.

In this thesis, the gamma-ray emission at around the cut-off energy from
the Crab pulsar is studied with the MAGIC telescope. The public data of
the satellite-borne gamma-ray detector, Fermi -LAT, are also analyzed in
order to discuss the MAGIC observation results in comparison with the
adjacent energy band.

In late 2007, a new trigger system (SUM trigger system) allowed to
reduce the threshold energy of the MAGIC telescope from 50 GeV to 25 GeV
and the Crab pulsar was successfully detected during observations from
October 2007 and January 2009. My analysis reveals that the energy
spectrum is consistent with a simple power law between 25 GeV to 100
GeV. The extension of the energy spectrum up to 100 GeV rules out the
inner magnetosphere scenario.

Fermi -LAT started operation in August 2008. The Fermi -LAT data reveal
that a power law with an exponential cut-off at a few GeV can well
describe the energy spectrum of the Crab pulsar between 100 MeV and 30
GeV. This is consistent with the outer magnetosphere scenario and again,
inconsistent with the inner magnetosphere scenario.

The measurements of both experiments strongly disfavor the inner
magnetosphere scenario. However, by combining the results of the two
experiments, it turns out that even the standard outer magnetosphere
scenario cannot explain the measurements. Various assumptions have been
made to explain this discrepancy. By modifying the energy spectrum of
the electrons which emit high energy gamma-rays via the curvature
radiation, the combined measurements can be reproduced but further
studies with higher statistics and a better energy resolution are needed
to support this assumption.

The energy-dependent pulse profile from 100 MeV to 100 GeV has also been
studied in detail. Many interesting features have been found, among
which the variabilities of the pulse edges and the pulse peak phases are
the most remarkable. More data would allow an investigation of the fine
structure of the pulsar magnetosphere based on these features.

Aiming at better observations of pulsars and other sources below 100
GeV, a new photosensor, HPD R9792U-40, has been investigated. Many
beneficial properties, such as a very high photodetection efficiency, an
extremely low ion-feedback probability and an excellent charge
resolution have been found.
