## Acknowlegments

I would like to thank my advisor Felix Schlenk for his support troughout
this work and the opportunity to complete this project. Furthermore I
thank Frédéric Bourgeois, Urs Frauenfelder, Agnès Gadbled and Alexandru
Oancea for valuable discussions. I also thank Will Merry and Gabriel
Paternain for having pointed out to me that the methods used in the
proof of Theorems A and B can also be used to prove Theorem C.

## Introduction

Let @xmath be a smooth closed manifold and denote by @xmath the
cotangent bundle over @xmath endowed with its usual symplectic structure
@xmath where @xmath is the Liouville form. A hypersurface @xmath is said
to be fiberwise starshaped if for each point @xmath the intersection
@xmath of @xmath with the fiber at @xmath is starshaped with respect to
the origin @xmath . There is a flow naturally associated to @xmath ,
generated by the unique vector field @xmath along @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The vector field @xmath is called the Reeb vector field on @xmath and
its flow is called the Reeb flow . The main result of this thesis is to
prove that the topological structure of @xmath forces, for all fiberwise
starshaped hypersurfaces @xmath , the existence of many closed orbits of
the Reeb flow on @xmath . More precisely, we shall give a lower bound of
the growth rate of the number of closed Reeb-orbits in terms of their
periods.

The existence of one closed orbit was conjectured by Weinstein in 1978
in a more general setting.

###### Weinstein conjecture.

A hypersurface @xmath of contact type and satisfying @xmath carries a
closed characteristic.

Independently, Weinstein [ 47 ] and Rabinowitz [ 36 ] established the
existence of a closed orbit on star-like hypersurfaces in @xmath . In
our setting the Weinstein conjecture without the assumption @xmath was
proved in 1988 by Hofer and Viterbo, [ 26 ] . The existence of many
closed orbits has already been well studied in the special case of the
geodesic flow, for example by Gromov [ 24 ] , Paternain [ 33 , 34 ] and
Paternain–Petean [ 35 ] . In this thesis we will generalize their
results.

The problem at hand can be considered in two equivalent ways. First, let
@xmath be a smooth Hamiltonian function such that @xmath is a regular
level of @xmath . Then the Hamiltonian flow @xmath of @xmath is
orbit-equivalent to the Reeb flow. Therefore, the growth of closed
orbits of @xmath equals the growth of closed orbits of the Reeb flow.
Secondly, let @xmath be the cosphere bundle over @xmath endowed with its
canonical contact structure @xmath . The contact manifold @xmath is
called the spherization of @xmath . Our main results are equivalent to
saying that for any contact form @xmath for @xmath , i.e. @xmath , the
growth rate of the number of closed orbits of the Reeb flow of @xmath in
terms of their period depends only on @xmath and is bounded from below
by homological data of @xmath .

##### The free loop space

The complexity of the Reeb flow on @xmath comes from the complexity of
the free loop space of the base manifold @xmath . Let @xmath be a @xmath
-smooth, closed, connected Riemannian manifold. Let @xmath be the free
loop space of @xmath , i.e. the set of loops @xmath of Sobolev class
@xmath . This space has a canonical Hilbert manifold structure, see [ 28
] . The energy functional @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . For @xmath we consider the sublevel sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath be the set of prime numbers and write @xmath . For each
prime number @xmath denote by @xmath the field @xmath , and write @xmath
. Throughout, @xmath will denote singular homology and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the homomorphism induced by the inclusion @xmath . Following [ 20 ] we
make the

###### Definition.

The Riemannian manifold @xmath is energy hyperbolic if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is closed, the property energy hyperbolic does not depend
on @xmath while, of course, @xmath does depend on @xmath . We say that
the closed manifold @xmath is energy hyperbolic if @xmath is energy
hyperbolic for some and hence for any Riemannian metric @xmath on @xmath
.

We also consider the slow growth of the homology given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the component of a loop @xmath in @xmath and by @xmath
the component of contractible loops. The components of the loop space
@xmath are in bijection with the set @xmath of conjugacy classes in the
fundamental group @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each element @xmath denote by @xmath the infimum of the energy of a
closed curve representing @xmath . Let @xmath , and define

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that @xmath and @xmath do not depend on the metric @xmath and that
@xmath .

##### Fiberwise starshaped hypersurfaces in @xmath

Let @xmath be a smooth connected hypersurface in @xmath . We say that
@xmath is fiberwise starshaped if for each point @xmath the set @xmath
is the smooth boundary of a domain in @xmath which is strictly
starshaped with respect to the origin @xmath . This means that the
radial vector field @xmath is transverse to each @xmath . We assume
throughout that @xmath . Then @xmath has two components, the bounded
inner part @xmath containing the zero section and the unbounded outer
part @xmath , where @xmath denotes the closure of @xmath .

##### Formultation of the results

Let @xmath be as above and denote by @xmath the Reeb flow on @xmath .
For @xmath let @xmath be the set of closed orbits of @xmath with period
@xmath . We measure the growth of the number of elements in @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The number @xmath is the exponential growth rate of closed orbits, while
@xmath is the polynomial growth rate . The following three theorems are
the main result of this thesis.

###### Theorem A.

Let @xmath be a closed, connected, orientable, smooth manifold and let
@xmath be a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface. Let @xmath be the Reeb
flow on @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be defined
as above. Then

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath .

We will say that @xmath is generic if each closed Reeb orbit is
transversally nondegenerate, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem B.

Let @xmath be a closed, connected, orientable smooth manifold and let
@xmath be a generic fiberwise starshaped hypersurface. Let @xmath be the
Reeb flow on @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be
defined as in section 1.1 . Then

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath .

The hypothesis of genericity of @xmath will be used to achieve a
Morse-Bott situation for the action functional that we will introduce.

The idea of the proofs is as follows. Let @xmath be a fiberwise
starshaped hypersurface. If @xmath is the level set of a Hamiltonian
function @xmath , then the Reeb flow of @xmath is a reparametrization of
the Hamiltonian flow. We can define such a Hamiltonian by the two
conditions

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

This Hamiltonian is not smooth near the zero section, we thus define a
cut-off function @xmath to obtain a smooth function @xmath . We then use
the idea of sandwiching develloped in Frauenfelder–Schlenk [ 19 ] and
Macarini–Schlenk [ 29 ] . By sandwiching the set @xmath between the
level sets of a geodesic Hamiltonian, and by using the Hamiltonian Floer
homology and its isomorphism to the homology of the free loop space of
@xmath , we shall show that the number of 1-periodic orbits of @xmath of
action @xmath is bounded below by the rank of the homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

induced by the inclusion @xmath .

The Hamiltonian Floer homology for @xmath is not defined, since all the
periodic orbits are degenerate. We thus need to consider small
pertubations of @xmath . In the proof of Theorem A, we will add to
@xmath small potentials of the form @xmath . Assuming @xmath for @xmath
, we will show the existence of a periodic orbit of @xmath in every
non-trivial conjugacy class as the limit of periodic orbits of @xmath .
This strategy cannot be applied for Theorem B. We thus use the
assumption of genericity to achieve a Morse–Bott situation following
Frauenfelder [ 18 , Appendix A] and Bourgeois–Oancea [ 7 ] and use the
Correspondence Theorem between Morse homology and Floer homology due to
Bourgeois–Oancea, [ 7 ] , to obtain our result.

###### Remark.

A proof of rough versions of Theorems A and B is outlined in Section 4a
of Seidel’s survey [ 42 ] . Meanwhile, a different (and difficult) proof
of these theorems, with coefficients in @xmath only, was given by
Macarini–Merry–Paternain in [ 30 ] , where a version of Rabinowitz–Floer
homology is contructed to give lower bounds for the growth rate of
leaf-wise intersections.

##### Spherization of a cotangent bundle

The hyperplane field @xmath is a contact structure on @xmath . If @xmath
is another fiberwise starshaped hypersurface, then @xmath and @xmath are
contactomorphic. In fact the differential of the diffeomorphism obtained
by the radial projection maps @xmath to @xmath . The identification of
these contact manifolds is called the spherization @xmath of the
cotangent bundle @xmath . Theorem A and Theorem B gives lower bounds of
the growth rate of closed orbits for any Reeb flow on the spherization
@xmath of @xmath .

Special examples of fiberwise starshaped hypersurfaces are unit cosphere
bundles @xmath associated to a Riemmanian metric @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Reeb flow is then the geodesic flow. In this case, Theorem A is a
direct consequence of the existence of one closed geodesic in every
conjugacy classes. If @xmath is simply connected, Theorem B for geodesic
flows follows from the following result by Gromov [ 24 ]

###### Theorem (Gromov).

Let @xmath be a compact and simply connected manifold. Let @xmath be a
bumpy Riemannian metric on @xmath . Then there exist constants @xmath
and @xmath such that there are at least

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

periodic geodesics of length less than @xmath , for all @xmath
sufficiently large.

The assumption on the Riemannian metric to be bumpy corresponds to our
genericity assumption. Generalizations to geodesic flows of larger
classes of Riemannian manifolds were proved in Paternain [ 33 , 34 ] and
Paternain–Petean [ 35 ] .

The exponential growth of the number of Reeb chords in spherizations is
studied in [ 29 ] . Results on exponential growth rate of the number of
closed orbits for certain Reeb flows on a large class of closed contact
3-manifolds are proved in [ 10 ] .

##### The simply connected case

In [ 3 ] Ballman and Ziller improved Gromov’s theorem in the case of
simply connected Riemannian manifolds with bumpy metrics. They showed
that the number @xmath of closed geodesics of length less than or equal
to @xmath is bounded below by the maximum of the @xmath betti number of
the free loop space @xmath , up to some constant depending only on the
metric. Following their idea we shall prove the following

###### Theorem C.

Suppose that @xmath is a compact and simply connected @xmath
-dimensional manifold. Let @xmath be a generic fiberwise starshaped
hypersurface of @xmath and @xmath its associated Reeb vector field. Then
there exist constants @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath sufficiently large.

##### Two questions

-   We assume the hypersurface @xmath to be fiberwise starshaped with
    respect to the origin . Could this assumption be omitted? In the
    case of Reeb chords it cannot, see [ 29 ] .

-   The assumption on @xmath to be fiberwise starshaped is equivalent to
    the assumption that @xmath is of restricted contact type with
    respect to the Liouville vector field @xmath . Are Theorem A and
    Theorem B true for any hypersurface @xmath of restricted contact
    type?

The thesis is organized as follows: In Chapter 1 we introduce the
definitions and tools that we will use throughout this work. Chapter 2
provides the tool of sandwiching used here to compare the growth of
closed Reeb orbits with the growth of closed geodesics. In Chapter 3 we
recall the definition of Morse–Bott homology which is used in the proof
of Theorem B. In Chapter 4 we prove Theorem A, Theorem B and Theorem C.
In Chapter 5 we shall evaluate our results on several examples
introduced in Chapter 1.

In Appendix A we review some tools to prove the compactness of moduli
spaces introduced in section 2.3.1 . In Appendix B we recall the
definition of the Legendre transform. In Appendix C we give a proof of
the existence of Gromov’s constant, see Theorem 5 .

## Chapter 1 Definitions and Tools

In this chapter we introduce the definitions and tools that we will use
throughout this work. In section 1.1 we describe the free loop space
@xmath of a manifold @xmath and introduce topological invariant
measuring the topological complexity of the free loop space. Section 1.2
gives an overview of Hamiltonian dynamic on cotangent bundles and
fiberwise starshaped hypersurfaces. We discuss the relation between Reeb
orbits on a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface and the 1-periodic orbits
of a Hamiltonian flow for which the hypersurface is an energy level. In
section 1.3 we recall the definitions and properties of Maslov type
indexes introduced by Conley and Zehnder in [ 11 ] and Robbin and
Salamon in [ 37 ] .

### 1.1 The free loop space

Let @xmath be a connected, @xmath -smooth Riemannian manifold. Let
@xmath be the set of loops @xmath of Sobolev class @xmath . @xmath is
called the free loop space of @xmath . This space carries a canonical
structure of Hilbert manifold, see [ 28 ] .

The energy functional @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . It induces a filtration on @xmath . For @xmath , consider
the sublevel sets @xmath of loops whose energy is less or equal to
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The length functional @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, for @xmath we can consider the sublevel sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying Schwarz’s inequality

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with @xmath and @xmath we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where equality holds of an only if @xmath is parametrized by arc-length.

Denote by @xmath the connected component of a loop @xmath in @xmath .
The components of the loop space @xmath are in bijection with the set
@xmath of conjugacy classes of the fundamental group @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Counting by counting conjugacy classes in @xmath

Let @xmath be a path-connected topological space. Denote by @xmath the
set of conjugacy classes in @xmath and by @xmath the set of free
homotopy classes in @xmath . Given a loop @xmath we will denote its
based homotopy class in @xmath by @xmath and its free homotopy class in
@xmath by @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.1.1.

Let @xmath be a path-connected topological space and @xmath a base
point. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a bijection between the set of conjugacy classes in @xmath and the
set of free homotopy classes in @xmath .

Furthermore, if @xmath is a continuous map between based topological
spaces, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be two continuous maps. If @xmath is homotopic to @xmath then
@xmath is also freely homotopic to @xmath . Thus we get a well defined
map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

sending a based homotopy class @xmath to its free homotopy class @xmath
. Let @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider the homotopy @xmath defined by @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath
, meaning that @xmath is a free homotopy of curves from @xmath to @xmath
. Using @xmath , one can construct a free homotopy of loops between
@xmath and @xmath . As @xmath is based homotopic to @xmath it follows
that @xmath is free homotopic to @xmath and thus @xmath . Thus @xmath
descends to a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now consider a loop @xmath and take a continuous path @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath . Then @xmath is a continuous loop with base point @xmath
which is freely homotopic to @xmath . This implies that @xmath which
yields the surjectivity of @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath be two elements of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath a
free homotopy from @xmath to @xmath . Define @xmath by @xmath . Then
@xmath is homotopic to @xmath and thus @xmath and @xmath are conjugate.
This proves the injectivity of @xmath .

The naturality follows from the definition of @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

#### 1.1.1 Growth coming from @xmath

Consider the set @xmath of conjugacy classes of the fundamental group
@xmath . For each element @xmath denote by @xmath the infimum of the
energy of a closed curve representing @xmath . We denote by @xmath the
set of conjugacy classes whose elements can be represented by a loop of
energy at most @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The exponential and polynomial growth of the number of conjugacy classes
as a function of the energy are measured by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

#### 1.1.2 Energy hyperbolic manifolds

Recall that for @xmath , @xmath denotes the subset of loops whose energy
is less or equal to @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the set of prime numbers, and write @xmath . For each
prime number @xmath denote by @xmath the field @xmath , and abbreviate
@xmath . Throughout, @xmath denotes singular homology. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the homomorphism induced by the inclusion @xmath . It is well-known
that for each @xmath the homology groups @xmath vanish for all large
enough @xmath , see [ 4 ] . Therefore, the sums in the following
definition are finite. Following [ 20 ] we make the

###### Definition 1.1.1.

The Riemannian manifold @xmath is energy hyperbolic if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is closed, the property energy hyperbolic does not depend
on @xmath while, of course, @xmath does depend on @xmath . We say that
the closed manifold @xmath is energy hyperbolic if @xmath is energy
hyperbolic for some and hence for any Riemannian metric @xmath on @xmath
.

We will also consider the rational growth of the homology given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Fix a Riemannian metric @xmath and @xmath . It holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath , respectively @xmath , is a lower bound for @xmath ,
respectively @xmath .

#### 1.1.3 Examples

##### Negative curvature manifolds

Suppose our manifold @xmath carries a Riemannian metric of negative
curvature.

###### Proposition 1.1.2.

If @xmath posses a Riemannian metric @xmath of negative curvature, then
the component of contractible loops @xmath is homotopy equivalent to
@xmath , and all other components are homotopy equivalent to @xmath .

Using the result of the previous section, this yields

###### Corollary 1.

@xmath

###### Proof.

Consider the energy functional @xmath with respect to the metric @xmath
. It’s a Morse–Bott, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a submanifold of @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover its critical points are closed geodesics. Let @xmath be a
closed geodesic on @xmath . Then @xmath gives rise to a whole circle of
geodesics whose parametrization differ by a shift @xmath . We denote by
@xmath the set of such geodesics. Consider the following result of
Cartan [ 28 , Section 3.8] .

###### Theorem 1.

(Cartan) Let @xmath be a compact manifold with strictly negative
curvature. Then there exists, up to parametrization, exactly one closed
geodesic @xmath in every free homotopy class which is not the class of
the constant loop. @xmath is the element of minimal length in its free
homotopy clas. All closed geodesics on @xmath are of this type.

Thus @xmath has a unique critical manifold @xmath in every component
which is not the component of the constant loops. While the component of
the constant loop has as critical manifold @xmath the subspace of
constant loops. Moreover all the Morse indices are equal to zero.
Following [ 23 ] , one can resolve every critical submanifolds @xmath
into finitely many non-degenerate critical points @xmath corresponding
to critical points of a Morse function @xmath . The index of a
non-degenerate critical point @xmath is then given by the sum @xmath
where @xmath is the Morse index of @xmath with respect to @xmath and
@xmath the Morse index of @xmath with respect to the Morse function
@xmath .

Let @xmath be regular values of @xmath and @xmath of @xmath in @xmath .
Let @xmath be the corresponding non-degenerate critical points of
indices @xmath . Then Lemma 2 of [ 23 ] tells us that @xmath is
diffeomorphic to @xmath with a handle of index @xmath attached for each
non-degenerate critical point @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The
diffeomorphism can be chosen to keep @xmath fixed. Using the methods of
Milnor in [ 32 , Section 3] , we obtain that the component of the
contractible loop has the homotopy type of the space of constant loops
while every other component has the homotopy type of @xmath . ∎

Consider the counting function @xmath for periodic geodesics, where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proposition 1.1.2 tells us that in the negative curvature case, every
periodic geodesic correspond to an element of @xmath . Setting @xmath ,
we have the following equality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A lower bound for @xmath can be deduced from a result of Margulis.

###### Theorem 2.

(Margulis 1969 [ 31 ] ) On a compact Riemannian manifold of negative
curvature it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the topological entropy of the geodesic flow.

For a definition see [ 25 , 5 ] . Theorem 2 implies that for @xmath
large enough,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For example if @xmath is an orientable surface of genus @xmath and
constant curvature @xmath , then @xmath , see [ 5 , Section 10.2.4.1] ,
and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Products

###### Lemma 1.1.1.

Let @xmath be two manifolds. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Consider the map @xmath , sending the loop @xmath onto @xmath . ∎

We will show in section 5.2 that the product of two spheres @xmath has
@xmath .

##### Lie groups

Let @xmath be a compact connected Lie group, i.e. a compact, connected
smooth manifold with a group structure in which the multiplication and
inversion maps @xmath and @xmath are smooth.

The fundamental group @xmath of a connected Lie group @xmath is abelian.
In fact, considering the universal cover @xmath , the kernel of the
projection @xmath is then isomorphic to @xmath . This is a discrete
normal subgroup of @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath is a continuous map
@xmath . Since @xmath is connected and @xmath discrete, it is constant,
so @xmath for all @xmath . Hence @xmath is central in @xmath and in
particular, it is abelian. This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the component of the constant loop. For @xmath we
consider the sublevel sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Choose a constant loop @xmath representing @xmath and consider another
component @xmath of @xmath represented by a loop @xmath . Fix @xmath .
For @xmath we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is such that @xmath . Notice that @xmath is homotopic to
@xmath . Then the map @xmath , is a homotopy equivalence with homotopy
inverse @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Abbreviating @xmath and @xmath , we therefore have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , recall that @xmath denotes the infimum of the energy of a
closed curve representing @xmath and @xmath . Set @xmath . Since @xmath
is a homotopy equivalence, it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . We can estimate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Considering the homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

induced by the inclusion @xmath , we can look at the growth rates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows from the definitions of @xmath and @xmath that for a Lie
group,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 1.2 Cotangent bundles

Let @xmath be a smooth, closed manifold of dimension @xmath . Let @xmath
be the corresponding cotangent bundle, and @xmath the usual projection.
We will denote local coordinates on @xmath by @xmath , and on @xmath by
@xmath .
We endowed @xmath with the standard symplectic form @xmath where @xmath
is the Liouville form . The definition of @xmath does not depend on the
choice of local coordinates. It has also a global interpretation on
@xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath .
A symplectomorphism @xmath is a diffeomorphism such that the pullback of
the symplectic form @xmath is @xmath , i.e. @xmath .
An Hamiltonian function @xmath is a smooth function @xmath . Any
Hamiltonian function @xmath determines a vector field, the Hamiltonian
vector field @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath be a @xmath -smooth time dependent @xmath -periodic family of
Hamiltonian functions. Consider the Hamiltonian equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In local coordinates it takes the physical form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The solutions of ( 1.2 ) generate a family of symplectomorphisms @xmath
via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The 1-periodic solutions of ( 1.2 ) are in one-to-one correspondence
with the fixed points of the time-1-map @xmath . We denote the set of
such solutions by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A @xmath -periodic solution of ( 1.2 ) is called non-degenerate if
@xmath is not an eigenvalue of the differential of the Hamiltonian
@xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is time-independent and @xmath a non-constant @xmath -periodic
orbit, then it is necessarily degenerate because @xmath , @xmath , are
also @xmath -periodic solutions. We will call such an @xmath
transversally nondegenerate if the eigenspace to the eigenvalue @xmath
of the map @xmath is two-dimensional.

An almost complex structure is a complex structure @xmath on the tangent
bundle @xmath i.e. an automorphism @xmath such that @xmath . It is said
to be @xmath -compatible if the bilinear form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defines a Riemannian metric on @xmath . Given such an @xmath -compatible
almost complex structure, the Hamiltonian system ( 1.3 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The action functional of classical mechanics @xmath associated @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This functional is @xmath -smooth and its critical points are precisely
the elements of the space @xmath .

#### 1.2.1 Fiberwise starshaped hypersurfaces

Let @xmath be a smooth, connected hypersurface in @xmath . We say that
@xmath is fiberwise starshaped if for each point @xmath the set @xmath
is the smooth boundary of a domain in @xmath which is strictly
starshaped with respect to the origin @xmath .

A hypersurface @xmath is said to be of restricted contact type if there
exists a vector field @xmath on @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and such that @xmath is everywhere transverse to @xmath pointing
outwards. Equivalently, there exists a 1-form @xmath on @xmath such that
@xmath and such that @xmath is a volume form on @xmath . Our assumption
that @xmath is a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface thus translates to
the assumption that @xmath is of restricted contact type with respect to
the Liouville vector field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or, equivalently: the Liouville form @xmath defines a contact form on
@xmath .

There is a flow naturally associated with @xmath , generated by the
unique vector field @xmath along @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The vector field @xmath is called the Reeb vector field on @xmath , and
its flow @xmath is called the Reeb flow .

For @xmath let @xmath be the set of closed orbits of @xmath with period
@xmath . We measure the growth of the number of elements in @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The number @xmath is the exponential growth rate of closed orbits, while
@xmath is the polynomial growth rate .

#### 1.2.2 Dynamics on fiberwise starshaped hypersurfaces

Given a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface @xmath , we can define an
Hamiltonian function @xmath by the two conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This function is of class @xmath , fiberwise homogeneous of degree 2 and
smooth off the zero-section.

###### Lemma 1.2.1.

Let @xmath be a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface. If @xmath is the
level set of a Hamiltonian function @xmath , then the Reeb flow of
@xmath is a reparametrization of the Hamiltonian flow.

###### Proof.

The restriction of the 2-form @xmath to @xmath is degenerate and of rank
@xmath . Its kernel is therefore 1-dimensional. By definition of both
Reeb and the Hamiltonian vector fields, they also define this kernel
since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath , with a nowhere vanishing smooth function @xmath . ∎

The first condition in ( 1.4 ) thus implies that the Hamiltonian vector
field @xmath restricted to @xmath is a positive reparametrization of the
Reeb vector field. Consequently

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath and for a smooth positive function @xmath on @xmath .
In particular, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is smooth and positive. Since @xmath is compact, @xmath is
bounded from above, say @xmath . Thus for a fixed metric, the image of
any segment of length one is an orbit segment of length at most @xmath .
Hence the image of a segment of length at most @xmath has length less
than @xmath which for @xmath is less than @xmath . This yields that the
image of any periodic orbit of @xmath of period @xmath has period @xmath
. Thus, if we denote by @xmath the set of closed orbits of @xmath with
period @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The growth of the function @xmath is thus equal to the growth of @xmath

Now we want to establish a correspondence between @xmath -periodic
solutions of @xmath and closed orbit of @xmath on @xmath . Consider the
map @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define the vector field @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In local coordinates @xmath . Differentiating @xmath with respect to
@xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Differentiating @xmath with respect to @xmath at @xmath we get Euler’s
identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In view of @xmath and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath or equivalently @xmath .

Fix a @xmath -periodic solution @xmath of @xmath and define @xmath by
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose @xmath . Euler’s identity yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So if we set @xmath , then @xmath satisfies @xmath . Thus @xmath is a
closed orbit of period @xmath .

Conversely if @xmath is a closed characteristic, then @xmath for some
@xmath . Thus @xmath is a @xmath -periodic solution of @xmath and @xmath
.

We obtain that the map @xmath is a bijection between @xmath -periodic
solutions of @xmath with action @xmath and the closed orbits with period
@xmath .

#### 1.2.3 Spherization of a cotangent bundle

Let @xmath be a closed connected submanifold and @xmath a fiberwise
starshaped hypersurface in @xmath . The hyperplane field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a contact structure on @xmath . Consider another fiberwise starshaped
hypersurface @xmath . The radial projection in each fiber induces a map
@xmath such that for every @xmath , @xmath . Then the differential of
the diffeomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Thus @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath and hence is a
contactomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The induced identification of those contact manifold is called the
spherization @xmath of the cotangent bundle. The unit cosphere bundle
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

associated to a Riemannian metric @xmath on @xmath is a particular
representative.

Fix a representative @xmath . For every smooth positive function @xmath
, @xmath holds true. We can thus consider the associated Reeb vector
field @xmath on @xmath defined as the unique vector field such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have seen in the previous section that for @xmath any Hamiltonian
function @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath is a regular value, the Reeb
flow of @xmath is a time change of of the Hamiltonian flow @xmath
restricted to @xmath . Note that for a different function @xmath the
Reeb flows on @xmath can be completely different.

Given another representative @xmath , the associated contactomorphism
@xmath conjugates the Reeb flows on @xmath and @xmath , in fact

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This yields that the set of Reeb flows on @xmath is in bijection with
Hamiltonian flows on fiberwise starshaped hypersurfaces, up to time
change.

Theorem A and Theorem B thus give lower bounds for the growth rate of
closed orbits for any Reeb flow on the spherization @xmath of @xmath .

### 1.3 Maslov index

Consider @xmath endowed with its standard symplectic structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it’s standard complex structure

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the set of symplectic automorphisms of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by @xmath the space of Lagrangian subspaces of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by @xmath the vertical Lagrangian subspace @xmath .

#### 1.3.1 Maslov index for symplectic path

In [ 11 ] Conley and Zehnder introduced a Maslov type index that
associates an integer @xmath to every path of symplectic automorphisms
belonging to the space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following description is presented in [ 39 ] .

It is well known that the quotient @xmath is contractible and so the
fundamental group of @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath . This isomorphism
can be represented by a natural continuous map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which restricts to the determinant map on @xmath . Consider the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It holds that @xmath has two connected components

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, every loop in @xmath is contractible in @xmath .

For any path @xmath choose a function @xmath such that @xmath and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath choose a path @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Then
@xmath is independent of the choice of this path. Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Conley-Zenhder index of a path @xmath is define as the integer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following index iteration formula, proved in [ 39 ] , will be used
in section 4.2.1 .

###### Lemma 1.3.1.

Let @xmath be any path such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath . Moreover, @xmath for every @xmath .

#### 1.3.2 The Maslov index for Lagrangian paths

A generalization of the Conley–Zehnder index is due to Robbin and
Salamon in [ 37 ] . They associated a Maslov type index to any path
regardless of where its endpoints lie.

Let @xmath be a smooth path of Lagrangian subspaces. For each @xmath we
define a quadratic form @xmath on @xmath as follows. Take a Lagrangian
complement @xmath of @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath near @xmath define
@xmath by @xmath . Then @xmath is independent of the choice of @xmath .
Now fix a Lagrangian subspace @xmath and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Without loss of generality we can assume that @xmath has only regular
crossings with @xmath (this can be achieved by homotopy). Then the
crossing form @xmath is a nonsingular quadratic form whenever @xmath .

The Robbin–Salamon index of a path @xmath is defined as the half integer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the signature @xmath is the number of positive minus the number of
negative eigenvalues of the quadratic form.

If @xmath is a path of symplectic automorphisms, then the graphs of
@xmath , @xmath , form a path of Lagrangian subspaces in @xmath . The
Robbin–Salamon index of a path @xmath is defined as the half integer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the diagonal of @xmath . If @xmath , this index is equal
to the Conley–Zehnder index @xmath .

#### 1.3.3 Maslov index for periodic orbits

Let @xmath be a time dependent Hamiltonian. In order to define the
Maslov index of a @xmath -periodic solution of ( 1.2 ) we can proceed as
follows.

Let @xmath . Then the symplectic vector bundle @xmath admits a
symplectic trivialization @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

see [ 2 , Lemma 1.1] . By acting on the differential of the Hamiltonian
flow along @xmath , the trivialization @xmath provides a path in @xmath
,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , neither the Conley–Zehnder index @xmath , if well defined,
nor the Robbin–Salamon index @xmath depends on the symplectic
trivialization @xmath satisfying ( 1.5 ), for two such trivializations
are then homotopic.

We define the Maslov index of the @xmath -periodic orbit @xmath by
setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is non-degenerate, @xmath belongs to the set @xmath and thus
@xmath is an integer equal to @xmath . If @xmath is transversally
nondegenerate, @xmath and thus @xmath is not an integer.

## Chapter 2 Convex to Starshaped

In this chapter we follow the idea of sandwiching develloped in
Frauenfelder–Schlenk, [ 19 ] , and Macarini–Schlenk, [ 29 ] . By
sandwiching the set @xmath between the level sets of a geodesic
Hamiltonian, and by using the Hamiltonian Floer homology and its
isomorphism to the homology of the free loop space of @xmath , we shall
show that the number of 1-periodic orbits of @xmath of action @xmath is
bounded below by the rank of the homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

induced by the inclusion @xmath .

### 2.1 Relevant Hamiltonians

Let @xmath be a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface in @xmath . We can
define a Hamiltonian function @xmath by the two conditions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This function is of class @xmath , fiberwise homogeneous of degree 2 and
smooth off the zero-section. To smoothen @xmath choose a smooth function
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath will be fixed in section 2.2.1 . Then @xmath is smooth.

Recall that @xmath denotes canonical coordinates on @xmath . Fix a
Riemannian metric @xmath on @xmath , let @xmath be the Riemannian metric
on @xmath induced by @xmath , and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the following we will often write @xmath . Our sign convention in the
definitions of the symplectic form @xmath and the Hamiltonian vector
field ( 1.1 ) is such that the flow @xmath is the geodesic flow.

For @xmath we abbreviate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath is compact and that @xmath is fiberwise starshaped.
After multiplying @xmath by a constant, we can assume that @xmath .
Choose @xmath such that @xmath . Moreover we ask that @xmath on @xmath .

The Hamiltonian Floer homology for @xmath or @xmath is not defined since
all the periodic orbits are degenerate. As we shall consider multiples
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , we associate to them
the followings perturbations.

Fix @xmath . Choose @xmath .
We shall add to @xmath a perturbation @xmath such that

-   All 1-periodic solutions of @xmath are nondegenerate, and

-   @xmath ,

where @xmath .

We shall add to @xmath and @xmath a perturbation @xmath such that

-   All 1-periodic solutions of @xmath and @xmath are nondegenerate,

-   @xmath for some constant @xmath , where @xmath will be fixed in
    section 2.3.2 ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath on @xmath .

###### Remark 1.

We could add to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the same perturbation @xmath
such that all 1-periodic solutions are nondegenerate and @xmath .
However in the proof of Theorem B, the perturbations @xmath that we will
consider will not be potentials. Therefore we made this more general
choice of perturbations.

We alter @xmath near infinity to a perturbed Riemannian Hamiltonian.

Choose smooth functions @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we thus have in particular that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.2 Action spectra

The action spectrum @xmath of a proper Hamiltonian @xmath is the set of
critical values of the action functional @xmath , that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following proposition follows from [ 41 , Proposition 3.7] .

###### Proposition 2.2.1.

The action spectrum @xmath is the union of countably many nowhere dense
subsets of @xmath .

We now look at the action spectra of perturbed homogeneous Hamiltonians
of degree 2.

###### Lemma 2.2.1.

Let @xmath be fiberwise homogeneous of degree 2 and let @xmath be a
perturbation such that @xmath . Let @xmath and assume that @xmath for
some @xmath . Then it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

By definition of the Hamiltonian vector field we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Assume there exist @xmath such that @xmath . Then there exists @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a contradiction. ∎

In the sequel, Lemma 2.2.1 will always be applied under assumption (V2)
or (W2).

###### Lemma 2.2.2.

Let @xmath be fiberwise homogeneous of degree 2 and let @xmath be a
perturbation such that @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth function and let
@xmath . Then it holds that

-    for @xmath we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and that

-   @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i) Set @xmath . For each @xmath we have @xmath and thus

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath is fiberwise homogeneous of degree 2, Euler’s identity
yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as claimed.

(ii)By definition of the Hamiltonian vector field, we have that @xmath
and thus @xmath since @xmath is homogeneous of degree 2. Also, since
@xmath does not depend on @xmath , @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

To the orbit @xmath in @xmath therefore corresponds to @xmath in @xmath
. Claim (i) then yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and thus @xmath . ∎

We next have a look at the action spectrum of @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.2.2.

Let @xmath . If @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath . If @xmath for
some @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Assume first that @xmath for some @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by Lemma 2.2.1

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath . Hence our choice of @xmath and (V2) yield that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Assume now that @xmath for some @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by Lemma 2.2.1

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath and @xmath . Let again @xmath . Using the definition of
@xmath we compute at @xmath , for @xmath that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath , the sum of the first and third summands is
@xmath . Together with Euler’s identity applied to the functions @xmath
and @xmath we obtain that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where in the inequality we use the fact that @xmath and @xmath .
Recalling (V2) and @xmath , this yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as claimed. ∎

#### 2.2.1 The Non-crossing lemma

Consider the space of Hamiltonian functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath and @xmath belong to @xmath . For @xmath set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now fix a smooth function @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath define the functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then @xmath for each @xmath .
Recall that @xmath . Choose @xmath and define the function @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath is monotone decreasing with minimum @xmath . Recall
@xmath entering the definition of the smoothing function @xmath . We
assume from now on that it also fulfills

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Lemma 2.2.3.

If @xmath , then @xmath for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Take @xmath .
Assume first that @xmath for some @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 2.2.1 we therefore have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath and @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Doing a similar computation as in the proof of Proposition 2.2.2 where
we replace @xmath by @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the last inequality follows from ( 2.4 ), Lemma 2.2.1 and the
observation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a positive constant. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume next that @xmath for somme @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 2.2.1 we therefore have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath for all @xmath , which yields @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By Lemma 2.2.2 (i) we therefore have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Together with @xmath and the choice of @xmath we obtain that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Assume finally that @xmath lies in @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath .
Hence @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then, in view of Lemma 2.2.2 (ii) and the definition of
@xmath , we obtain that @xmath which is a contradiction to our
hypothesis. ∎

### 2.3 Floer Homology for convex Hamiltonians

Floer Homology was invented by Floer in a series of seminal papers, see
[ 14 , 15 , 16 ] .

#### 2.3.1 Definition of @xmath

##### The chain groups

Let @xmath such that all 1-periodic solutions of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are nondegenerate. For @xmath define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath such that @xmath for some @xmath we have by Lemma 2.2.1

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then by Lemma 2.2.2 (i) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

By Lemma 2.2.1 , the set @xmath is finite. For each @xmath the Maslov
index @xmath is a well-defined integer, see Section 1.3 . Define the
@xmath Floer chain group @xmath as the finite-dimensional @xmath -vector
space freely generated by the elements of @xmath of Maslov index @xmath
, and define the full Floer chain group as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Almost complex structures

Recall that an almost complex structure @xmath on @xmath is @xmath
-compatible if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defines a Riemannian metric on @xmath . Consider the Liouville vector
field @xmath and its semi-flow @xmath , for @xmath , on @xmath . Denote
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the contact structure on @xmath .

An @xmath -compatible almost complex structure @xmath on @xmath is
convex on @xmath if

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Following [ 8 , 6 ] we consider the set @xmath of @xmath -dependent
smooth families @xmath , @xmath , of @xmath -compatible almost complex
structures on @xmath such that @xmath is convex and independent of
@xmath on @xmath . The set @xmath is non-empty and connected.

##### Compactness

For @xmath , for smooth maps @xmath from the cylinder @xmath to @xmath ,
and for @xmath consider Floer’s equation given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Lemma 2.3.1.

Solutions of Floer’s equation ( 2.6 ) are contained in @xmath .

###### Proof.

By @xmath we have @xmath , whence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In view of the strong maximum principle, the lemma follows from the
convexity of @xmath outside @xmath and from ( 2.7 ) together with the
fact that @xmath outside @xmath implies @xmath , see Appendix A and [ 9
, 21 ] . ∎

We denote the set of solutions of ( 2.6 ) by @xmath . The elements of
@xmath are the stationary solutions of Floer’s equation ( 2.6 ) and if
@xmath , then @xmath , see the more general Lemma 2.3.2 below. So @xmath
contains only the elements @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The compactness of the manifolds @xmath follows from Lemma 2.3.1 and the
fact that there is no bubbling-off of @xmath -holomorphic spheres.
Indeed, @xmath vanishes on @xmath because @xmath is exact. See [ 15 , 38
] for details.

##### The boundary operators

There exists a residual subset @xmath of @xmath such that for each
@xmath the linearized operator to Floer’s equation is surjective for
each solutions of ( 2.6 ). For such a regular @xmath the moduli space
@xmath is a smooth manifold of dimension @xmath for all @xmath , see [
17 ] .

Fix @xmath . It is shown in [ 2 , Section 1.4] that the manifold @xmath
can be oriented in a way which is coherent with gluing. In particular,
when @xmath , @xmath is an oriented one-dimensional manifold.

Note that the group @xmath freely acts on @xmath by time-shift. We will
use the notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denoting by @xmath the equivalence class of @xmath in the
zero-dimensional manifold @xmath , we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to be @xmath if the @xmath -action is orientation preserving on the
connected component of @xmath containing @xmath and @xmath in the
opposite case.

For @xmath with @xmath let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the oriented count of the finite set @xmath . For @xmath one can
define the Floer boundary operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the linear extension of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath has index @xmath and the sum runs over all @xmath of index
@xmath . Then @xmath for each @xmath . The proof makes use of the
compactness of the 0- and the 1-dimensional components of @xmath , see [
14 , 40 , 2 ] .

##### The Floer homology group

The @xmath Floer homology group is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As our notations suggests, it does not depend on the choices involved in
the construction. They neither depend on coherent orientations up to
canonical isomorphisms, see [ 2 , Section 1.7] , nor on @xmath up to
natural isomorphisms, as a continuation argument shows, see [ 14 , 40 ]
. The groups @xmath do depend, however, on @xmath and @xmath .

In the sequel, the field @xmath is fixed throughout. We shall therefore
often write @xmath and @xmath instead of @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.3.2 Continuation homomorphisms

Let @xmath be the function from ( 2.1 ). Given two functions @xmath with
@xmath for all @xmath , we define the monotone homotopy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then @xmath for each @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the map @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , is a regular homotopy of
families @xmath of almost complex structures on @xmath . This means that

-   @xmath is @xmath -compatible, convex and independent of @xmath and
    @xmath outside @xmath ,

-   @xmath for @xmath ,

-   @xmath for @xmath .

The following lemma is well-known.

###### Lemma 2.3.2.

Assume that @xmath is a solution of equation ( 2.9 ). Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Extend the map @xmath to a smooth map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is exact, we find, using Stoke’s Theorem and taking
orientations into account, that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, by the definition of the homotopy ( 2.8 ) we obtain that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This and the asymptotic boundary condition in ( 2.9 ) yield

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Together with the compatibly @xmath , Floer’s equation in ( 2.9 ),
Hamilton’s equation ( 1.2 ) and the definition of the action functional
we obtain that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as claimed. ∎

In view of this lemma, the action decreases along solutions @xmath of (
2.9 ). By counting these solutions one can therefore define the Floer
chain map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

see [ 8 ] . The induced continuation homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on Floer homology does not depends on the choice of the regular homotopy
@xmath used in the definition. An important property of these
homomorphisms is naturality with respect to concatenation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another important fact is the following invariance property, which is
proved in [ 8 ] and [ 6 , Section 4.5] .

###### Lemma 2.3.3.

If @xmath for all @xmath , then @xmath is an isomorphism.

### 2.4 From Floer homology to the homology of the free loop space

#### 2.4.1 Continuation homomorphisms

The goal of the section is to relate the groups

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 2.2.1 , the set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

is finite. In particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is also finite. Define @xmath as the minimal distance between two
elements of this set. Recall from (W2), we assume that the constant
@xmath fulfills

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is not in the action spectrum of @xmath and @xmath , and by
Proposition 2.2.2

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 2.

In the degenerate case when @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next we want to show that @xmath and @xmath are naturally isomorphic
when @xmath . This is a special case of a generalization of Lemma 2.3.3
stated in [ 46 , Proposition 1.1] .

Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath in the band bounded by the graphs of @xmath and @xmath we
have that @xmath in view of the Non-crossing Lemma 2.2.3 . Choose a
partition @xmath so fine that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Abbreviate @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Together with Lemma 2.3.3 we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism. Since @xmath , we have @xmath and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism. Recalling that @xmath and @xmath we obtain that the
composition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the homomorphism induced by the inclusion @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.4.1.

For each @xmath there is a commutative diagram of homomorphisms

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.14)
  -- -- -- --------

Moreover @xmath is an isomorphism.

###### Proof.

By construction, the isomorphism @xmath is induced by the composition of
Floer chain maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath is induced by the composition of Floer chain maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the concatenation property ( 2.10 ) this composition induces the same
map in Floer homology as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The upper triangle therefore commutes. The lower triangle commutes in
view of @xmath and according to ( 2.10 ). ∎

###### Corollary 2.

@xmath .

#### 2.4.2 To the homology of the free loop space

The goal of this section is to prove that the rank of the map @xmath is
bounded below by the rank of @xmath . This will be done by first
applying the Abbondandolo–Schwarz isomorphism, [ 2 ] , between the Floer
homology of @xmath and the Morse homology of its Legendre transform
@xmath , and by then applying the Abbondandolo–Mayer isomorphisms, [ 1 ]
, from the latter Morse homology to the homology of the free loop space
@xmath of the base.

###### Theorem 3.

Let @xmath be a smooth, closed, orientable Riemannian manifold and
@xmath be as above. It holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We start with proving

###### Proposition 2.4.2.

For each @xmath there is a commutative diagram of homomorphisms

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the horizontal maps are isomorphisms and the right map @xmath is
induced by the inclusion @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the Legendre transform of @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the corresponding functional on @xmath , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying Theorem 3.1 of Abbondandolo–Schwarz in [ 2 ] we obtain for each
@xmath the isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the Morse homology below level @xmath of @xmath
constructed in [ 1 ] , see also [ 2 , Section 2] . The
Abbondandolo–Schwarz chain isomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

between the Floer and the Morse chain complexes commute with the
inclusions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , see [ 2 , p. 298] . Therefore, the induced diagram of
homology groups commutes,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Moreover, Abbondandolo and Mayer constructed chain isomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

between the Morse and the singular chain complexes which commute with
the inclusions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath (see [ 1 ] and [ 2 , Section 2.3] ). Thus the induced diagram
of homology groups commutes, i.e.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Notice now that @xmath , whence by Lemma B.0.1 @xmath retracts on @xmath
as @xmath does not belong to the spectrum of @xmath . Proposition 2.4.2
follows. ∎

Consider now the commutative diagram

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.15)
  -- -- -- --------

induced by the inclusion @xmath . In view of Proposition 2.4.2 and (
2.15 ) we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is bounded below by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Together with Corollary 2 this yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Which conclude the proof of Theorem 3 .

Suppose @xmath is energy hyperbolic, @xmath . By definition of @xmath ,
there exist @xmath and @xmath such that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore there exists @xmath such that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Together with Proposition 2.4.2 we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, if @xmath we find that there exists @xmath and @xmath such
that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 3 Morse-Bott homology

In order to prove Theorem B, we use Morse–Bott homology and its
correspondence to Floer homology. This chapter is devoted to the
definition of Morse–Bott homology. In the first section we give a
definition of a generic hypersurface in order to achieve a Morse–Bott
situation. In the second section, we associate to a relevant Hamiltonian
an additional perturbation in order to obtain an isomorphism between its
Floer homology and Morse–Bott homology. The main tool of this
isomorphism is the Correspondence Theorem due to Bourgeois–Oancea, [ 7 ]
, which will be discussed in the last section.

### 3.1 A Morse-Bott situation

Let @xmath be a Riemannian manifold. A smooth function @xmath is called
Morse-Bott if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a submanifold of @xmath and for each @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a Hamiltonian such that @xmath . The action functional
@xmath is invariant under the @xmath -action on @xmath given by @xmath .
In order that it’s critical points are Morse–Bott manifolds we make the
following nondegeneracy assumption on the Reeb flow on @xmath .

-   The closed Reeb orbits of @xmath are of Morse-Bott type, i.e. for
    each @xmath the set @xmath of @xmath -periodic Reeb orbits is a
    closed submanifold and every closed Reeb orbit is transversally
    nondegenerate, i.e.

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Assumption (A) is generically satisfied. We will then say that @xmath is
generic. If (A) is satisfied, then the action functional @xmath is
Morse-Bott.

There are several ways to deal with Morse–Bott situations. The first
possibility we are going to use, is to choose an additional small
perturbation to get a Morse situation. Our perturbation is the one
introduced in [ 9 ] . The second possibility is to choose an additional
Morse function on the critical manifold. The chain complex is then
generated by the critical points of this Morse function while the
boundary operator is defined by counting trajectories with cascades.
This approach was carried out by Frauenfelder in [ 18 , Appendix A] and
by Bourgeois and Oancea in [ 7 ] .

In [ 7 ] , Bourgeois and Oancea studied a particular class of admissible
Hamiltonians corresponding in our setting to Hamiltonians @xmath such
that

-   @xmath is a @xmath -small Morse function and @xmath on @xmath ;

-   @xmath outside @xmath , where @xmath is a strictly increasing
    function, convex at infinity and such that the 1-periodic orbits of
    @xmath are in one-to-one correspondence with closed Reeb orbits.

The 1-periodic orbits of @xmath then fall into two classes:

-   critical points of @xmath in @xmath ;

-   nonconstant 1-periodic orbits of @xmath .

For such Hamiltonians, they obtained an isomorphism of the homology of
the Morse-Bott complex with the Floer homology with respect to the same
Hamiltonian with an additional perturbation.

In the following we will follow their approach. However in view of our
particular choice of Hamiltonian, we will deal with a slightly simpler
situation. Instead of dealing with two classes of periodic orbits as in
[ 7 ] , we only have nonconstant 1-periodic orbits. Moreover, as we are
working below an energy level @xmath , we are able to apply their
Correspondence Theorem to our situation.

### 3.2 An additional perturbation

Let @xmath be a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface and assume @xmath is
generic in the sense of (A). As in section 2.1 , we can define a
Hamiltonian function @xmath by the two conditions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and smoothen @xmath by composing it with the smooth function @xmath .

By the assumption of genericity, all the elements of @xmath are
transversally nondegenerate. Thus every orbit @xmath gives rise to a
whole circle of nonconstant 1-periodic orbits of @xmath whose
parametrizations differ by a shift @xmath . We denote by @xmath the set
of such orbits, so that @xmath for all @xmath . The Maslov index is
still well-defined for these orbits. But as the eigenspace to the
eigenvalue 1 is two dimensional, their index will be a half integer, see
section 1.3 .

The following construction is the one described in [ 9 , Proposition
2.2] and [ 7 ] . For each @xmath , we choose a Morse function @xmath
with exactly one maximum @xmath at @xmath and one minimum @xmath at
@xmath . We denote by @xmath the maximal natural number so that @xmath
for all @xmath . We choose a symplectic trivialization @xmath between
open neighborhoods @xmath of @xmath and @xmath of @xmath such that
@xmath . Here @xmath is endowed with the symplectic form @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . Let @xmath be a smooth cutoff function supported in a small
neighborhood of @xmath so that @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath , we
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will denote the perturbation added to @xmath by @xmath .

This perturbation destroys the critical circles and gives rise to two
obvious solutions of @xmath , namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By construction these orbits are nondegenerate, their indexes are then
integer. It is shown in [ 9 , Proposition 2.2] that for @xmath
sufficiently small @xmath and @xmath are the only elements of @xmath in
@xmath and their indexes are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall from section 1.3 that @xmath is a half integer. Therefore @xmath
and @xmath are integers.

### 3.3 Morse-Bott homology

Consider the space of autonomous smooth Hamiltonian functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . Fix @xmath , and suppose that every orbit @xmath gives rise
to a whole circle of non-constant periodic orbits @xmath of @xmath ,
which are transversally non-degenerate. We denote by @xmath the set of
such orbits.

##### The chain groups

For each @xmath , @xmath choose a Morse function @xmath with exactly one
maximum and one minimum. We denote by @xmath , @xmath the orbits in
@xmath starting at the maximum and the minimum of @xmath respectively.

The @xmath Morse-Bott chain group is defined as the finite dimensional
@xmath -vector space freely generated by the the set of @xmath , @xmath
of Maslov index @xmath so that @xmath is an element of @xmath , and the
full chain group is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the grading is given by the Maslov index.

##### Almost complex structures

Following section 2.3.1 in the definition of Floer homology, we are
considering the set @xmath of @xmath -dependent @xmath -compatible
almost complex structures @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath is convex
and independent of @xmath on @xmath . Recall that an @xmath -compatible
almost complex structure @xmath on @xmath is convex on @xmath if

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath denote the Liouville vector field @xmath .

##### Trajectories with cascades

Fix @xmath , @xmath . We denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the space of solutions @xmath of Floer’s equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

subject to the asymptotic conditions

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

uniformly in @xmath . The Morse-Bott moduli spaces of Floer trajectories
are defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is shown in [ 7 , Proposition 3.5] that there exists a dense subset
@xmath such that given @xmath the Morse-Bott moduli spaces of Floer
trajectories are smooth manifolds, and their dimensions are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have natural evaluation maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath , @xmath , consider the Morse function @xmath and its
negative gradient flow @xmath with respect to @xmath . Define the stable
an unstable manifold by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

It is shown in [ 7 ] that for a generic choice of these Morse functions,
all the maps @xmath are transverse to the unstable manifolds @xmath ,
@xmath , all the maps @xmath are transverse to the stable manifolds
@xmath , @xmath , and all pairs

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are transverse to products @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We denote by
@xmath the set consisting of collections @xmath of Morse functions which
satisfy the above transversality conditions.

Let now @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath we denote the Morse index by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . For @xmath denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the union for @xmath of the fiber products

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is a smooth manifold of dimension

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we call this the moduli space of Morse-Bott trajectories with
cascades , whereas the space @xmath is called the moduli space of
trajectories with cascades with @xmath sublevels .

##### The Morse-Bott differential and the Correspondence Theorem

Let @xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath if @xmath is small enough.
Consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 4.

(Correspondence Theorem). Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . There exists

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for any

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the following hold:

-   @xmath is regular for @xmath for all @xmath ;

-    the space @xmath is a one-dimensional manifold having a finite
    number of components that are graphs over @xmath ;

-    there is a bijective correspondence between points

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and connected components of @xmath .

For each @xmath , the sign @xmath , defined in section 2.3.1 , is
constant on the corresponding connected component @xmath for continuity
reasons. We define a sign @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We define the Morse-Bott differential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath sufficiently small, the definitions imply an isomorphism of
free modules

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover the Correspondence Theorem and definition ( 3.3 ) of signs in
the Morse-Bott complex implies that the corresponding differentials also
coincide. As a consequence, it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 4 Proofs of theorem A and theorem B

### 4.1 Proof of theorem A

###### Theorem A.

Let @xmath be a closed, connected, orientable, smooth manifold and let
@xmath be a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface. Let @xmath be the Reeb
flow on @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be defined
as in section 1.1 . Then

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath .

###### Proof.

The starting point of the proof is the crude estimate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the set of conjugacy classes in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each element @xmath denote by @xmath the infimum of the energy of a
closed curve representing @xmath . Consider the energy sublevels

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider the Hamiltonian function @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Use the cut-off function @xmath defined in section 2.1 to obtain the
smooth function @xmath .

Fix @xmath . Choose a sequence of perturbations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that all 1-periodic solutions of @xmath are nondegenerate, for all
@xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to apply the results of chapter 2 we can, without loss of
generality, suppose that @xmath for all @xmath , where @xmath is the
constant defined in section 2.1 . In the following, we will use the
notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath and an action level @xmath , we estimate

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.1)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the second inequality follows from Theorem 3 . Moreover, if @xmath
, then the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is not empty. This follows from the Abbondandolo–Schwarz chain
isomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

between the Floer and the Morse chain complexes.

Fix @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath , and fix a non-zero
conjugacy class @xmath . Consider a sequence @xmath such that @xmath .
By Proposition 2.2.2 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set @xmath is compact. Since @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath on
@xmath . By the Ascoli–Arzelà theorem, there exists a subsequence @xmath
of @xmath such that @xmath as @xmath , with convergence in @xmath .
Then, by making use of the Hamilton equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain @xmath when @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath . Since @xmath for
all @xmath and @xmath , we see that @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have thus shown that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath is a non-trivial conjugacy class.

For a closed orbit @xmath , denote by @xmath its @xmath th iterate
@xmath . The iterates of a closed orbit are geometrically the same. We
want to control the contribution of the iterates of a closed orbit to
@xmath . We are considering orbits with action @xmath , so there are
finitely many of them. There exists a lower bound @xmath of the action
of these closed orbits. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence at most @xmath iterates of such orbits will have action @xmath .
Notice that if we increase the action level, @xmath will still be a
lower bound.

Denote by @xmath the set of geometrically different closed 1-periodic
orbits. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies the estimates @xmath and @xmath of Theorem A. ∎

### 4.2 Proof of theorem B

###### Theorem B.

Let @xmath be a closed, connected, orientable smooth manifold and let
@xmath be a generic fiberwise starshaped hypersurface. Let @xmath be the
Reeb flow on @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be
defined as in section 1.1 . Then

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath .

##### Relevant Hamiltonians

Let @xmath be a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface, generic in the sense
of (A), i.e. all closed Reeb orbits of @xmath are of Morse-Bott type.

Consider the Hamiltonian function @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Use the cut-off function @xmath defined in section 2.1 to obtain the
smooth function @xmath .

The Hamiltonian vectore field @xmath is a nonvanishing smooth vector
field on @xmath which is compact. Thus there exists @xmath such that
every closed orbit @xmath of @xmath restricted to @xmath has period at
least @xmath . Consider a @xmath -periodic orbit @xmath on @xmath and
define for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is a periodic orbit of @xmath of period @xmath . Moreover
all the nonconstant periodic orbits of @xmath are of this form. Recall
the definition of the cut-off function @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and choose @xmath such that @xmath . Then the closed orbits @xmath of
@xmath with @xmath agree with those of @xmath , while the nonconstant
periodic orbits @xmath of @xmath with @xmath have period at least

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence the elements of @xmath are the same as the elements of @xmath .

Fix @xmath . In order to apply the results of chapter 2 and chapter 3 ,
we need to determine a suitable perturbation @xmath of @xmath . It will
be the sum of a pertubation @xmath following section 3.2 with support in
@xmath and a positive Morse function @xmath with support in @xmath ,
where @xmath .

By the assumption of genericity, all the nonconstant elements of @xmath
are transversally nondegenerate. Thus every nonconstant orbit @xmath
gives rise to a whole circle of nonconstant 1-periodic orbits of @xmath
whose parametrizations differ by a shift @xmath . We can thus apply the
construction of the perturbation described in section 3.2 and consider
the perturbed Hamiltonian

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will denote the perturbation added to @xmath by @xmath and assume
that the support of @xmath is contained in @xmath , where @xmath .

Recall that this perturbation destroys the critical circles and gives
rise to two solutions of @xmath , namely @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath be a positive Morse function with support in @xmath . We
define the perturbation @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Without loss of generality, we can choose @xmath and @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the constant defined in section 2.1 .

The 1-periodic orbits of @xmath fall in two classes:

1.  critical points of @xmath in @xmath ,

2.  nonconstant 1-periodic orbits of @xmath in @xmath .

Set

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are defined as in section 2.1 . Moreover we
assume that

-   @xmath , where @xmath is the minimal period of closed orbits of
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath restricted to @xmath .

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath as support in @xmath .

-   @xmath .

Assumptions (B1) and (B3) imply that the 1-periodic orbits of @xmath
fall in two classes:

1.  critical points of @xmath in @xmath ,

2.  nonconstant 1-periodic orbits of @xmath in @xmath

and similarly for @xmath . Assumptions (B2) and (B4) will be used in the
next section.

##### The Non-crossing Lemma

Following section 2.2.1 , for @xmath define the functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.2.1.

If @xmath , then @xmath for @xmath . Moreover @xmath for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Take @xmath .
Assume first that @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath . Then the
statement follows from the proof of Lemma 2.2.3 .
Assume next that @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath , which
yields @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence the first part of the statement follows from the proof of Lemma
2.2.3 . We need to show that @xmath . By Lemma 2.2.2 (i) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Together with @xmath and the choice of @xmath we obtain that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Assume finally that @xmath lies in @xmath . Then @xmath is a constant
orbit, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This conclude the proof of the lemma. ∎

##### Floer homology groups

For @xmath and @xmath we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose that @xmath and every 1-periodic orbits @xmath is nondegenerate.
The Floer chain group @xmath is defined as the quotient

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is usefull to think of this chain complex as the @xmath -vector space
freely generated by the elements of @xmath graded by the Maslov index.
By Lemma 2.3.2 the subcomplex @xmath is invariant under the boundary
operator defined in section 2.3.1 . We thus get an induced boundary
operator on the quotient. We denote the @xmath Floer homology group of
the quotient complex by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Continuation homomorphisms

Let @xmath be the action level ( 2.12 ) of section 2.4.1 .

###### Proposition 4.2.1.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

In view of the Non-crossing Lemma 4.2.1 , the isomomorphism @xmath of
section 2.4.1 induces an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recalling the proof of Proposition 2.4.1 , we thus have for each @xmath
a commutative diagram of homomorphisms

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Moreover @xmath is an isomorphism. This concludes the proof of the
proposition. ∎

##### To the homology of the free loop space

###### Proposition 4.2.2.

Let @xmath be a closed, orientable Riemannian manifold and @xmath be as
above. It holds that for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the Legendre transform of @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the corresponding functional on @xmath , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that both the Abbondandolo–Schwarz isomorphism, [ 2 ] , and
Abbondandolo–Mayer isomorphism, [ 1 ] , are chain complex isomorphisms.
Following the proof of Proposition 2.4.2 , we have for each @xmath a
commutative diagram of homomorphisms

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the horizontal maps are isomorphisms and the right map @xmath is
induced by the inclusion @xmath .
By definition @xmath is the set of constant loops. Hence every critical
point @xmath of @xmath has Morse index zero. This yields for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider now the commutative diagram

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.5)
  -- -- -- -------

induced by the inclusion @xmath . Together with Proposition 4.2.1 this
yields for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which concludes the proof of Proposition 4.2.2 . ∎

We can now proove Theorem B.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a fiberwise starshaped hypersurface, generic in the sense
of (A), i.e. all closed Reeb orbits of @xmath are of Morse-Bott type.

Consider the Hamiltonian function @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We use the cut-off function @xmath and the positive Morse function
@xmath defined previously to obtain the smooth function @xmath .

By the assumption of genericity, we can consider the perturbed
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is given by ( 4.2 ), i.e. the sum of the Morse–Bott
pertubation @xmath and the Morse function @xmath . Without loss of
generality, we can choose @xmath and @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the constant defined in section 2.1 and such that the
isomorphism ( 3.5 ) between the Morse-Bott complex @xmath and the Floer
complex @xmath holds.

For an action level @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.6)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Together with Proposition 4.2.2 this yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose @xmath is energy hyperbolic, @xmath . By definition of @xmath ,
there exist @xmath and @xmath such that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore there exists @xmath such that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the dimension of the base space @xmath . Together with
Proposition 2.4.2 we find that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, if @xmath we find that there exists @xmath and @xmath such
that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We again need to take care of the iterates @xmath of an element @xmath .
Let @xmath be the minimal action of the elements of @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence at most @xmath iterates of such orbits will have action less or
equal to @xmath .

Denote by @xmath the set of geometrically different, non-constant,
closed 1-periodic orbits of @xmath . We get for an energy hyperbolic
manifold

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and if @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which yields Theorem B in view of the definitions. ∎

#### 4.2.1 The simply connected case: generalizing Ballmann–Ziller

In [ 3 ] , Ballmann and Ziller proved that the number of closed
geodesics of any bumpy Riemannian metric on a compact, simply connected
manifold @xmath grows like the maximal Betti number of the free loop
space. In this section, we will prove a similar result for the number of
closed Reeb orbits on @xmath .

Let @xmath be the free loop space of @xmath and denote by @xmath the
sublevel set of closed loops of energy @xmath . Denote by @xmath the
rank of @xmath .

###### Theorem C.

Suppose that @xmath is a compact and simply connected @xmath
-dimensional manifold. Let @xmath be a generic fiberwise starshaped
hypersurface of @xmath and @xmath its associated Reeb vector field. Then
there exist constants @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath sufficiently large.

###### Proof.

Recall the following result of Gromov

###### Theorem 5.

(Gromov). There exists a constant @xmath , such that @xmath is
surjective for @xmath .

A proof can be found in Appendix C . Renormalize @xmath as in section
2.1 , i.e. such that @xmath where @xmath . Then there exists @xmath such
that @xmath for @xmath .

Let @xmath be a fiberwise homogeneous Hamiltonian of degree 2 such that
@xmath . Consider its Morse–Bott perturbation @xmath . Denote by @xmath
the rank of @xmath . We already proved that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a non-constant closed orbit @xmath , denote by @xmath its @xmath th
iterate @xmath . The iterates of a closed 1-periodic orbit give rise to
different critical circles of @xmath of index @xmath or @xmath .
Following [ 3 ] we are going to control the contribution of a closed
1-periodic orbit and its iterates to @xmath .

By construction of @xmath , a non-constant element @xmath gives rise to
two generators @xmath and @xmath with their Maslov index related in the
following way

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, by construction of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly @xmath .

The index iteration formula of Salamon and Zehnder, see Lemma 1.3.1 ,
implies the following

###### Lemma 4.2.2.

Let @xmath be a nondegenerate closed orbit. Then there exist constants
@xmath and @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover, @xmath .

Notice that if @xmath , then @xmath . We consider three cases

1. Assume first that @xmath . There exist only finitely many such closed
orbits. Let @xmath be a lower bound of the average index @xmath of the
closed orbits @xmath for which @xmath . Using ( 4.7 ) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , if @xmath . Therefore at most @xmath iterates of @xmath
can have index @xmath or @xmath for @xmath .

2. Assume next that @xmath and @xmath . In view of ( 4.7 ) we have
@xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence at most @xmath iterates of @xmath can have index @xmath or @xmath
.

3. Finally assume that @xmath and @xmath . In view of ( 4.7 ) and @xmath
we have @xmath . This and again ( 4.7 ) yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath , then, using the assumption @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall now that we are counting only closed orbit below the action level
@xmath . Hence @xmath , and then with ( 4.8 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore at most @xmath iterates of @xmath can have index @xmath or
@xmath of action @xmath if @xmath .

We obtain that for @xmath large enough there exists a constant @xmath ,
such that at most @xmath iterates of any @xmath will give rise to
generators of index @xmath or @xmath , for @xmath . Summarizing, if we
denote by @xmath the set of geometrically different, non-constant,
closed 1-periodic orbits, we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In view of Proposition 4.2.2 and Gromov’s result, we thus have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

## Chapter 5 Evaluation

In this chapter we evaluate the results of the previous chapter on the
examples introduced in section 1.1.3 .

### 5.1 Lie groups

Let @xmath be a Lie group. As its fundamental group is abelian, the free
loop space @xmath admits the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, all the components @xmath of the free loop space are homotopy
equivalent.

###### Proposition 5.1.1.

Let @xmath be a closed, connected, Lie group and let @xmath be a
generic, fiberwise starshaped hypersurface. Let @xmath be the Reeb flow
on @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be defined as in
section 1.1 . Then

-   @xmath

-   @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath let @xmath be the infimum of the energy of a closed curve
representing @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moreover, recalling the argument in section 1.1.3 on Lie groups, we have
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the sublevel set of loops in the component @xmath of
energy @xmath . Using the notation from the proof of Theorem B, it holds
that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence by ( 5.2 ) and ( 5.1 )

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

Arguing as in the proof of Theorem B, the Proposition follows in view of
the definitions.

∎

### 5.2 @xmath finite: the case of the sphere

In this section we will show that the product of two spheres @xmath has
@xmath , so that @xmath .. Our main tool will be the cohomology classes
of the free loop space discovered by Svarc and Sullivan as an
application of Sullivan’s theory of minimal models, see [ 44 , 43 ] . We
begin by recalling some basics properties of the minimal model following
[ 27 ] and [ 13 ] .

The minimal model @xmath for the rational homotopy type of a simply
connected countable @xmath complex @xmath is a differential graded
algebra over @xmath with product denoted by @xmath , having the
following properties:

1.  @xmath is free-commutative, i.e. is free as an algebra except for
    the relations imposed by the associativity and graded commutativity.
    The vector space spanned by the generators of any given degree
    @xmath is finite; its dual is isomorphic to @xmath ;

2.  the differential @xmath applied to any generator is either zero, or
    raises the degree by one and is a polynomial in generators of
    strictly lower degree;

3.  @xmath

The rational cohomology of the sphere @xmath is an exterior algebra on
one generator in degree @xmath . A minimal model for @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath is odd, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath is even, see [ 13 , Example 2.43] .

Given @xmath , a minimal model @xmath for the free loop space @xmath can
be constructed as follows. Each generator @xmath of @xmath is also a
generator of @xmath with the same differential. The remaining generators
are obtained by associating to each generator @xmath of @xmath a
generator @xmath for @xmath of one degree less. In order to define their
differential, extend @xmath to all of @xmath as a derivation acting from
the right. Then define @xmath .

A minimal model for the free loop space of the sphere @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath is odd and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when @xmath is even.

##### @xmath odd

When @xmath is odd, the rational cohomology of @xmath has one generator
in each degree

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Ideed, @xmath for @xmath . For example when @xmath

This yields

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Consider Gromov’s constant @xmath , see Appendix C . Then it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### @xmath even

When @xmath is even, the Sullivan cohomology classes are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For every @xmath , its differential is zero and it is not a boundary
since @xmath is contained in the ideal generated by the subalgebra
@xmath . The rational cohomology of @xmath has then one generator in
each degree

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

And it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Product of spheres @xmath

Consider the product of two spheres @xmath of dimensions @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.2.1.

There exists a constant @xmath depending on @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that for smooth manifolds @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Künneth formula tells us that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath are odd, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For example when @xmath and @xmath

This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Arguing similarly when @xmath or @xmath is even, we obtain the lemma.

Again, using Gromov’s work, we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, if @xmath is a product of @xmath spheres of dimensions @xmath
, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 5.3 Negative curvature

###### Proposition 5.3.1.

Let @xmath be a closed connected orientable manifold endowed with a
metric of negative curvature and let @xmath be a fiberwise starshaped
hypersurface. Let @xmath be the Reeb flow on @xmath , and let @xmath be
defined as in section 1.1 . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the topological entropy of the geodesic flow.

Suppose that @xmath possesses a Riemannian metric with negative
curvature. Then by Proposition 1.1.2 , it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since all Morse indices vanish,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover the generators appearing while increasing the energy will not
kill the previous ones. Hence for @xmath the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is injective. Using the notation from the proof of Theorem A, this
yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Recalling the argument in section 1.1.3 , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the topological entropy of the geodesic flow. The
proof of the Proposition follows in view of the definitions.

## Appendix A Convexity

In this chapter we follow the work of Biran, Polterovich and Salomon
(see [ 6 ] ) and Frauenfelder and Schlenk (see [ 21 ] ) in order to
introduce useful tools for the compactness of moduli spaces introduced
in section 2.3.1 .

Consider a @xmath -dimensional compact symplectic manifold @xmath with
non empty boundary @xmath . The boundary @xmath is said to be convex if
there exists a Liouville vector field @xmath i.e. @xmath , which is
defined near @xmath and is everywhere transverse to @xmath , pointing
outwards.

###### Definition A.0.1.

(cf [ 12 ] ) (i) A compact symplectic manifold @xmath is convex if it
has non-empty convex boundary.

(ii) A non-compact symplectic manifold @xmath is convex, if there exists
an increasing sequence of compact, convex submanifolds @xmath exhausting
@xmath , that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Cotangent bundles over a smooth manifold @xmath are examples of exact
convex symplectic manifolds. In fact, the @xmath -disc bundle @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a compact, convex submanifold and @xmath .

Let @xmath be a compact, convex symplectic manifold and denote @xmath .
Choose a smooth vector field @xmath and a neighborhood @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath on @xmath . Denote by @xmath the flow of @xmath ,
suppose that @xmath , and denote by @xmath the contact structure on the
boundary determined by @xmath and @xmath . Then there exists an @xmath
-compatible almost complex structure @xmath on @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Such an almost complex structure is called convex near the boundary . We
recall that an almost complex structure @xmath on @xmath is called
@xmath -compatible if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defines a Riemannian metric on @xmath .

Consider the function @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath on @xmath , we have @xmath on
@xmath for all @xmath . Hence, ( A.2 ) and ( A.3 ) yield

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Together with ( A.1 ) this implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the gradient with respect to the metric @xmath . With
these properties, we can now give the following theorem due to Viterbo,
(see [ 45 ] ).

###### Theorem 6.

For @xmath define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a domain in @xmath and let @xmath be a smooth section such
that @xmath is an @xmath -compatible convex almost complex structure. If
@xmath is a solution of Floer’s equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

We abbreviate @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In view of the identities ( A.4 ), ( A.5 ) and ( A.6 ) we compute

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As @xmath we obtain with ( A.6 ) that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Together with the previous equality it follows that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and hence ( A.8 ) yields the statement of the theorem. ∎

###### Remark 3.

(Time dependent Hamiltonian). Repeating the calculation in the proof of
Theorem A.7 , one shows the following more general result. Let @xmath
and define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a domain in @xmath and if @xmath is a solution of the
time-dependent Floer equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Theorem A.7 implies

###### Corollary 3.

(Maximum Principle). Assume that @xmath and that either @xmath is a
solution of Floer’s equation ( A.6 ) or @xmath is a solution of the
time-dependent Floer equation ( A.9 ) and @xmath . Then if @xmath
attains its maximum on @xmath , we have that @xmath is constant.

###### Proof.

Assume that @xmath solves equation ( A.6 ). We set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The operator @xmath on @xmath defined by @xmath is uniformly elliptic on
relatively compact domains in @xmath , and according to Theorem A.7 ,
@xmath . If @xmath attains its maximum on @xmath , the strong Maximum
Principle (see [ 22 , Theorem 3.5] ) thus implies that @xmath is
constant. The other claim follows similarly from the second part of the
strong Maximum Principle and Remark 3 . ∎

## Appendix B Legendre transform

Let @xmath be a smooth closed manifold of dimension @xmath . Let @xmath
be the corresponding cotangent bundle. We will denote local coordinates
on @xmath by @xmath , and on @xmath by @xmath .

Consider a Hamiltonian @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can introduce the variable @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Legendre transform of @xmath is given by the Lagrangian @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Legendre transform @xmath establishes a one-to-one correspondence
between the solutions of the first order Hamiltonian system on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the second order Lagrangian system on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The set of @xmath -periodic solutions of the Euler-Lagrange equation (
B.2 ) is the set of critical points of the Lagrangian action functional
@xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider the following Hamiltonian

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then its Legendre transform is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume @xmath . Then using Lemma 2.2.2 and ( B.1 )

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath and @xmath have the same critical values. We introduce the
notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma B.0.1.

Let @xmath with @xmath . Assume that @xmath does not belong to the
action spectrum of @xmath . Then @xmath retracts on @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Similarly if @xmath then @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now note that @xmath is smooth on @xmath and satisfies the Palais–Smale
condition, see [ 4 ] . We can thus apply Lemma 2 of [ 23 ] which tells
us that, as @xmath does not contain any critical value of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are homotopy equivalent to @xmath . ∎

## Appendix C Gromov’s theorem

Let @xmath be a compact simply connected manifold and consider its free
loop space @xmath . Let @xmath be a Riemannian metric on @xmath . Recall
that the energy functional @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . The length functional @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath we consider the sublevel sets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 7.

(Gromov). Given a Riemannian metric @xmath on @xmath there exists a
constant @xmath , such that @xmath is surjective for @xmath .

The proof of this theorem follows from the following lemmata.

###### Lemma C.0.1.

Given a Riemannian metric @xmath on @xmath there exists a constant
@xmath , such that every element in @xmath can be represented by a cycle
in @xmath .

Gromov’s original proof of this result is very short. A detailed proof
for the based loop space can be found in [ 33 ] , we will follow this
work and the proof by Gromov in [ 25 , Chapter 7A] .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a finite covering of @xmath by geodesically convex open
sets. Consider a triangulation @xmath of @xmath such that each closed
simplex lies in one of the @xmath . We assume that the 1-skeleton of
@xmath consist of geodesic segments. For each @xmath we define @xmath as
the closed face of @xmath of minimal dimension that contains @xmath .
For example, if @xmath is a vertex then @xmath . We also define @xmath
as the union of all the maximal simplices of @xmath that contain @xmath
.

Given @xmath , we define open subsets @xmath as follow. A loop @xmath
belongs to @xmath if for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the same @xmath .

Let @xmath be the subset of loops @xmath such that @xmath is a broken
geodesic and @xmath restricted to each subinterval @xmath is a constant
speed parametrized geodesic. Then each @xmath determines a sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the following properties:

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath lies in a single @xmath for each @xmath .

Conversely each sequence @xmath with properties (i) and (ii) determines
a broken geodesic loop in @xmath . Moreover this correspondence is
bijective. This yields a cell decomposition on @xmath as follow: a cell
that contains @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath is a finite cell complex. Moreover, using the methods of
Milnor in [ 32 , Section 16] , we have that @xmath is a deformation
retract of @xmath .

Since @xmath is simply connected, there exists a smooth map @xmath such
that @xmath collapses the 1-skeleton of @xmath to a point and @xmath is
smoothly homotopic to the identity. This map @xmath naturally induces a
map @xmath . We need the following lemma.

###### Lemma C.0.2.

There exist a constant @xmath such that for any integer @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider a cell

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of dimension @xmath . Take a path @xmath , then @xmath is a broken
geodesic with each of its legs lying in one @xmath , @xmath . Consider
the following constants:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath collapses the 1-skeleton of @xmath to one point it holds
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By assumption the 1-skeleton consists of geodesic segments, thus the
legs of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath belong to the 1-skeleton if @xmath
and @xmath . Equivalently, the only legs that do not belong to the
1-skeleton are the legs which begin or end in a @xmath of nonzero
dimension. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we set @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which concludes the proof of the lemma. ∎

We shall show that any @xmath can be represented by a cycle whose image
lies in @xmath , where @xmath is the constant given by Lemma C.0.2 .
Since @xmath is a surjective map, @xmath has degree one since it is
homotopic to the identity, this implies Lemma C.0.1 .

Observe that for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is homotopic to the identity, there exists @xmath such that
@xmath . Let @xmath be a cycle that represents @xmath . Then its image
will lie in @xmath for some @xmath . Retract @xmath onto @xmath . Then
we can move @xmath by a homotopy into the @xmath -skeleton of @xmath .
By Lemma C.0.2 @xmath maps all points of the @xmath -skeleton of @xmath
to points in @xmath and in particular the image of @xmath will lies in
@xmath . Hence @xmath can be represented by a cycle whose image lies in
@xmath . ∎

###### Lemma C.0.3.

There exist a constant @xmath depending only on @xmath such that each
element of @xmath can be represented by a cycle in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the standard @xmath -simplex, and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be an integral cycle, where @xmath is the constant given by Lemma C.0.1
. For convenience of notation we pretend that @xmath consists only on
one simplex. As @xmath is a completion of @xmath , see [ 28 ] , we can
replace @xmath by a homotopic and hence homologous cycle

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

consisting of smooth loops. We identify @xmath with the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Endow the manifold @xmath with the product Riemannian metric. We lift
@xmath to the cycle @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This cycle consists of smooth loops whose tangent vectors do not vanish.
For each @xmath let @xmath be the reparametrization of @xmath
proportional to arc length. The homotopy @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

shows that @xmath is homologous to the cycle @xmath . Its projection
@xmath to @xmath is homologous to @xmath and lies in @xmath . Since for
each @xmath the loop @xmath is parametrized proportional to the arc
length, we conclude that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for each @xmath , so that indeed @xmath . This concludes the proof. ∎
