### Acknowledgements

I vividly remember being on the beach, at quite a young age, trying to
understand my father’s explanation of Newton’s law of action and
reaction. I would like to dedicate this thesis to him, for first getting
me interested in physics and thereafter never failing to give me his
full support or sharing his enthusiasm. I would like to thank first and
foremost my mother, whose words of wisdom always put me back on track
whenever I, for one reason or another, lost motivation. I would like to
thank Julian Barbour for his interest and immense support for my work,
and for reading and extensively commenting a first draft of this thesis.
In the great tradition of Einstein, Bohr, Poincaré, and others, his
unwavering focus on foundational principles is an example of what
physics has to gain from Natural Philosophy. He is largely responsible
for inspiring us to give shape dynamics its due attention. Julian so
eloquently argues for shape dynamics that even his son, Boris Barbour –
who is not a physicist – was recruited to draw the figures contained in
this text, and which I “borrowed”. My thanks goes out to Boris as well.
My immense gratitude also of course goes out to my good friends Tim and
Joy (and Nate and Ruthie) Koslowski for being very gracious hosts to me
more than one time. I feel very grateful for having found a collaborator
so knowledgeable and yet with whom I can communicate so effortlessly. I
would also like to thank Sean Gryb, without whom the “perfect storm”
leading to Shape Dynamics would not have been complete. Our heated
discussions have enhanced my understanding of shape dynamics a very
great deal. My supervisor John Barrett, must also figure prominently in
this list. My admiration for his extremely honest approach to physics
(and to being a physicist) inspires me to no end. John was somehow able
to make sure I was on the right track for my degree while still allowing
me to follow my own interests. This is a balance I had never thought
possible.

######

Thank you all.

In quantum gravity, we are all in the gutter, but some of us are looking
at the stars.

– Popular saying, pre-cognitively adapted by Oscar Wilde.

###### Contents

-    1 Introductory remarks
    -    1.1 A tale of two theories
    -    1.2 The problem of time
    -    1.3 A tale of two parts
    -    1.4 Notation and other warnings.
        -    1.4.1 Other warnings
        -    1.4.2 Notation
-    I Shape Dynamics
    -    2 Introducing Shape Dynamics
        -    2.1 Technical Background
            -    2.1.1 Constrained dynamics
            -    2.1.2 Hamiltonian dynamics
            -    2.1.3 Poisson brackets and symplectic flows
            -    2.1.4 Geometric interpretations and the case of a true
                Hamiltonian
            -    2.1.5 ADM 3+1 split
            -    2.1.6 Constraint algebra for ADM.
        -    2.2 A brief history of 3D conformal transformations in
            standard general relativity
            -    2.2.1 The Weyl connection
            -    2.2.2 Lichnerowicz and York’s contribution to the
                initial value problem.
            -    2.2.3 Dirac’s fixing of the foliation.
        -    2.3 Barbour et al’s work.
            -    2.3.1 Poincaré’s principle.
            -    2.3.2 Best matching.
            -    2.3.3 Best matching in pure geometrodynamics
            -    2.3.4 Introduction of the conformal group and emergence
                of CMC by best matching
        -    2.4 Results and directions for Shape Dynamics.
            -    2.4.1 Brief statement of results.
    -    3 Linking theory for Shape Dynamics
        -    3.1 General trading of symmetries
            -    3.1.1 Linking Theories
            -    3.1.2 A Construction Principle for Linking Theories
            -    3.1.3 Diagram of trading
    -    4 Trading GR for SD: compact closed @xmath case
        -    4.1 Construction of the Linking Theory
        -    4.2 Recovering General Relativity for compact closed
            manifolds
        -    4.3 Recovering Shape Dynamics for compact closed manifolds.
            -    4.3.1 Constraint Surface for Shape dynamics in compact
                closed manifolds.
            -    4.3.2 Constructing the theory on the constraint surface
            -    4.3.3 Properties of @xmath
        -    4.4 Construction of the section in @xmath
            -    4.4.1 Possibility of bypassing the linking theory
                construction
        -    4.5 Comparisons with earlier work
            -    4.5.1 Comparison with earlier work: Barbour et al
            -    4.5.2 Comparison with earlier work: York
    -    5 Trading GR for SD: asymptotically flat case
        -    5.1 Constructing the Linking Theory
        -    5.2 Recovering General Relativity in the asymptotically
            flat.
        -    5.3 Recovering Shape Dynamics in the asymptotically flat
            case
            -    5.3.1 Constraint Surface for Shape Dynamics
            -    5.3.2 Comparison with Dirac’s work
        -    5.4 Lagrangian Picture
    -    6 Causal Structure and coupling to different fields
        -    6.1 General criteria for coupling.
            -    6.1.1 Coupling to the scalar field.
            -    6.1.2 Coupling to the electromagnetic field.
        -    6.2 Emergence of the causal structure.
            -    6.2.1 Testing different actions with the reconstruction
                of the metric.
    -    7 Volume expansions and Hamilton-Jacobi approach.
        -    7.1 A practical way to calculate the global Hamiltonian.
        -    7.2 Large volume expansion
        -    7.3 Hamilton-Jacobi equation for large volume.
-    II Gauge Theory in Riem.
    -    8 Riem as a principal fiber bundle
        -    8.1 Introduction
            -    8.1.1 Principal fiber bundles and gauge theory.
        -    8.2 The 3-diffeomorphism group.
        -    8.3 Gauge structures over Riem: Slice theorem.
            -    8.3.1 Constructing the vertical projection operator for
                the PFB-structure of @xmath
            -    8.3.2 Defining @xmath , a Riemmanian structure for
                @xmath , and an @xmath map.
            -    8.3.3 The orbit manifold and splittings
            -    8.3.4 The normal bundle to the orbits and construction
                of the vertical projection operator.
            -    8.3.5 The Slice Theorem
        -    8.4 The conformal bundle.
            -    8.4.1 York splitting.
    -    9 Connection Forms
        -    9.1 Introduction
        -    9.2 Connection forms: basic properties
            -    9.2.1 An equivariant splitting.
            -    9.2.2 The connection form obtained from the vertical
                projection
            -    9.2.3 Locality of connection forms.
        -    9.3 Construction of connection forms in @xmath through
            orthogonality
            -    9.3.1 Construction through orthogonality and the
                momentum constraint
            -    9.3.2 Using the Fredholm Alternative
            -    9.3.3 Equivariant metrics
            -    9.3.4 Ellipticity of @xmath
            -    9.3.5 The intersection @xmath
        -    9.4 The conformal diffeomorphism group.
            -    9.4.1 A fully conformally invariant action with two
                metric degrees of freedom.
    -    10 Conclusions
-    A Variational Formulae
    -    A.1 Poisson brackets of constraints.
        -    A.1.1 Pure gravity.
    -    A.2 Scalar and Electromagnetic fields.
        -    A.2.1 Scalar.
        -    A.2.2 Electromagnetic.
-    B Relevant formulae for volume-preserving-conformal
    transformations.
    -    B.1 Basic variations.
    -    B.2 Canonical transformation properties
    -    B.3 Tangent space to the space of volume-preserving conformal
        transformations.
    -    B.4 Group structure.
-    C Hamilton-Jacobi auxiliary calculations.
    -    C.1 Volume decoupling for @xmath .
    -    C.2 Volume expansion for the SD Hamiltonian
        -    C.2.1 Explicit calculation of the first three terms in the
            Hamilton-Jacobi volume expansion.
-    D Manifold structure for constraint set.
    -    D.1 Poisson Brackets and Linear maps
    -    D.2 Constraint manifold for GR.
    -    D.3 Propagation of the constraints.
        -    D.3.1 Momentum Constraint
        -    D.3.2 Hamiltonian Constraint
-    E Some useful mathematical theorems.
    -    E.0.1 Lovelock’s theorem
    -    E.0.2 Closed graph theorem.
    -    E.0.3 Regular value theorem.
    -    E.0.4 Implicit function theorem.
    -    E.0.5 Yamabe problem

### Chapter 1 Introductory remarks

#### 1.1 A tale of two theories

Probably one of the most regurgitated quotes of theoretical physics is
Minkowski’s 1908 address at the 80th Assembly of German Natural
Scientists and Physicians:

  Henceforth space by itself, and time by itself, are doomed to fade
  away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of the two will
  preserve an independent reality.

By the time Minkowski pronounced the now famous words, the experimental
and theoretical bases for relativity were on solid ground. The
experimental absence of the ether had been explained away, and the
4-dimensional unification of electricity and magnetism was one of the
theoretical triumphs of the early 20th century. The foundation was laid
for one of the great edifices of modern physics: general relativity.

In a different part of the world of physics, simultaneously with these
advances, the apparently completely different field of thermodynamics
and heat emission had given birth to the quantum. The infant came into
the scene dissipating the second of Lord Kelvin’s famous ‘‘clouds” over
physics: the then experimentally disproved law of black-body radiation.
¹ ¹ 1 Both Rayleigh-Jeans’and Wien’s, for different ends of the
spectrum. The newborn was destined for greatness, and it did not
disappoint. Under the teenage guise of quantum mechanics, and its later
adult incarnation, quantum field theory, it dominated much of modern
theoretical and experimental physics.

Both fields grew up side by side basking in glory after glory, with
relativity perhaps reaching its maturity earlier than quantum mechanics,
being put into its present form already in 1916. After the teenage
years, under the auspices of Schrödinger, Klein, Gordon, and most
prominently Dirac, the two met and the encounter evolved quantum
mechanics into quantum field theory, arguably the most successful theory
ever developed. On the other hand, general relativity remained largely
unmoved by quantum mechanics.

As it stands however, quantum field theory is not the final word in this
tale. It incorporates at best a sterile version of general relativity,
one in which quantum fields are not allowed to feed back into the
geometry of space-time. At worst, it still requires a structure that
allows one to separate space-time into space and time, thereby foiling
Minkowski’s grandiose prediction. ² ² 2 In other words, unless the
background metric has a global time-like Killing vector, one cannot
canonically define a vacuum or ground state, as the concept of a vacuum
is not invariant under diffeomorphisms. In general, under a
diffeomorphism, the mode decomposition of the transformed eigenfunctions
will contain negative frequencies even if they were positive before the
transformation. In spite of valiant attempts by many physicists over the
past 80 years, it remains true that the two theories are not completely
on talking terms.

Our objective in the present thesis is to give an alternative view of
gravity, one which breaks away from space-time – indeed breaks
space-time – into space and time. This might seem at first like a step
back. But as we will see, many other conceptual challenges are resolved
by the approach advertised in this thesis. In so doing we hope to remove
the most glaring point of conceptual disagreement between our two
protagonists: the different notions of time each one clings to. Or,
being a little more conservative, we hope to at least smooth out the
issue to the point where a compromise can be reached and gravitational
phenomena be made more sympathetic to quantum mechanics.

#### 1.2 The problem of time

It is no secret that time plays very different roles in quantum field
theory and general relativity. In the former time is part of an absolute
framework with respect to which dynamical operators (or states) are
defined, but in the latter everything is dynamical. This mismatch is the
source of many great difficulties encountered in the attempts to create
an overarching unified framework of quantum gravity [ 1 ] .

In the canonical formulation, more amenable to a standard quantum
theoretical treatment, space-time is essentially ‘sliced-up’, and
Einstein’s equations are described as an evolution of the geometry of
spatial slices through time. In effect, one attempts to revert to
separate notions of space and time as much as possible to be able to
apply the Hamiltonian analysis. It is in this formulation that we can
see most clearly some of the problems that relativistic “time” creates
in the quantization of gravity. The ADM formulation of the Einstein
equations [ 2 ] leads directly to constraints. These constraints are
such that they are associated with “symmetries” of the system,
symmetries whose action generate certain transformations of the physical
description of the Universe.

One set of constraints, known collectively as the momentum constraint,
is associated with foliation-preserving 3-diffeomorphisms. In other
words, its action preserves the “slicing”, and thus the separation of
space-time into space and time remains intact. This action has a well
defined group representation on phase space, which simplifies its
treatment considerably. Only a single initial configuration of the
Universe is needed to obtain the resulting final configuration under the
action of the symmetry. Moreover this is valid for the finite (as
opposed to infinitesimal) action of the group, a property which does not
hold for the remaining constraints, as we will see. These
characteristics make it fairly simple to quotient out the symmetry
associated to the momentum constraint, eliminating its related
unphysical degrees of freedom. The resulting quotient space, called
superspace , parametrizes initial data obeying the constraint, and is
the proper physical arena that eliminates the redundancy generated by
that symmetry.

The other set of constraints, which we denote by @xmath , is called the
Hamiltonian constraint , and it generates evolution of the spatial
variables. Already at the classical level a severe problem immediately
arises. Because there is an @xmath constraint at each space point,
generating evolution independently, the time evolution is “many
fingered”, which means that the spatial slices can be made to evolve at
arbitrarily chosen different rates at different points. In contrast to
the action of 3-diffeomorphisms, this “symmetry” changes the original
decomposition of space-time into space and time. By generating different
foliations of space-time, it yields curves in phase space that bear no
simple relationship to each other (see figure 1.1 ). Unlike the momentum
constraints, it does not, by itself, have a group action on phase space,
and one cannot straightforwardly quotient phase space. Dirac, when
speaking about the difference between the constraints (in the setting of
quantum theory) phrased it in the following simple way [ 3 ] : “Thus we
have the situation that we cannot specify the initial state for a
problem without solving the equations of motion. The formalism is thus
not suitable to dealing with practical problems.” And therein lies the
problem: to quotient out the symmetry and obtain the physical
configuration space, one must basically solve the equations of motion.

#### 1.3 A tale of two parts

###### A theory of space and time

Our objective in the first part of the thesis will be to develop a
theory of gravity that is indeed a theory of space and time.
Furthermore, it has a different symmetry group than general relativity
and carries a ‘‘proper” group action on the gravitational variables. As
we put it, in shape dynamics (SD) we are in the business of symmetry
‘‘trading”. It will be a theory of gravity in the sense that the
solutions of a particular gauge fixing of general relativity are
equivalent to the solutions of a particular gauge fixing of the new
symmetry in the present theory. The new symmetry is that of
3-dimensional conformal transformations, ³ ³ 3 Transformations that
either preserve the total volume in the case that the Universe is closed
and without boundary, or respect given boundary conditions if the
Universe is spatially asymptotically flat. i.e., transformations that
change local scale. These transformations act truly as a symmetry group
in the phase space of general relativity. Their simple linear action
allows us to easily track the effect of the symmetry transformations and
eliminate their associated redundancy (i.e., we can quotient by their
action).

We thus obtain the space of physical configurations called conformal
superspace , or, more lyrically, shape space . It is the natural setting
for a description of the Universe which relies solely on the “shape of
space”. In such a description, spatial angles take the forefront, while
local size is relegated to a quantity measured only with respect to an
arbitrary local scale.

In this new formulation, we replace evolution generated by infinitely
many local Hamiltonian constraints by evolution generated by a unique
single global constraint @xmath . Time evolves rigidly, in step
everywhere. We believe this squarely addresses issues related to the
problem of time, and offers real hope of a definitive solution to it.
This part will be based on the papers: [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 ] .

###### A geometrical gauge-theory setting.

Since in Shape Dynamics we have a “proper” group action on phase space,
the question of how far one can pursue the gauge-theoretic scenario of
usual gauge theories, such as electrodynamics, immediately becomes
relevant. In the second part of this thesis, we will describe such a
gauge setting, with connection forms, gauge choices and the like, for
both the 3-diffeomorphism group and the 3-conformal group as actions on
Riem. Both the actions of the groups and their algebras are perfectly
well-defined and correspond exactly to their finite-dimensional
counterparts. This part is entirely based on paper [ 8 ] .

This thesis is formed from two separate but deeply related subjects: the
construction of a theory of gravity embodying a different symmetry
principle, called shape dynamics (SD), and the construction of a gauge
theory for the configuration space of general relativity (GR).

#### 1.4 Notation and other warnings.

##### 1.4.1 Other warnings

We try to pursue our proofs to the point where only subtle technical
functional-analytic matters, such as domains in Frechét spaces etc,
start to appear. Even though we do not present full mathematical proofs
to the bitter end taking these issues into account, we give strong
plausibility arguments of why they should go through without a hitch.

This thesis is a merger of two independent but very much interrelated
lines of research. One is the construction of the theory of shape
dynamics, which takes a leading role and is very prominent in the
present work. The other is the working out of specific geometric gauge
theoretic structures in the configuration space of GR. The former is a
self-contained theory, with a robust conceptual background. The latter
is a conceptual framework, or the development of a set of tools, that
can be applied in the future to, among other things, the theory of shape
dynamics itself.

We have chosen in this thesis to keep the background material for the
two sections separate. It seemed more pedagogic to distinguish the
technical background necessary for each part, and only after both
edifices have been constructed to bridge them, although of course by
then the reader will already see a clear connection between the two
parts. This approach has its drawbacks; it is not always possible to
keep the two parts completely separate. In particular, we have three
cases where one section must borrow from the other, or vice-versa. One
of these instances happens when we explain Barbour’s best-matching
ideas, and find that the ideal way to explain them is to use almost
exclusively the technical material present in Part II, defining gauge
structures in Riem, the space of 3-metrics (chapter 8 ). A second
instance is that we use the Fredholm alternative when studying the
asymptotically flat case of shape dynamics in chapter 5 . Lastly, we
give an intuitive geometrical picture of shape dynamics, and we must
also mention the use of a section for the conformal bundle, presented
also in chapter 8 . For this item, we had no option but to include it in
the first part of the thesis. We could have as easily included the first
and last items in Part II of the thesis and made reference to part I, or
vice-versa, but although they might be less displaced technically if
placed in Part II, we find them conceptually better situated in Part I.

##### 1.4.2 Notation

We explicitly mention only a few of the items individually, those that
may be more confusing to the reader without further explanations.

###### Concerning the 3-metric @xmath.

One important difference between the usual notation and the one utilized
in this thesis has to be mentioned here at the beginning. Since we will
focus mostly on the 3+1 picture of gravity, we will use @xmath to denote
the 3-dimensional Riemannian metric , and not the four-dimensional
Lorentz one. Whenever we write @xmath we mean of course the square root
of the determinant of the metric. But we will also use @xmath for the
determinant itself, or for the metric as an argument of some
function(al), such as @xmath . This does not mean that @xmath is a
function of the determinant of the metric and the trace of the momenta,
but of the full metric and full momenta. The distinction should be clear
from the context. At some points, when it is convenient to use
index-free tensor notation, we will adopt a boldface @xmath for the
metric tensor.

Throughout the paper semi-colon denotes covariant differentiation, and
we will, when it is convenient, use abstract index notation (parentheses
denote symmetrization of indices, and square brackets
anti-symmetrization). Also, again when it is convenient, we shall use
@xmath to denote the intrinsic Levi-Civita covariant derivative related
to the 3-metric, and @xmath the one related to the 4-dimensional one.

The one parameter family of natural metrics on the tangent space to Riem
(the configuration space of all 3-metrics) is taken to be given by [ 9 ]
:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, for tangent vectors @xmath , the generalized DeWitt metric is
defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with inverse

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where by inverse we mean @xmath . The relation between @xmath and @xmath
is that @xmath . The usual DeWitt metric is @xmath . We briefly note
that the DeWitt metric is usually taken to be @xmath , but if we are
only dealing with symmetric two-valence tensors, its action amounts to
the one we have used, apart from the @xmath factor, which we input on
the volume form.

###### Functional dependence, brackets, function spaces.

We employ square brackets for functional dependence, as @xmath for
example, and Kuchař’s notation for mixed functional and local
dependence, @xmath for a functional of @xmath that yields a local
function. Sometimes, when there is more than one functional dependence
and still local dependence, we separate the functional arguments by
commas and the local dependence by semi-commas @xmath .

We will use bras and kets both for the mean of quantities, such as
@xmath . This is not to be confused to its use when separated by a
comma, for a given contraction between dual vector spaces and the vector
spaces themselves, such as @xmath .

Another non-standard notation we will be employing is that of @xmath ,
for some given function @xmath . This is meant to signify that @xmath
strongly, i.e., over all of phase space @xmath and for every @xmath .

The space of smooth functions over the manifold @xmath will be denoted
by @xmath . The space of smooth sections over a given vector bundle
@xmath will be given by @xmath .

###### Conformal transformations

The acronym vpct signifies volume-preserving-conformal-transformation
and we shall employ it widely. The calligraphic @xmath is the notation
for the conformal transformation map, and should not be confused with
@xmath , meaning the tangent space to @xmath at @xmath , nor with @xmath
which is the tangent map to @xmath at @xmath . It should also not be
confused when we denote the general linking theories in Chapter 3 by
@xmath .

## Part I Shape Dynamics

### Chapter 2 Introducing Shape Dynamics

We will now introduce the main subject of this thesis: the theory of
shape dynamics (SD). The first aim of this chapter is to provide the
reader with an outline of the theory, that is, its motivations and main
results so far. It will serve the purpose of pointing north, and the
rest of Part I will guide us there and hopefully, once we have arrived,
indicate some interesting directions to explore.

#### 2.1 Technical Background

Before actually presenting an introduction to the main subject of this
thesis, we have to present some technical baggage without which it makes
little sense. In other words, this section will be an introduction to
the introduction of shape dynamics. The theory itself will be
constructed in the next few chapters (chapter 3 through 5 ).

We will start by giving a streamlined view of constrained dynamics,
which suffices for our purposes. The main result which we wish to
present in the first section is that for systems without a “true
Hamiltonian” a complete description of the dynamics can be made by
separating first and second class constraints (section 2.1.3 ) and
strongly solving the second class constraints. We also give a more
geometric view of the whole Dirac analysis, including that for systems
possessing a “true Hamiltonian”.

In 2.1.5 , we then present the ADM 3+1 decomposition, which is the
starting point of almost all canonical approaches to gravity, finishing
with the ADM constraints and the Dirac algebra in section 2.1.6 . After
introducing these theoretical constructs, we will be able to discuss
work that led to the construction of shape dynamics, such as York’s
method for solving the initial value problem of general relativity and
Barbour et al’s first principles derivation of those equations.

##### 2.1.1 Constrained dynamics

###### Lagrangian dynamics

In this thesis we are mainly concerned with a dynamical formulation of
physical systems. That means we will focus on how such systems develop
through time, a view in some aspects different from the usual
4-dimensional covariant field theory.

In the Lagrangian formulation of mechanics, one is given a Lagrangian
@xmath , where @xmath are the coordinates of the system, @xmath are
their time derivatives, and @xmath is an index that parametrizes them.
For example, for a single particle in @xmath , @xmath runs from 1 to 3.
¹ ¹ 1 For two particles in @xmath for example, it is convenient to
subdivide the 6 values of @xmath into two subsets of three, parametrized
by the particle to which they belong: @xmath . As the coordinates @xmath
describe every possible configuration of the system, the space of
coordinates parametrize what is called the configuration space of the
system, @xmath .

With the Lagrangian, one forms an action functional

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

by integrating the Lagrangian over a given path @xmath . Now, upon
variation and integration by parts, assuming that the system is fixed at
both initial and final configurations, one obtains from the least action
principle @xmath the Euler–Lagrange equations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We chose to use the notation @xmath as opposed to @xmath because this
generalizes the partial derivatives directly to functional derivatives
in the infinite dimensional case, just as the sum indicated by repeated
indices generalizes to integrals.

If we use the chain rule for the @xmath derivative, we get from ( 2.2 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this it becomes clear that the accelerations are uniquely
determined by the positions and velocities if and only if the matrix
@xmath is invertible. If it isn’t, our system possesses some kind of
redundancy in its description, and this is indicative of gauge
symmetries .

Although the Euler–Lagrange equations derived from variation of the
Lagrangian completely describe the dynamics of the system, it is a
rather cumbersome ordeal to obtain directly from them information about
redundancy in the description of the system. The more suitable method to
unravel such information is to use the Hamiltonian formalism.

##### 2.1.2 Hamiltonian dynamics

For Hamiltonian dynamics, we seek to perform a change of variables
@xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In other words, one defines the action of the Legendre transform as
@xmath . Here @xmath denotes the tangent space to the configuration
space. This is the space parametrized by the doubles @xmath , where
@xmath denotes an element of the tangent space to @xmath , i.e., the
tangent of a curve at the point @xmath . Thus we say that @xmath . The
space @xmath is obtained by replacing the tangent space at each point by
the cotangent space, i.e., by the vector space consisting of linear
functionals on @xmath , for each point @xmath . ² ² 2 These are all
simple examples of vector bundles over @xmath , the trivializing charts
being induced by the tangent map of the original charts of @xmath . The
momenta @xmath are not elements of the tangent space, but of the
cotangent space. That means that we can define their action on the
tangent vectors @xmath without the need of an inner product. In fact, we
have to define these elements of @xmath by the way in which they act on
elements of the tangent space.

Thus we characterize the map @xmath by defining it to act on @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As an example, let us set @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we can see that the linear functional, at @xmath , is just given by
@xmath , which is indeed an element of the cotangent space, and
parametrizes the momenta with the position and velocity vectors.

As it happens however, under usual assumptions the map might not be
injective nor surjective. In particular the full @xmath might not be
accessible to the dynamical system. However, this is far from being a
disadvantage of the Hamiltonian approach. Quite the contrary, a
dynamical system may possess some redundancy in its description – one is
in fact “over-parametrizing” it – and this property of the Hamiltonian
approach is a warning sign that the system has this feature. Let us see
how this is related, in the Lagrangian approach, to the unique
determination of the accelerations from the velocities and positions.

The condition for the map to be (at least locally) an isomorphism is
that the block diagonal matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

be invertible. Since one of the blocks contains the identity Id (this is
just the matrix @xmath ), we arrive at the same condition imposed from
equation ( 2.3 ) that such a situation reflects the fact that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

has to be invertible. The constraints on @xmath that we get usually form
submanifolds of @xmath (this relies on our assumption that the rank of
@xmath is constant)) and can thus be put in the form of functionals of
@xmath , let us say @xmath , which implicitly define the said manifolds
(see the regular value theorem 2 ).

The regularity assumption of constant rank and the further assumption
that the constraints are irreducible ³ ³ 3 We assume that all the @xmath
are linearly independent, i.e., that the one forms @xmath are linearly
independent, i.e., that we have an irreducible set of constraints. If
they were not, we would have to choose a basis for the constraints. ,
implies again from theorem 2 that the @xmath form a complete coordinate
system in phase space for the complement of the constraint surface. For
example, if we had a 4-dimensional phase space with two sets of
irreducible constraints, theorem 2 guarantees that we can find
coordinates in phase space, @xmath , such that @xmath parametrize the
constraint surface and @xmath are given by the two constraint functions.
This has the strong consequence that a vector @xmath is tangent to the
constraint surface if and only if @xmath . The fact that @xmath is
tangent to the constraint surface already implies the “if” part, since
@xmath on the entire constraint surface it doesn’t change along @xmath .
The “only if” part is a result of writing everything in a coordinate
system and on the fact that indeed we have a complete coordinate system
as mentioned above.

Such constraints, arrived at from the sole definition of the momenta,
are called primary , in allusion to the fact that the equations of
motion need not be used to derive them. In Lagrangian variables, these
relations are merely identities, as we will see in practice in section
3.1.2 . It follows that the inverse transformation from the momenta to
the velocities, even when we restrict ourselves to the constraint
surface, is multi-valued. Given a point in phase space that fulfills the
constraints, the “inverse image” through @xmath is not unique, and in
order to render it single-valued, and thereby indicate the location of
the velocities @xmath on the inverse manifold, one needs to introduce
extra parameters in at least the same number as there are primary
constraints. These parameters will appear as Lagrange multipliers in the
Hamiltonian formulation.

Thus we can see that we do not fully characterize dynamical redundancy
solely by restricting ourselves to the constraint surface. Dynamical
redundancy, or symmetry, is present in the Lagrangian characterization
of the system as much as in the Hamiltonian. The transform being
injective signifies that a restriction to the constraint surface (the
image of ) still “includes” the full Lagrangian characterization,
symmetries and all. Part of the power of the Hamiltonian formulation is
exactly that it gives us a starting point to study redundancy in the
description of dynamical systems, so let us get to it.

The canonical Hamiltonian is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we compute the variation of ( 2.8 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

As the total variation depends only on the variation of @xmath and
@xmath , this means that @xmath enters @xmath only in the precise
combination that gives @xmath , and thus the non-trivial dependence of
the Hamiltonian can be set to be just @xmath .

Since the system can only access the surfaces in @xmath defined by
@xmath , and the Hamiltonian is a function of @xmath , one would be
inclined to conclude that we may arbitrarily extend the Hamiltonian in
@xmath out of the surface:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we introduced the notation @xmath to mean weak equality ; i.e.,
equalities that are valid only over the constraint surface. Here we are
summing over the @xmath index, and @xmath is an arbitrary coefficient.
These extra parameters could then be seen as coordinates on @xmath that
determine the exact position (a “height”) over the inverse images of the
momenta. However, such a conclusion would be hasty. The issue, which
will be explained better in section 2.1.4 below, is that the dynamics
does not depend on the value of the Hamiltonian itself, but on its flow
, or gradient. In fact, it is true that we can amend the Hamiltonian in
such a way (for first class constraints), but for a different reason
than the one stated above.

From ( 2.9 ) and ( 2.10 ) we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The equations of motion ( 2.11 )-( 2.12 ) can be derived from the
variation of the Legendre transform of the action with generating
function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the boundary conditions that the variations vanish at the
endpoints. If we are able to explicitly solve the constraints, i.e., if
we can impose the conditions @xmath , then we can use the simpler
variational principle subject to the conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 2.1.3 Poisson brackets and symplectic flows

It is through ( 2.11 )-( 2.12 ) that we choose to introduce Poisson
brackets into the dynamical analysis, as these equations generalize by
the chain rule to arbitrary functionals of the dynamical variables
@xmath to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where a sum over the index @xmath is understood, and the usual notation
for Poisson brackets @xmath was introduced. One can immediately see the
value of Poisson brackets for evolution through a Hamiltonian, but they
can be generalized beyond that, to signify the evolution of any
constraint under the action of another. This is completely necessary
when one starts talking about symmetries, as one would like to know if
one or another constraint is invariant under its action.

###### First- and second-class constraints

A more geometric picture of the workings of both first- and second-class
constraints will be given below. For now we give a more pragmatic
approach to the classifications of constraints. A set of constraints
@xmath will be called first class if their Poisson bracket vanishes
weakly on the constraint surface, i.e. @xmath . In contrast, a set will
be called second class if @xmath does not vanish on the constraint
surface. A given constraint @xmath will be said to be first class with
respect to this set if @xmath .

It can easily be seen that for a set of @xmath second-class constraints
for which the @xmath matrix @xmath is not of maximal rank on the
constraint surface, i.e., @xmath , there exists at least one linear
combination of the constraints that is first class with respect to all
of the rest. By definition, there exists a vector (or an N-tuple) @xmath
for which @xmath . Then clearly @xmath is still first class. By
iterating this procedure we arrive at a set of purely first-class
constraints @xmath , and purely second-class ones @xmath . The Poisson
bracket matrix is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is invertible.

Second-class constraints cannot be interpreted as gauge generators, or,
even indeed as generators of any transformation that is physically
significant. Because it does not preserve the constraints its symplectic
flow will take us out of the allowed surfaces for dynamics. So what does
one do with second class constraints? We use the invertibility of the
matrix of purely second class constraints to define a projection of the
dynamics into the constraint surface. That is, we define the Dirac
bracket:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

As can easily be checked, @xmath . I.e. the symplectic flow (defined on
Section 2.1.4 ) of any of the second class constraints automatically
vanishes with this bracket. The Dirac brackets effectively project the
dynamics to the constraint surface and thus reduce the degrees of
freedom of the theory (again, see Section 2.1.4 ). This obligatory
projection of the dynamics implies that the constraints are imposed
strongly : the constraints should be taken to be zero everywhere (since
we are forcefully projecting dynamics to the surface where they are
zero). In relatively simple cases one or more pair of conjugate
variables can be found such that the purely second class constraints can
be solved for them in terms of the other variables. Considering such
variables as coordinates in phase space, these values define surfaces in
@xmath . We can then completely project dynamics to the surface thus
defined by completely eliminating said variables (using the second class
constraints as definitions) and reverting to the usual Poisson brackets.
In this simple case we eliminate the degrees of freedom of the system
that refer to these constraints and move our analysis to the projected
surface. In other words, using the second-class constraints equations as
definitions we reduce our phase space, and hence our Poisson bracket, to
the remaining variables only, expressing all quantities in terms of the
remaining variables. If we cannot find a way to express all second class
constraints in such a manner the dynamics must be formulated using the
Dirac bracket, whereby one keeps the second class constraint in their
implicit form and all variables are retained.

As a matter of fact, one of the main aspects of the present work is
based exactly on what is described here: separate a first class
constraint from the purely second class ones and then solve the latter
for a pair of conjugate variables.

###### Gauge fixings

In the absence of a true Hamiltonian, i.e., a Hamiltonian not entirely
made up of constraints, ⁴ ⁴ 4 As a matter of fact, recent work shows
that Dirac’s conjecture, namely that all primary first-class constraints
generate gauge symmetries, holds only in the absence of a time labeling.
It does not need to hold for a constraint that generates time
reparametrization, any more than it does for a true Hamiltonian [ 10 ] .
the presence of primary first-class constraints is associated with gauge
symmetry. The associated gauge freedom indicates that there is more than
one set of canonical variables that corresponds to a given physical
state. In practice it is sometimes desirable to eliminate this freedom
by imposing further restrictions on the canonical variables. This should
eliminate part (partial gauge fixing) or all of the arbitrariness in the
choice of canonical variables representing the same physical states. The
inclusion of such extra conditions in the formalism is permissible
because they only remove unobservable elements of the system and do not
impinge on the gauge-invariant properties.

For a certain extra (imposed) constraint @xmath to be considered a gauge
fixing, we must demand two properties of gauge transformations as
related to the fixing:

-    Existence: The particular choice of gauge that the condition @xmath
    imposes has to be reachable from any point on the constraint surface
    through a gauge transformation that this condition purports to fix,
    i.e., there has to exist a gauge transformation that fixes the gauge
    to satisfy @xmath .

-    Uniqueness: There must be only one gauge transformation that fixes
    the variables to satisfy the gauge-fixing condition @xmath .

These conditions can be similarly formulated in the language of fiber
bundles by the concept of a section (see section 8 ).

##### 2.1.4 Geometric interpretations and the case of a true Hamiltonian

###### Interlude: geometric interpretation

We will try not to give too technical an account of the introduction of
symplectic geometry, but aim to give merely a pedestrian approach to the
meaning of Poisson brackets of general functions on phase space. If one
looks closely at equation ( 2.15 ), one can see that indeed it is a
derivation, i.e. it obeys Leibiniz’s rule:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which indicates that we can see the linear operator @xmath as a kind of
vector field in phase space. We then generalize what was done for the
Hamiltonian and define the symplectic flow of a given phase-space
function @xmath as @xmath . It will act on other functions as a
directional derivative @xmath and measure how much @xmath changes in the
direction of @xmath . That is, it measures how other phase-space
functions change under “evolution” through the action of the
corresponding phase-space function @xmath . Now, as we have already
mentioned in section 2.1.2 , the phase-space function @xmath implicitly
defines a surface through the regular value theorem 2 provided certain
regularity assumptions. In the presence of a metric, one would usually
say that the differential one-form @xmath is “perpendicular” to the
surface @xmath , because its dual vector field @xmath is defined as
@xmath , which obviously vanishes for any vector field tangent to @xmath
. In the case of symplectic geometry, one does not define the analogous
operation through the use of a metric but a symplectic two-form, usually
denoted by @xmath . Explicitly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and furthermore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, just as a vector field can be tangential to a given manifold, so
can symplectic flows. Suppose then that a surface @xmath in phase space
is given by the intersection of regular manifolds defined by the inverse
values of the functions @xmath , i.e., @xmath . Then @xmath will be said
to be first class if: for all phase-space functions @xmath such that
@xmath vanishes on @xmath , i.e. @xmath for all @xmath , then @xmath for
all @xmath and @xmath . The statement is equivalent to the much simpler
statement that @xmath , since this will indeed be zero whenever we are
on the surface. The geometric translation is indeed very simple: all
symplectic flows @xmath of functions @xmath that vanish on the surface
@xmath are tangent to the surface.

By contrast, we can define a second-class manifold (or set of regular
functions @xmath ) if all symplectic flows (of functions that vanish on
the surface) take us out of the surface (i.e. are not tangent to it).

As anticipated in section 2.1.2 , we now explain with more completeness
why we must add arbitrary summands of constraints to the Hamiltonian
function. As we saw, by the regularity assumptions, a phase-space vector
@xmath is tangent to a first-class constraint surface if and only if
@xmath for all the @xmath making up the said surface. Thus by the above
( 2.18 ), for any such vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

meaning that for the pull-back (or, let us say, the projection) of the
symplectic form @xmath to the constraint surface, @xmath , the
directions given by @xmath are degenerate, and dynamical flows are not
uniquely defined, i.e., @xmath . Thus, as their dynamical effect is not
felt over the constraint surface, we can arbitrarily add summands of
@xmath to the definition of the Hamiltonian function ( 2.10 ) without
further consequence.

###### The case of a true Hamiltonian.

If we have a Hamiltonian that consists of “pure constraints”, as happens
in GR, then after separating the constraints into pure second- and
first-class ones, and solving for the second-class ones (and thereby
setting them strongly to zero), we are done, as we are left with only
first-class constraints. Thus all smearings (Lagrange multipliers) in
the total Hamiltonian would propagate all the constraints, making the
dynamical system consistent. But if we have a true Hamiltonian, let us
call it @xmath , we have more work to do.

As we will not be dealing with this result directly, we but briefly
remark on the Dirac procedure, using the geometric interpretation
presented above. What geometrically happens when we are obliged to add
constraints to the theory? Let us start with, say, the initial primary
first-class constraints @xmath . We are restricting the domain of the
dynamics, as we said before, to a subsurface of the total phase space,
@xmath , and we must add the new constraints to the Hamiltonian with
some Lagrange multipliers, @xmath , as they will have no observable
effect on the dynamics.

Let us call this initial surface @xmath . We have to check if the
Hamiltonian propagates the corresponding constraints. In the geometric
picture, this means we have to find a subsurface @xmath to which the
symplectic flow of the Hamiltonian is tangent. The problem is that the
flow @xmath might be tangent to @xmath only at the points @xmath , i.e.,
we can only say that the Hamiltonian vector field is contained in the
tangent space @xmath . It does not need to be tangent to the entirety of
@xmath . Of course, @xmath is contained in the “full” tangent space to
@xmath at those points, and need not be tangent to the subspace @xmath
itself (i.e., contained in @xmath ). But now we cannot restrict dynamics
to @xmath because the Hamiltonian flow will take us out of that surface
again. And thus we must find a subsurface of @xmath to which the
Hamiltonian flow is tangent, i.e., @xmath .

We keep on doing this until we finally reach a @xmath over which the
symplectic flow @xmath is tangent to the entire surface. At the end of
the algorithm, we will be left with a surface (a set of constraints
@xmath ) over which the extended Hamiltonian @xmath is completely
tangent. Then the dynamics is said to be consistent.

##### 2.1.5 ADM 3+1 split

General relativity in its original formulation is very elegant and
powerful, describing the physics of space-time simply as 4-dimensional
Lorentzian geometry. While this is indeed a very simple framework, we
human beings do not directly observe space-time, but instead we notice
an evolution, or change, of space. Therefore, under some circumstances,
it is very useful to have a more direct translation between experience
and theory by formulating what is called a 3+1 description of general
relativity.

###### Gauss–Codazzi relations

To arrive at the so-called 3+1 description, we have to assume that
space-time, @xmath , where @xmath is a four-dimensional manifold and
@xmath is a Lorentzian metric on it, is diffeomorphic to the direct
product @xmath , where @xmath is a 3-dimensional manifold representing
space and @xmath represents time. Such space-times are called globally
hyperbolic and exist if and only if the primary condition that allows us
to split space and time is satisfied. Namely, we have to assume
causality ; that no closed time-like curves ⁵ ⁵ 5 Curves @xmath such
that @xmath . exist [ 11 ] . Of course, a particular slicing of
space-time will still be a matter of choice, not considered in the
standard presentation of GR to be something intrinsic to the world. ⁶ ⁶
6 The main aim of this thesis however is to convince the reader that
indeed a natural splitting does exist. A choice of such a slicing is
equivalent to a choice of a regular function @xmath (in this case, this
is equivalent to saying that the gradient of @xmath is not zero
anywhere) for which @xmath is time-like.

###### Adapted coordinates, shift and lapse.

As we have assumed that the time function is regular, the regular values
of @xmath form 3-dimensional manifolds, which we call @xmath . Using the
submersion theorem, we can always find a local coordinate system @xmath
over the open set @xmath , where, for @xmath , @xmath , and we use
barred variables only when we feel we need to emphasize that we are in
an adapted coordinate system.

The one-form @xmath is then given by @xmath and the intrinsic
coordinates of each hypersurface are given by @xmath . Thus the vectors
@xmath span the tangent space to each hypersurface, where we used latin
indices to denote the adapted spatial coordinates. To make coordinate
independence more transparent, we can express the components of these
vector fields in terms of a general basis @xmath as @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath can be interpreted as the components of the vector field
@xmath (i.e., as the vector field itself). As @xmath is tangent to the
hypersurfaces and @xmath is a general coordinate vector field, @xmath
can alternatively be seen to act as a projection onto the hypersurface
@xmath [ 12 ] .

Let @xmath be tangent to @xmath . As the value of @xmath is constant
over each surface, @xmath by definition. In the adapted coordinates,
this is just saying @xmath . In this subsection, we will try to keep
both notations, @xmath and @xmath , side by side, so that the reader
does not forget that it is actually an arbitrary function that is
defining the hypersurfaces. Let us pause to note the important geometric
fact that in order to define the foliation we need only a regular
function @xmath , which does not require the aid of coordinate systems.
However, when we define the curves parametrized by @xmath , all other
coordinates being held constant, we have made an arbitrary choice of
coordinates and endowed our description with extra structure. Since
@xmath is defined independently of this structure, it is not necessary
that the vectors tangent to the chosen coordinate curves @xmath , @xmath
have much to do with the previously existing one-form @xmath . Let us
see what this implies.

The superscipt @xmath usually denotes dualization of a one-form to a
vector field by use of the metric. We adjoint a @xmath to it, to make
clear that we are using the full four-metric. Then, using the notation
@xmath to mean the metric dual to the one-form @xmath , we have the
vector field ( not written in components):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the vector field with components @xmath , or @xmath in adapted
coordinates, is a (un-normalized) normal to the hypersurfaces. We call
@xmath the unit normal to @xmath , to which @xmath is parallel. It is
straightforward to find the metric induced norm squared of @xmath , in
adapted coordinates, using ( 2.21 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Of course, for a general 4-metric the metric dual to the one-form @xmath
is n ot equal to @xmath , which is the algebraic dual to @xmath and
tangent vector to the @xmath curves. By ( 2.21 ), we can tell that this
is the case if @xmath . Thus we cannot say that the vectors tangent to
the @xmath coordinates are orthogonal to the hypersurfaces @xmath . We
decompose @xmath into its components parallel to the hypersurface,
@xmath , and orthogonal to it @xmath . In short

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath we get from ( 2.22 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we can simply define @xmath through @xmath .

Alternatively, using the projectors @xmath , and abbreviating @xmath by
the vector @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

See figure 2.1 .

The four metric @xmath induces a metric on @xmath , which is just its
restriction to vectors tangential to @xmath . We call this induced
metric @xmath and can straightforwardly check that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

is indeed the induced metric. Using ( 2.26 ), we write the orthogonal
projection operator onto @xmath as @xmath . It is easy to check that
@xmath and @xmath . Alternatively, we can use the components @xmath as
defined in ( 2.20 ) to project indices. Thus, in intrinsic @xmath
coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both definitions have their advantages and disadvantages.

###### Extrinsic curvature

The extrinsic curvature is a two-form, given by the tangential component
of the covariant derivative of the normal vector. Quite a mouthful, so
let us write it out explicitly in coordinate-free notation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define the Levi-Civita covariant derivative associated with
@xmath as @xmath . In the next to last equality, we used the metric
compatibility of the connection and orthogonality of @xmath and @xmath
and, in the last, we noticed that by Frobenius theorem the commutator
@xmath is tangent to @xmath , which enabled us to write @xmath . Since
@xmath is normalized, we can also straightforwardly check that @xmath ;
thus, although it depends on the normal @xmath , which is not intrinsic
to @xmath , we can write the extrinsic curvature with indices in @xmath
, as @xmath . We will denote the trace @xmath .

We can split the covariant derivative for vector fields on @xmath into
normal and parallel components, defining the intrinsic covariant
derivative to @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way the definition of @xmath is intrinsic on @xmath ; fact,
given that the original covariant derivative is the Levi-Civita one for
@xmath – that it is metric preserving and torsion-free – it can be shown
that @xmath is the Levi-Civita one for @xmath .

###### Gauss–Codazzi relation

Using this decomposition, we can rewrite the 4-dimensional Ricci scalar
@xmath , and thus the Einstein–Hilbert Lagrangian density, in terms of
the intrinsic geometry of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The final thing we must do is express @xmath in terms of our present set
of dynamical variables. The expression for the determinant gives us,
since @xmath is precisely the projection of @xmath along the normal,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get that @xmath . Up to boundary terms, we now have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the intrinsic 3-dimensional Ricci scalar of @xmath .

##### 2.1.6 Constraint algebra for ADM.

Now, to find the Hamiltonian, we must express ( 2.31 ) in terms of the
metric velocities @xmath . By definition @xmath . In particular, using
components as in ( 2.20 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this last equation in ( 2.27 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 2.25 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Upon projection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, to put it the other way around,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

We first rewrite the integrand of ( 2.31 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the DeWitt supermetric. We get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, from ( 2.31 ) and using ( 2.33 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath we finally get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note the important fact that, being a vector field, the shift is
originally written as @xmath , and thus we should write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now consider the constraints. We first have @xmath , which by the
Hamilton equations means @xmath . In turn, this enforces the scalar
constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, we obtain the vectorial momentum constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is many times written in the equivalent form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both of these can be rewritten using the extrinsic curvature:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This is the point of departure for a constraint analysis of the 3+1
formulation of general relativity. We get the constraint algebra
calculated in ( A.10 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we use the notation for smearing @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a smooth vector field.

Note that ( 2.43 ) involves the infamous “structure functions” @xmath
when we use the correct form of the momentum constraint ( 2.39 ). ⁷ ⁷ 7
Note that @xmath , which as a one-form, does not involve the metric at
all. It is the appearance of the metric in the original form of the
momentum constraint that flushes out the appearance of the “structure
functions”, as opposed to structure constants in the Dirac algebra.

#### 2.2 A brief history of 3D conformal transformations in standard
general relativity

To orient the reader on how the present work originated, we give here,
in some detail, an account of previous work that led up to it. We start
with the attempt by Weyl to introduce some notion of relativity of size
into the structure of general relativity, an enterprize very close in
spirit to our own motivations. We then discuss how first Lichnerowicz
and then York successfully developed the 3-dimensional conformal tools
to solve the initial-value problem of GR for almost all initial data.

##### 2.2.1 The Weyl connection

In 1918, H. Weyl had a happy thought [ 13 ] . If, when generalizing
Euclidean geometry to Riemannian geometry, we need extra information to
characterize parallel directions at different points, shouldn’t we worry
about how to characterize “parallel” (or equal) lengths? The assumption
of equal lengths comes from one of the elements of the definition of the
Levi-Civita connection; namely, that it preserves the metric tensor:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Weyl’s idea was to include in the definition of the connection a
one-form @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, it would no longer be true that @xmath , but @xmath . In
this way, the extra term says that even when we parallel translate the
direction of a vector there is also an infinitesimal change in its
length, given by its initial length times the value of the one form
@xmath in the given direction. This he hoped to be connected to the
electromagnetic @xmath connection @xmath . However, as Einstein soon
pointed out, if @xmath was non-zero, the lengths of objects would be
path-dependent, something not observed in Nature.

Our construction bears strong similarities to Weyl’s initial attempts,
especially as regards this question: how do we compare lengths at
distinct points? According to relationalist principles, we in fact
cannot. One way to get around Einstein’s criticism would be to limit the
Weyl potential @xmath to be given by @xmath for some scalar function
@xmath . In this way we would have an integrable connection and lengths
would still be “relative” but would not depend on the path taken.
Unfortunately this solution ceases to be interesting for incorporating
electromagnetism, because it obligates the curvature tensor @xmath to be
zero. Nonetheless, we are not interested in using conformal
transformations for the coupling of electromagnetism, and Weyl’s
enquiries were an important stimulus for the further work on the meaning
of relative size that has culminated in the work presented in this
thesis.

##### 2.2.2 Lichnerowicz and York’s contribution to the initial value
problem.

Conformal transformations are here defined as those transformations that
change the local spatial scale. A priori they have nothing to do with
the passage of time and therefore appear to have nothing in common with
the scalar Hamiltonian constraint. Yet, in a study begun through purely
mathematical considerations, the great relativist James York came to
quite a revolutionary conclusion: we can adjust the local scale so as to
find appropriate initial data for GR, i.e. data that solve the scalar
and the momentum constraints. He began his 1973 paper [ 14 ] on the
conformal approach to the initial value problem by stating:

  An increasing amount of evidence shows that the true dynamical degrees
  of freedom of the gravitational field can be identified directly with
  the conformally invariant geometry of three–dimensional spacelike
  hypersurfaces embedded in spacetime.[…] the configuration space that
  emerges is not superspace (the space of Riemannian three–geometries)
  but ‘conformal superspace’[the space of which each point is a
  conformal equivalence class of Riemannian three–geometries] @xmath
  [the real line](ie, the time, @xmath ).”

Perhaps a more careful choice of words would have been “An increasing
amount of evidence suggests ”, as, although it was indeed shown by York
that one could construct initial data for GR using three-dimensional
conformally invariant initial data, a conformally invariant version of
general relativity - with its own sets of conformally invariant
constraints and evolution equations - was not developed. The use of the
conformal factor was input by hand to aid in the solvability of an
equation. It did not involve any sort of canonical analysis and thus did
not contain stronger statements about the dynamical system as a whole.

The first important step towards solving the initial value problem for
GR, given by ( 2.38 ) and ( 2.40 ), was taken by Lichnerowicz [ 15 ] .
He did so by realizing that if @xmath is traceless , then the ( 2.42 )
means @xmath must also be divergenceless, or transverse .

Now, transverse traceless (TT) tensors are equivariant with respect to
conformal transformations. That is, if @xmath is a @xmath tensor with
respect to @xmath , conformal transformations act on @xmath in such a
way that the conformally transformed @xmath is TT with respect to the
transformed metric. For more information on this, see section 8.4.1 .
There we also show that if @xmath transforms ⁸ ⁸ 8 Note that
Lichnerowicz and York did not use the exponentiated action of the
conformal group, which differs from our treatment. Because of this they
had to deal with other questions, such as positivity of the conformal
factor. as @xmath then @xmath must transform as @xmath . A short
explanation for this conformal weighing is that, besides the usual
@xmath factor, the @xmath coming from the density @xmath must be
compensated for.

Alternatively, in the language of inner products of metric velocities in
Riem (see Chapter 8 ), to maintain the conformal invariance of the
superspace inner product, one must demand that the lapse have the
conformal weight given in definition ( 6 ), section 9.4 . Then
straightforwardly ( 2.33 ) yields the appropriate weight.

A more straightforward procedure is to not use the extrinsic curvature
formulation, but the momentum one. Then, calling @xmath the traceless
part of @xmath we get the weighting:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which matches the conformal weight associated with the momenta in the
rest of this work. We shall call @xmath a choice of transverse @xmath .

Now since a conformal change in the TT tensor will still satisfy the
momentum constraint ( 2.42 ), one can choose an arbitrary one and try to
solve for it the modified scalar constraint, given from ( 2.38 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the conformally transformed Ricci scalar obtained from (
A.3 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is sometimes useful to rewrite this as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scalar constraint thus becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Of course, ( 2.46 ) only makes sense if we can find a conformal
transformation that makes @xmath positive everywhere. Such metrics are
said to be in the positive Yamabe class, and this imposes a restriction
on initial data to belong to this class.

In 1970, James York contributed to the program by adding a constant
trace term to the TT momenta @xmath , where @xmath is a spatial
constant. With this simple addition, the scalar constraint as an
equation for the conformal factor becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

As long as @xmath , this places no restriction on the scalar curvature
ab initio. In [ 16 ] , York and OḾurchadha, using Leray–Schauder degree
theory, showed that the specific form of the polynomial in @xmath ,
@xmath , implies that, as long as @xmath , equation ( 2.50 ) always
possesses a unique solution. We will not go into details of the proof,
as it is involved and requires too much background material. The
important point is that the initial value problem was shown to be
solvable for any choice of metric, TT tensor, and non-zero constant
@xmath . The initial data that are constructed have constant trace of
the extrinsic curvature and are thus called a constant–mean–curvature
(CMC) solution to the constraints. From the physics point of view, this
method, which did not arise in any way from canonical analysis, has been
regarded as a felicitous “device” for solving the initial–value problem,
which distances the LY method from Shape Dynamics. It did not yield, as
stressed in the beginning of the section, a conformally invariant
theory. We will have further comments on the mathematical similarities
once we have presented Shape Dynamics in its full form, at the end of
chapter 4.3 .

##### 2.2.3 Dirac’s fixing of the foliation.

In 1958, Dirac [ 3 ] saw the need to fix the foliation of GR for the
Hamiltonian framework, as a step for quantization. In effect (as we
later discovered), he essentially describes the steps we take in chapter
5 after enforcing the gauge fixing. Indeed, the gauge-fixing that he
attempts to work with, and deems the most natural, is given by @xmath .

Let us briefly review the main steps. After basically (re)constructing
the 3+1 decomposition and the constraints, defining the Dirac bracket,
and pinpointing foliation invariance as the main obstacle to quantizing
GR, all in under 4 pages, Dirac recognized that a more powerful approach
to quantizing GR would be to fix the gauge of the scalar constraint,
after which it would no longer be required as an operator equation on a
wave-functional. He then proceeded to show how one would go about doing
that.

In the general setting of dynamical systems, he abstractly described the
method contained in section 2.1.3 and introduced a gauge fixing in a
manner which we now describe. Suppose there are initially @xmath first
class constraints. Introduce @xmath gauge-fixing constraints, all second
class with respect to the initial constraints. Thus there are now @xmath
second class constraints, and we must separate the first and second
class sets of constraints. As “there is no room for second class
constraints in the quantum theory”, we must either use the Dirac
bracket, or completely solve for the second class ones. The two
procedures are equivalent. Suppose that @xmath of the second class
constraints are of the form @xmath , where @xmath is the momentum
conjugate to @xmath . That means that the remaining second–class
constraints must contain all of the coordinates @xmath in a linearly
independent manner, otherwise there would be at least one @xmath which
would still be first--class. ⁹ ⁹ 9 We basically use the reciprocal
argument when we come to equation ( 3.18 ). This means it might in
principle be possible to solve the remaining second class constraints
for @xmath , i.e.:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then using equation ( 2.51 ) and @xmath we can completely eliminate
these variables from the system (and obviate the need for a Dirac
bracket), as they play no effective role. We will not get to grips with
exactly how Dirac effectively performed this fixing with @xmath in this
section, but leave it for section 5 , where a better description and
direct comparison are more natural.

We pause to mention that this procedure basically outlines what we will
do with general relativity to arrive at SD. The major departure from
Dirac is that we will introduce extra degrees of freedom, and thus our
equation analogous to @xmath will be given by @xmath , and a good part
of our efforts will be devoted to proving that we can indeed solve the
remaining second class constraints for @xmath as a functional of @xmath
, culminating in Theorem 1 .

Dirac’s procedure, unlike ours, is not coordinate independent, but if
put on a firmer grounding (in other aspects as well) might well have
culminated in our results for asymptotically flat SD, of chapter 5 .
However the manner in which we perform our trading explicitly maintains
conformal symmetry to very significant advantage. Nonetheless, however
unwittingly, Dirac’s attempt implicitly used conformal methods applied
to the quantization of gravity.

#### 2.3 Barbour et al’s work.

The most influential of all previous work on conformal methods however
came from Barbour et al, in work contained in various papers: [ 17 , 18
, 19 ] and especially [ 20 ] . We will try to keep the account of this
beautiful body of work to a minimum. We do this in the interest of
brevity, but more importantly, this work is more eloquently described
than what we would be able to achieve here in various sources (for the
most updated, complete and masterfully written account, see [ 21 ] ,
whose reading we strongly encourage). We would fear misrepresenting the
area in any attempt to be complete.

##### 2.3.1 Poincaré’s principle.

To introduce some of the main ideas, let us consider a Newtonian system
of @xmath particles. Although it seems completely transparent when
expressed in an inertial frame of reference, from the relational point
of view the dynamics are not determined uniquely from initial
interparticle separations and their rates of change. One also needs as
extra data the angular momentum of the entire system, which is not
encoded in such data. For a relationalist, this is disturbing, as was
already noted by Poincaré. This discrepancy led Barbour to formulate
what he called the Poincaré principle. We will let Barbour explain this
concept in his own words:

  Poincaré, writing as a philosopher deeply committed to relationalism,
  found the need for them [the extra data] repugnant [Poincaré 1902,
  Poincaré 1905]. But, in the face of the manifest presence of angular
  momentum in the solar system, he resigned himself to the fact that
  there is more to dynamics than, literally, meets the eye.[…]Poincaré’s
  penetrating analysis […] only takes into account the role of angular
  momentum in the ‘failure’ of Newtonian dynamics when expressed in
  relational quantities. Despite its precision and clarity, it has been
  almost totally ignored in the discussion of the absolute vs relative
  debate in dynamics.[…] For some reason, Poincaré did not consider
  Mach’s suggestion [Mach 1883] that the universe in its totality might
  somehow determine the structure of the dynamics observed locally.
  Indeed, the universe exhibits evidence for angular momentum in
  innumerable localized systems but none overall. This suggests that,
  regarded as a closed dynamical system, it has no angular momentum and
  meets the Poincaré principle : […] a point and a tangent vector in the
  universe’s shape space determine its evolution.

Now of course we are faced with the question; what exactly is shape
space? To define it requires some degree of arbitrariness. For example
in the case of the @xmath particles, we could deem shape space to be
given by a @xmath dimensional space of Euclidean coordinates ( @xmath )
minus translations and rotations ( @xmath ), which do not change the
inter-particle separations. Or, if we are more radically relationalist,
we can also argue that, having no absolute ruler, we can only compare
distances, and so one of the distances serves as unity, giving us @xmath
dimensions to this space. According to Barbour, this choice is the only
possible in a complete relationalist setting. We will try to translate
these concepts to geometrodynamics soon. We illustrate the concept of
shape space as a quotient of configuration space for the case of a
triangle (or just @xmath ) in figure 2.2 .

A quotient space, in pedestrian language, is a space @xmath obtained
from some other space @xmath by considering certain elements of @xmath
to be equivalent. By using this concept we will get rid of such
extraneous structure. It is to have a theory existing in shape space
that the tool of best-matching was devised.

##### 2.3.2 Best matching.

One of the keys to understanding Barbour’s ideas is to try to define
motion itself in a relationalist setting, incorporating Poincaré’s
principle. How do we know a given object has moved from one place to
another? Well in the relationalist approach, we can only compare its
relative position with respect to some other objects serving as a
reference system. One initial attempt might be to say an object has
moved if relative to other fixed objects it has different coordinates.
But suppose we lived in a swarm of bees, how would we go about defining
movements? Barbour explains the problem in the following excerpt, and
gives us a hint of the solution [ 21 ] :

  We can now see that there are two very different ways of interpreting
  general relativity. In the standard picture, spacetime is assumed from
  the beginning and it must locally have precisely the structure of
  Minkowski space. From the structural point of view, this is almost
  identical to an amalgam of Newton’s absolute space and time. This near
  identity is reflected in the essential identity locally of Newton’s
  first law and Einstein’s geodesic law for the motion of an idealized
  point particle. In both cases, it must move in a straight line at a
  uniform speed. As I already mentioned, this very rigid initial
  structure is barely changed by Einstein’s theory in its standard form.
  In Wheeler’s aphorism “Space tells matter how to move, matter tells
  space how to bend.” But what we find at the heart of this picture is
  Newton’s first law barely changed. No explanation for the law of
  inertia is given: it is a – one is tempted to say the – first
  principle of the theory. The wonderful structure of Einstein’s theory
  as he constructed it rests upon it as a pedestal. I hope that the
  reader will at least see that there is another way of looking at the
  law of inertia: it is not the point of departure but the destination
  reached after a journey that takes into account all possible ways in
  which the configuration of the universe could change.

The answer Barbour came up with is called best matching . To explain it
in a simpler setting than geometrodynamics first, let us consider a
system of 3 particles in Euclidean space @xmath . Any three particles
form a triangle @xmath at any given moment @xmath , and another triangle
@xmath at @xmath . To define the infinitesimal motion happening during
an infinitesimal interval of time, we have to first find out what would
not constitute a motion, i.e., what is deemed to leave the physical
configuration fundamentally untouched. In the example of the triangles,
we could say that any rotation leaves the physical configuration
untouched @xmath . Or we could be more radical, arguing that since all
we can ever really measure are ratios of distances, we should also
include dilatations in this group, @xmath . Remember this is a world in
which only the 3 particles exist.

The abstract group that one chooses to characterize this “no real
change” of configurations of a given system has been recently termed the
geometrical group [ 22 ] . Let us call it @xmath for now. Having chosen
the geometrical group @xmath , we have to define an “infinitesimal
distance functional” between configurations , @xmath . This ‘‘distance”
does not, a priori, have to be invariant under the action of the
geometric group, ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 This fact is what allows best-matching to
generalize gauge theory [ 22 ] . In fact calling it a distance
functional is also not entirely accurate since for many cases considered
in the literature it does not satisfy the basic postulates required of a
norm. Suppose we have two descriptions, or configurations, of triangles
@xmath and @xmath , lying in @xmath but over different shapes in the
quotient space (see figure 2.2 ). We know that @xmath is in fact
equivalent to all other descriptions related to it by the geometrical
group. What best matching does is to select the description of that
final state that is closest to @xmath . Formally,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us give now the pedestrian approach to the above description: we
have two triangles, @xmath and @xmath , and we move the second one
however we like without breaking it (i.e. obeying the geometric group)
until it is “most similar” (i.e. until it minimizes the distance) to the
first one. That is, until it is best matched. See figure 2.3 for an
illustration of best-matching in the way described here.

As noticed by the author ( [ 23 ] and later put into [ 8 ] ), if the
whole construction can be put in configuration space, with the
geometrical group giving an orbit foliation, the notion of shape space
becomes analogous to that of a base space in a principal fiber bundle
given by the whole of configuration space (see section 8 ). Then it
might be that the whole approach can be put into the same geometrical
terms as usual gauge theory. Thus the Poincaré principle would be
equivalent to saying that one has to build a theory on the quotient
space, i.e. the base space of the fiber bundle. And then, if this is
attainable, best matching becomes very reminiscent of the description of
the way a connection form works in gauge theory. It will give a notion
of “parallel transport” of coordinates. Both the Poincaré principle and
best-matching can thus be geometrically incorporated in a principal
fiber bundle setting, as we shall explain in the second part of this
thesis.

As mentioned in the caption to figure 2.3 , one can prove that the
best-matched velocity, when induced by a metric in configuration space,
always implies that the corrected velocity of the triangle be orthogonal
to the orbits, with respect to said metric. This will be explored more
thoroughly in Part II. The statement that best-matching brings the
centers of mass to coincidence and brings the net rotation to zero can
be seen as particular cases of ( 2.56 ) below.

##### 2.3.3 Best matching in pure geometrodynamics

Unfortunately, this section requires some of the introductory material
contained in chapter 8 , but we shall attempt to make it as
self-contained as possible.

For the implementation of best matching in “pure” geometrodynamics, we
first choose the geometrical group to be @xmath , the group of
3-diffeomorphisms of the manifold @xmath and the distance functional to
be given by @xmath , some action functional on the configuration space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

dependent on the metric and metric velocities. To effect the best
matching (in the Lagrangian setting), we first transform all the
dynamical variables @xmath , where @xmath , and the @xmath represents a
given action of the diffeomorphisms (which we explain in Part II). This
implies a certain transformation for @xmath and so forth, which we will
not make explicit here, since they are discussed extensively in chapter
8 . In any case, this is important in that it will imply a certain
transformation property for @xmath , which now becomes a functional
@xmath dependent on @xmath and its infinitesimal generating vector field
@xmath .

Given an initial metric @xmath and another, @xmath , infinitesimally
close-by, best matching is equivalent to finding the infinitesimal
diffeomorphim (change of coordinates) @xmath that makes the norm of
@xmath with respect to @xmath an extremum. In this manner, Barbour
argues that subsequent instants in time should have points in their
copies of @xmath identified such that the metrics are “as close as
possible”.

As it happens, for any action taken to be the integral of a density, the
diffeomorphism parameter @xmath does not appear. We can thus restrict to
the case where the dependence of @xmath is given solely by @xmath .
Looking for a geodesic principle in configuration space that
incorporated the arguments above, Barbour argued initially for an action
of the type:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the generalized DeWitt supermetric, and @xmath is a
positive functional of @xmath . As argued in [ 17 ] , for a truly
geodesic, timeless picture, where the only notion of time is that given
by change, one should also demand that this “distance” functional be
reparametrization invariant.

For the usual geodesic principle, one usually looks towards minimizing
some function of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

for curves @xmath , and some inner product @xmath . This suggests taking
a global square root:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

(for @xmath an undetermined conformal factor to the supermetric) which
should be taken to be extremal with respect to @xmath . This would at
least heuristically define a geodesic principle in superspace (see
chapter 8 for the definition of superspace, and chapter 9 for the
mathematical difficulties inherent in trying to define an induced metric
in superspace). In the relationalist approach of Barbour this is seen as
highly desirable [ 20 ] .

###### BSW form of gravity.

Encouragingly, the Einstein-Hilbert action, in the alternative, @xmath
lapse-eliminated BSW formulation [ 24 ] , is of the type ( 2.54 ) for
@xmath (the three scalar curvature) and @xmath , i.e. @xmath , but only
if we take a local square root:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

This however forfeits the geodesic picture, as we no longer have a
variational principle for a functional of the form ( 2.53 ).

Let us say a few words about the above action ( 2.55 ), called the BSW
action. It is obtained from the ADM action by regarding the metric and
metric velocities as fundamental variables, i.e. by regarding @xmath ,
where @xmath is given in ( 2.34 ) as one of the fundamental variables.
Then instead of the primary scalar constraint ( 2.38 ), one gets that
the terms involving the lapse @xmath appear as: @xmath Upon varying and
solving the action with respect to the lapse, one obtains @xmath , where
@xmath . See section D.3 for more on the propagation of constraints in
the BSW action. As it should, this Lagrangian point of view transforms
the scalar constraint into an identity.

In other words, for these choices of @xmath and @xmath , and a local
square root, the action ( 2.52 ) gives GR in the BSW form, which could
arguably be said to be a Jacobian timeless form for GR [ 25 ] . ¹¹ ¹¹ 11
We note however that in this case @xmath is not a lapse potential, in
accordance in definition 5 .

The local square root is the source of many (so far) insurmountable
mathematical difficulties [ 9 ] in trying to formulate the theory as
either a geodesic theory in superspace or a gauge theory with a
metric-induced connection, as in Part II of this thesis (the two
problems are interconnected). However, as we will not need it in the
following sections, and in the interest of brevity we limit its
discussion to what has been just said. In the author’s opinion, there is
still no first–principles justification for the local square-root, or at
least not as convincingly as there exists for the other structures
present in Barbour’s relational construction.

##### 2.3.4 Introduction of the conformal group and emergence of CMC by
best matching

Let us go back to the case of the triangle (see figure 2.3 ).
Irrespectively of the form of the distance functional we assume, we can
always use the best-matching algorithm. In fact, if one defines the
distance functional simply as any given action @xmath in configuration
space, one has an interesting consequence. To see this, suppose the
group @xmath acts on congiguration space, @xmath where @xmath designates
a general element of @xmath . Then after making the substitutions in the
action, both @xmath and @xmath appear in the action. As we show below,
the statement then that the action will be extremized for infinitesimal
variations along the orbit translates to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

When one does this for the diffeomorphism group in geometrodynamics,
either for the ADM or the BSW action, one automatically recovers the
momentum constraint ( 2.40 ), whereas for the full conformal group one
recovers the maximal slicing constraint @xmath . Albeit straightforward,
we will not show this now, as it is contained in its general form in
chapter 3 , and in its particulars, in chapters 4 , 5 and 9 .

Let us quickly present an alternate view however, which is not presented
in the main text and which can be shown to be equivalent to ( 2.56 ) by
an application of the chain rule. Recall first of all equation ( 2.5 ).
Given @xmath , the Legendre map will give us momenta defined by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, In accordance with the best-matching ansatz, we would like the
action to be an extremal with respect to all possible infinitesimal
velocity displacements along the orbit of the group:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , the Lie-algebra of @xmath . This means that we require
all the conjugate momenta to annihilate the tangent space to the orbits
(represented here by @xmath ). The rhs of ( 2.58 ) implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies ( 2.56 ).

As a more concrete example, in the case of configuration space given by
Riem, and thus the configurations @xmath being given by three-metrics
@xmath and @xmath being the group of 3-diffemorphisms, we get, upon
contraction of the metric conjugate momenta ( 2.36 ) with a tangent
vector to the diffeomorphims orbits, assumed for now given by @xmath ,
the equation ( 2.40 ). Or for that matter, upon contraction ¹² ¹² 12
Contraction here of course includes integration over @xmath . with an
element of tangent space to the conformal orbit, of the form @xmath , we
get @xmath , and finally, with an element of the tangent space to the
volume-preserving-conformal orbit (see section B.3 ) we get @xmath .

In [ 20 ] Barbour et al, after reaching some obstacles in their attempt
to apply full conformal best-matching to GR [ 26 ] , ¹³ ¹³ 13 Upon
careful scrutiny one can see that these difficulties are related to the
non-invertibility of the corresponding lapse fixing operator. See
proposition 1 . applied best-matching with respect to the group of
volume-preserving-conformal transformations. After quite a bit of
algebra, they correctly derived the new momentum constraint @xmath ,
along with the transformed scalar constraint – which had the form of (
2.50 ) – and the momentum constraint. Of course this is one constraint
too many, and implies that there is a gauge fixing of the scalar
constraint. They correctly derived the conditions that this implies on
the lapse function (which is roughly our equation ( 4.18 )). But as the
scalar constraint is gauge fixed, the interpretation of ( 2.50 ) can be
only that of an initial value equation, and not of a constraint imposed
at every point. ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 There is also the question of over-imposing the
scalar constraint, since they depart from the Lagrangian formulation,
and fix the lapse as in the BSW approach ( 2.55 ), turning the scalar
constraint into an identiy already satisfied by what they term as the
momenta. This will be more thoroughly discussed in section 4 . Thus they
conclude with

  Our new principles enable us to derive Hamiltonian GR, the
  prescription for solving its initial-value problem, and the condition
  for maintaining the CMC condition in a single package.

We will discuss some of the factors that distance this earlier work from
Shape Dynamics in chapter 4 . However, needless to say, this work was
the foundation stone of the whole program of Shape Dynamics.

#### 2.4 Results and directions for Shape Dynamics.

##### 2.4.1 Brief statement of results.

We have found a theory of gravity with two physical degrees of freedom
that possesses local scale invariance. Only in a certain conformal gauge
it is identical to ADM in constant mean curvature gauge. The total Shape
Dynamics Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the ADM phase space @xmath parametrized by the usual coordinates
@xmath , where @xmath , @xmath is an arbitrary Lagrange multiplier
function, and @xmath is our unique global Hamiltonian, which is a
non-local functional of @xmath which does not depend on the point @xmath
. Shape Dynamics possesses the local first class constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the global mean of the function @xmath over the
3-manifold @xmath . These are the generators of volume-preserving
conformal transformations and spatial diffeomorphisms, respectively. The
non-zero part of the constraint algebra is given solely by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For the asymptotically flat case we have a similar result, where the
conformal generator is given by @xmath only, and its Lagrange multiplier
respects certain asymptotic boundary conditions.

We have furthermore found how we can extend the treatment that leads to
( 10.1 ) to the electromagnetic, massive and massless scalar fields (see
chapter 6 ), with their usual Hamiltonians. We also show here that
different approximation schemes are available for the global
Hamiltonian, and in this thesis we perform a large volume expansion for
it (chapter 7 ), obtaining the first three terms. We use this expansion
to find the Hamilton–Jacobi version of the global Hamiltonian, a first
step towards quantization. We have found that this bears strong
resemblance to certain holographic dualities between gravity and
traditional conformal field theories [ 27 ] .

Shape Dynamics provides the theory that fulfills the requirements of a
complete theory of the gravitational field on conformal superspace. Our
results justify York’s intuitive remarks regarding the configuration
space of gravity: conformal superspace is not the reduced configuration
space of general relativity but that of Shape Dynamics. Shape Dynamics
also meets Barbour’s relational arguments for a truly relational theory
of the Universe, encapsulated by the aphorism: “size and motion are
relative, and time is given by change”.

It is also true, although unseen by us at the time of its conception,
that SD is the completion and formalization of Dirac’s 1958 paper [ 3 ]
. Made explicit and put into context however, it gains significance way
beyond that of a mere “fixation of the coordinates”, providing truly an
alternative description of gravity.

The local constraints are all linear in momenta, being easily
implementable in configuration space. The true gravitational degrees of
freedom are easily found. The constraint algebra is very simple, making
it possible that the attempts at the quantization of gravity that
encounter the obstacle posed by structure functions being present in the
algebra of constraints (as opposed to structure constants) might be more
successful in Shape Dynamics.

### Chapter 3 Linking theory for Shape Dynamics

This chapter is based on the paper [ 5 ] . It is aimed at introducing
the general mechanism behind Shape Dynamics. If the reader feels it has
become too abstract we recommend following the explicit example given in
the next chapter.

#### 3.1 General trading of symmetries

Before introducing Shape Dynamics (SD) per se, we will present in this
short chapter a general mechanism that relates equivalent gauge
theories. The central concept in this mechanism is that of a linking
gauge theory . Roughly speaking, a linking gauge theory between two
gauge theories @xmath with first class constraints @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, both existing on the phase space parametrized by @xmath ,
is a gauge theory possessing additional fields and corresponding
additional first class constraints. Such a gauge theory qualifies as a
linking gauge theory if it yields theories @xmath and @xmath under two
distinct gauge fixings of the additional fields. We show that whenever
there is a linking gauge theory that links two gauge theories then these
two gauge theories are equivalent.

The method by which we proceed can be said to be closely analogous to
the Stuckelberg mechanism [ 28 ] , whereby one adds a fictitious field
to a given system in order to reveal some hidden properties it might
possess. This is the main aim of our actual usage of the linking theory
in GR, through a fictitious addition of a ”conformal” field, we reveal a
hidden conformal invariance present in ADM.

##### 3.1.1 Linking Theories

A gauge theory can be denoted by data @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
phase space carrying the Poisson structure @xmath , the set @xmath
denotes first class constraints and the set @xmath denotes second class
constraints. We shall from the start restrict the study to a class of
theories with no explicit Hamiltonian (it can be included in the set of
first class constraints as the constraint @xmath that enforces energy
conservation) and no second class constraints. The initial value problem
of @xmath is given by finding the space @xmath and the canonical
equations of motion are given by the Hamilton vector fields @xmath
defined through the action on smooth phase space functions @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath are arbitrary Lagrange multipliers. Furthermore, one is
able to impose (partial) gauge-fixing conditions @xmath , such that
(some of) the Lagrange multipliers @xmath are determined by the
condition that @xmath is tangent to @xmath . Hence, gauge-fixing
conditions turn (some of) the first class constraints into second class
constraints and transforms the initial value problem into a gauge-fixed
initial-value problem @xmath .

There can exist a nontrivial physical equivalence between gauge
theories, based on the observation that physical quantities are
gauge-invariant. To be precise, we call two gauge theories @xmath
equivalent , if there is a (partial) gauge-fixing @xmath of @xmath and
another partial gauge fixing @xmath of @xmath , such that the initial
value problems @xmath and the (partially) gauge-fixed Hamilton-vector
fields coincide.

Let us define a general linking gauge theory @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a gauge theory as described before and @xmath and @xmath are two sets
of partial gauge-fixing conditions such that @xmath is a (partial)
gauge-fixing condition for @xmath and we assume that we can split the
set @xmath of first class constraints into three independent subsets:
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is gauge fixed by @xmath , @xmath is
gauge fixed by @xmath and @xmath is not gauge fixed by either @xmath or
@xmath .

Given a linking gauge theory, we can construct two equivalent gauge
theories:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These are equivalent gauge theories, because both can be gauge-fixed to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This construction becomes nontrivial if we construct the Dirac-bracket
and reduced phase space for @xmath and @xmath . In particular, in the
important case where the phase space @xmath is a direct product of
@xmath with another phase space @xmath , which we assume to be
coordinatized by a canonically conjugate pair @xmath for simplicity.
Moreover, let us assume a special set of first class constraints @xmath
, which are equivalent to (define the same constraint surface as) the
constraints:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are functions on @xmath for all @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 The
functions @xmath and @xmath obey certain conditions so that @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent to the first class constraints @xmath and @xmath .
These conditions do not play any role since we will start already from
explicitly first class @xmath . See last paragraph of this subsection.
By equivalence between @xmath and @xmath we mean solely that the
constraints @xmath can be solved for certain values of @xmath and @xmath
.

Moreover, we assume special gauge-fixing conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath . Note that @xmath completely fixes the gauge of @xmath
to zero and vice-versa. The special form of the constraints and gauge
fixing conditions allows us to perform the phase space reduction
explicitly. That is, we use the equations ( 3.4 ) as definitions and
completely eliminate the variables @xmath and @xmath from the system
together with the second class constraints, reverting to the usual
Poisson bracket in the reduced phase space, as mentioned in Section
2.2.3 .

To see this is indeed equivalent to using the Dirac bracket, consider
functions @xmath on @xmath that are independent of @xmath , which are in
one-to-one correspondence with functions on @xmath , and we construct
their Dirac bracket @xmath for the gauge-fixing @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where Einstein summation over @xmath is assumed, and we used the facts
that @xmath and that @xmath are canonically conjugate. The Dirac bracket
thus reduces to the Poisson bracket on the reduced phase space @xmath
and as @xmath is completely gauge-fixed to zero, the remaining first
class constraints are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Performing the analogous phase space reduction for the gauge-fixing
condition @xmath , we arrive at

###### Proposition 1.

Given a gauge theory on a phase space @xmath with special first class
constraints which are equivalent to constraints of the form ( 3.4 ), and
special gauge fixing conditions of the form ( 3.5 ) then @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent gauge theories.

Note that this proposition only assumes that the constraints can be
formally written in the form ( 3.4 ). However, any set of constraints
that can in principle be solved for @xmath and @xmath on the respective
gauge fixing surface as in ( 3.4 ) suffices for the construction of the
phase space reduction.

##### 3.1.2 A Construction Principle for Linking Theories

We will now give a simple construction principle for special linking
theories linking a known gauge theory to a desired gauge theory with
different symmetry. For this purpose we consider elementary degrees of
freedom @xmath whose dynamics is governed by an action @xmath . If the
dynamical system is consistent, then the Legendre transform to the
canonical system will yield first and second class constraints, however
we ignore second class constraints in this subsection (as they will not
appear in such a fashion in the model we will be studying) and assume we
have a conjugate pair @xmath of canonical degrees of freedom that
coordinatize our phase space @xmath and a purely first class system of
constraints:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the Lagrangian picture, we extend our configuration space to include
auxiliary degrees of freedom @xmath , but still with the Lagrangian
@xmath , which implies that the Legendre transform yields a phase space
with an additional canonically conjugate pair @xmath and with additional
first class constraints

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

whose Poisson-brackets with the original constraints ( 3.8 ), as well as
with any @xmath , and among themselves, vanish strongly by construction.
Let us now apply a point transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

parametrized by the auxiliary degrees of freedom @xmath , such that
@xmath , which reverts the system to the original Lagrangian. This
transformation is a canonical transformation generated by the generating
functional

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the shorthand @xmath as well as @xmath we can denote the canonical
transformation from @xmath to @xmath generated by ( 3.11 ) in the
compact form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Alternatively, we can obtain these formulae from the transformed
Lagrangian, eg.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath is the only variable dependent on @xmath . In the same way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

yields the respective equation in ( 3.12 ).

Let us now consider the system of canonically transformed constraints (
3.8 ) and ( 3.9 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is of course still first class. Notice that the previously
(almost) trivial constraints @xmath now take a quite nontrivial form. To
construct a special linking theory, we now assume that we can split the
constraints @xmath into two sets @xmath and @xmath , where the first set
can be solved for @xmath and the second (weakly) Poisson commutes with
@xmath . So we can write the constraints ( 3.15 ) equivalently as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is of the form needed for a special linking theory. We can thus
impose the two sets of gauge fixing conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gauge-fix the first and (respectively) last line of ( 3.16 ).

The gauge fixing conditions @xmath can be worked out easily. Since
@xmath commutes with the two first lines of ( 3.16 ), it imposes no
further conditions on these. Hence the union of these two sets of
constraints is still @xmath . Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus it completely gauge fixes the constraint @xmath , whose
Lagrange-multiplier is constrained to vanish for propagation. In other
words, we set the two (sets of) second class constraints @xmath and
@xmath strongly to zero, using these equations as definitions for @xmath
and @xmath . One can thus perform the phase space reduction by setting
@xmath . Since @xmath appears nowhere but in @xmath , which is used
solely as a definition of @xmath itself, phase space reduction reduces
the constraints @xmath to @xmath and reverts us to the original gauge
theory.

Let us now examine the gauge fixing conditions @xmath . They clearly do
not (weakly) Poisson commute with the constraints @xmath , because these
can be written as @xmath . In fact, the assumption that the remaining
constraints are not gauge fixed by @xmath is redundant. Given
constraints of the form of ( 3.16 ) we can prove that @xmath does not
gauge fix any further constraint(s). For this we assume that there is a
subset @xmath of the constraints @xmath and @xmath that is gauge-fixed,
which implies that the matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

is invertible. The block containing @xmath is invertible by assumption
and hence the determinant of the entire matrix vanishes, since the
conjugate block vanishes identically. This lies in contradiction with
the assumption, which stated that the matrix was invertible. This was to
be expected, because we can write one of the constraints as @xmath , it
makes its Poisson Bracket with the gauge fixing automatically invertible
and thus completely exhausts the gauge fixing.

It follows that @xmath can just gauge fix the @xmath . Thus, to perform
the phase space reduction we trivialize the constraints @xmath and set
@xmath . On the reduced phase space this then gives the first class
constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus we have effectively traded the constraints @xmath for @xmath .

In summary we have shown the following proposition

###### Proposition 2.

Given a dynamical system with first class constraints @xmath and a point
transformation @xmath parametrized by auxiliary degrees of freedom
@xmath such that a subset @xmath of the constraints can be solved for
@xmath as a function of @xmath after applying the canonical
transformation that implements the point transformation, then the above
construction provides a linking theory that provides equivalence with a
theory in which the @xmath are replaced by the constraints @xmath as
defined in equation ( 3.19 ).

Conversely, the phase space reduction of a linking theory can be viewed
as an embedding of the equivalent gauge theories in the linking theory.
In this picture one has two embeddings @xmath and @xmath that embed the
original resp. dual gauge theory in the linking theory by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we wrote @xmath to bring out the similarity between the two
embedding. It should be noted however that in spite of the apparent
similarity, there is an important formal asymmetry. Namely, whereas
setting @xmath will influence the reduced dual system ( 3.19 ), as
@xmath does not figure anywhere in the original system, setting its
value to some given function @xmath does not influence the reduced
system (see paragraph following the paragraph of equation ( 3.16 )).

##### 3.1.3 Diagram of trading

We started by showing how an equivalence of gauge theories follows from
the existence of a linking gauge theory on an extended phase space
@xmath . One can sketch the construction of a pair of equivalent gauge
theories A and B on a reduced phase space @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is a canonical pair coordinatizing @xmath and
the “Dictionary”is a further gauge fixing of the two equivalent theories
such that the two theories coincide. The dictionary can be used to
easily identify trajectories of the equivalent theories with one
another.

To summarize the procedure in plain words and notation: we start with a
theory @xmath which possesses some explicit symmetry @xmath , but which
we suspect might possess some hidden symmetry @xmath . We then
artificially introduce a field parametrizing symmetry @xmath into the
system @xmath , producing a system @xmath even more redundantly
parametrized. The outcome of the introduction of @xmath however, is not
the presence of the symmetry @xmath , but of some other symmetry @xmath
. In some very restricted set of cases, upon very particular gauge
fixings of @xmath (namely setting either @xmath or its conjugate momenta
to zero), one may obtain a system which explicitly possesses symmetry
@xmath .

We stress that in most cases, the procedure outlined above is not
applicable, i.e. one obviously cannot trade any two given symmetries. If
for example the theory already possesses the symmetry we are trying to
trade the two gauge fixings coincide and there is no gain in the
procedure. In the majority of cases though, what will happen is that the
system produced through the gauge fixing will entail a tower of
constraints, rendering it inconsistent.

### Chapter 4 Trading GR for SD: compact closed @xmath case

###### Summary of this chapter

In this section we will apply the method of the linking theory presented
in the previous chapter to a specific extension of ADM gravity for
compact closed space. After extending ADM to include certain scalar
fields representing conformal transformations and their conjugate
fields, a linking theory in the sense of the diagram ( 3.21 ) will be
presented. One gauge fixing of the linking theory will then eliminate
conformal freedom but retain lapse freedom, resulting in ADM, and
another will fix the lapse freedom but retain conformal freedom,
resulting in Shape Dynamics. The most difficult technical steps will be
taken in section 4.3 , where we will split the constraints into first
and second class and show that the second class constraints can be
uniquely solved for the extra variables. This chapter is based in [ 4 ,
5 ] , but contains more detailed (and somewhat different) proofs of the
main propositions.

#### 4.1 Construction of the Linking Theory

We start with the equivalent of ( 3.8 ) and denote the usual ADM
constraints as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where for ease of manipulation we wrote the smeared version of the
diffeomorphism constraint.

Following the method described in the previous chapter, we will embed
the original system into an extended phase space. This extended phase
space is chosen to include the auxiliary variables @xmath . The scalar
function @xmath will parametrize conformal transformations of the
system. We denote the space of conformal transformations by @xmath . The
nontrivial canonical Poisson brackets are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The extended phase space for these fields is now given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the additional constraint analogous to ( 3.9 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will explore the space of volume-preserving conformal transformations
acting as canonical transformations in @xmath . Given any conformal
transformation @xmath we can define a surjection into a
volume-preserving one @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we use the mean

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and 3-volume @xmath . We will abuse notation and extend the use of the
mean @xmath to densities by dividing out by the appropriate power of
@xmath . For example, instead of writing @xmath , we will just redefine
the mean for this scalar density as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We denote the space of volume-preserving conformal transformations as
@xmath , and it is redundantly parametrized by @xmath . One can check
that the redundancy, i.e the equivalence relation, is given by @xmath if
and only if @xmath where @xmath is a spatial constant. We also note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can be derived from ( B.18 ), with @xmath . Thus we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As we will see, this deviation from the simplest case of unconstrained
conformal transformations is necessary in order to have some combination
of the linking theory scalar constraint @xmath that is not fixed by
(remains first class wrt) the condition @xmath . This will allow shape
dynamics have a unique non-zero global Hamiltonian and be matched to ADM
in something other than the frozen lapse regime.

Following ( 3.11 ), we construct the generating function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where capitals denote the transformed variables. We find the canonical
transformation analogous to ( 3.12 ) operating in extended phase space:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again, although slightly more inconvenient, one can find essentially the
same set of transformations from the first line of ( 4.6 ) through a
Lagrangian analysis, as in ( 3.13 ). We explicitly check that this
transformation is indeed canonical in section B.2 .

The three sets of constraints that we now have are the transformed
scalar and diffeomorphism constraints of GR as well as the transform of
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the shorthand @xmath and the notation @xmath to
denote the analogous constraint of ( 3.15 ) in Chapter 3 , where we used
the notation @xmath . We write down here explicitly the form of the
transformed scalar constraint, but note that it will not be explicitly
used until section 7 .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The transformed diffeomorphism constraint will be worked out below, in (
4.10 ).

Any functional of the original phase space variables, when transformed
by @xmath , strongly commutes with @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus it is clear that on the original phase space, @xmath generates
infinitesimal volume-preserving conformal transformations. This can be
seen more clearly if we use the fact that @xmath is invariant under the
transformation ( 4.6 ) to rewrite ( 4.9 ) as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be checked explicitly as well. ¹ ¹ 1 One can fairly easily
visualize how this comes about by just considering how @xmath generates
infinitesimal conformal transformation. That is @xmath and @xmath .

The diffeomorphism constraint in the linking theory, @xmath , can be
explicitly calculated as follows (in smeared density form):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used integration by parts and the fact that the constraint
@xmath vanishes on the image of @xmath strongly. Thus the constraint (in
smeared density form) @xmath explicitly generates diffeomorphisms in
extended phase space.

We define the total Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We do not explicitly topologize phase space for now and only later
assume that we can turn it into a Banach space compatible with the
Poisson bracket. This completely defines the linking @xmath as contained
in the previous section. We define the linking theory as the gauge
theory defined in this section together with the two sets of
gauge-fixing conditions and constraint sets

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      
        @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath will be specified shortly in a way that ensures
that @xmath combined with @xmath is equivalent to @xmath on the surface
@xmath .

#### 4.2 Recovering General Relativity for compact closed manifolds

The only non-vanishing Poisson bracket of the gauge fixing condition
@xmath with the constraints of the linking theory is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which determines the Lagrange-multiplier @xmath , and effectively
eliminates @xmath from the theory. We can thus perform the phase space
reduction by setting the two second class constraints strongly to zero:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This eliminates both of the extra conjugate variables, and makes the
constraint @xmath empty. Moreover, for phase space functions independent
of @xmath one finds in the same way as in ( 3.6 ) that the Dirac-bracket
coincides with the canonical Poisson bracket. Since @xmath does not
appear anywhere else but in equation @xmath , which is now seen as its
definition, the constraints on the reduced phase space are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The resulting gauge theory is thus ADM gravity.

#### 4.3 Recovering Shape Dynamics for compact closed manifolds.

Our main aim in this subsection will be to prove that part of the scalar
constraints can be written in the form @xmath on the gauge-fixing
surface @xmath , in a particular way that will be useful for us, and
then use the results section 3.1 .

The only weakly non-vanishing Poisson-bracket of the gauge-fixing
condition @xmath with the constraints of the linking theory is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to (calculated in the appendix, see ( A.16 )):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In ( 4.18 ) @xmath is the differential operator appearing in the first
term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the important operator of the theory for compact closed
manifolds, and we will have to make small detour to study some of its
properties. We leave this diversion to later, namely to Proposition 1 .
For now let us assume the end result of the proposition: @xmath has a
unique fundamental solution (i.e. it is an invertible operator).

First of all, @xmath is an elliptic linear second order differential
operator on a compact manifold. Merely from ellipticity, a fundamental
solution (or Green’s function) always exists, in the sense that there
exists a distribution @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However for our purposes it is not sufficient that the fundamental
solution exist; it needs also to be unique, which is what we for now
assume, and later on, in Proposition 1 , proceed to prove.

If this is so, then if @xmath the only solution is @xmath . Thus to
solve ( 4.18 ) non-trivially, all we require is that @xmath , where
@xmath is any non-zero spatial constant. This fact allows us to escape
integral-differential equations and just stick to very simple partial
differential ones. We then adjust this constant so that @xmath for our
lapse smearing. To be able to do this we must prove that there exists a
@xmath such that the solution obeys @xmath . This is done in Proposition
2 . By scaling @xmath appropriately to get @xmath , we fix the ambiguity
and get the unique kernel @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

for each @xmath .

Thus, by the canonical transformation properties and ( 4.17 ), the
solution to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is @xmath , which always exists uniquely provided @xmath . We thus have
one linear combination among the infinitely many @xmath constraints that
remains first class with respect to all the other constraints and is
also not gauge fixed by @xmath . This constraint no longer has a spatial
index, as it carries an integration. We denote this global constraint by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, we do not fix the lapse gauge to be given by @xmath , but we
separate the constraints into a first class part, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a purely second class part, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will discuss the affirmation that @xmath is indeed purely second
class in the next subsection.

##### 4.3.1 Constraint Surface for Shape dynamics in compact closed
manifolds.

Now we show that the constraint @xmath is equivalent to a constraint of
the form @xmath , the form necessary for the workings of proposition 1
already anticipated in ( 4.12 ).

We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since this map does not depend on @xmath , we can fix @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we note that in fact @xmath depends solely on @xmath .
Furthermore, everything said here using @xmath as the domain can (and
should) be extended to the square-integrable ² ² 2 We assume that, for
all practical purposes, we can carry on as if all our spaces were
Banach. The fact that they are not does not impose great obstacles for
our approach, since we can use the constructions of section 8 (Sobolev
lemma and the such) to regularize the domains. domain [ 29 ] .

Consider the linear operator:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the tangent space at @xmath , and, as in usual
partial derivatives, one holds the coordinates @xmath fixed. We will
omit from now on the “initial” point @xmath where we take the
derivative. One can explicitly check (see ( B.18 ) in the appendix) that
the tangent space to @xmath at @xmath , @xmath , is given by smooth
functions of the form @xmath , i.e. it is the linear version of the
surjective ‘ @xmath ’ map ( 4.4 ), which redundantly parametrizes the
elements of @xmath by elements of @xmath .

The tangent map is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by ( 5.10 ). Contraction of ( 4.24 ) with @xmath
yields @xmath . Here we have denoted the derivative in the second
coordinate, the one parametrized by @xmath , by a subscript @xmath . We
note that contraction in the @xmath variable requires us to use the
adjoint @xmath (see ( D.10 )), and as this is not a self-adjoint
operator the distinction is important. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we then use ( D.10 ), we get from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath which means that under this inner product @xmath is
perpendicular to @xmath . ³ ³ 3 In fact, we should take @xmath to be a
test function over @xmath in the square-integrable domain and not
necessarily in @xmath . This affects none of our arguments (see [ 29 ]
). By uniqueness, @xmath generates the whole annihilator of @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the annihilator of the subspace @xmath . There exists
an isomorphism between @xmath and the dual to @xmath [ 30 ] . Now put
@xmath and @xmath . This, together with the fact that the space
generated by @xmath is a closed linear subspace of the dual, tells us
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is what we’ll need. Thus from now on assume @xmath .

As @xmath is a closed one-dimensional linear subspace of @xmath , the
tangent space to @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath at each point. Now we
construct a modification of @xmath such that it has the same tangent map
but its range must be such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

As predicted, this modified map is given by @xmath , since as one can
readily check the tangent map indeed stays the same and:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we must use the fact that we chose @xmath (otherwise we would have
a numerical factor between the two elements of @xmath ).

For a heuristic explanation of what we are doing, in the language of
linear algebra, smearing functions can be viewed as a choice of a linear
combination of the (continuously infinite) set of constraints. It
follows from ( 4.21 ) that ( 5.15 ) has a kernel: the linear combination
given by the smearing @xmath . We thus take a set of constraints that is
linearly independent of ( 4.21 ) given by @xmath .

We have not yet proven that @xmath is a topological linear isomorphism.
We have shown that it is a surjective linear map, but we must still
prove injectivity. We must still show that if for some @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath then @xmath , i.e. @xmath , which would mean we have a
zero kernel of the linear map @xmath .

The differential operator @xmath is invertible, possessing a Green’s
function. Thus for any function @xmath there exists some @xmath for
which @xmath . Since @xmath , if ( 4.28 ) holds, we must have @xmath for
any function @xmath .

Suppose then that @xmath for some @xmath . Let us take @xmath (i.e. we
take the point source of the field @xmath ). ⁴ ⁴ 4 We note that @xmath
is here a locally integrable function, and not a smooth one. We could
have done everything in this section appropriately in this setting (see
[ 31 ] and [ 32 ] for the appropriate versions of the theorems used),
but as this would introduce too many complications to this already
involved construction we decided to leave it out. Then @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means @xmath and thus @xmath . By the canonical transformation
properties of @xmath , one can extend this construction to arbitrary
@xmath . We have thus proven

###### Proposition 3.

The linear map given by @xmath where @xmath , is a toplinear isomorphism
for all @xmath provided @xmath .

We have shown that it is a linear continuous bijection, and hence a
topological linear isomorphism [ 33 ] . @xmath .

Thus not only can we form the Dirac bracket using @xmath , but we can
now use the implicit function theorem for Banach spaces for the function
@xmath to assert (with the caveat of footnote 2 ) that

###### Theorem 1.

There exists a unique @xmath , where @xmath is the restriction of phase
space to @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, we can find the solution to @xmath for all @xmath ,
@xmath , by setting @xmath . @xmath .

##### 4.3.2 Constructing the theory on the constraint surface

We now have a surface in @xmath , defined by @xmath and @xmath , on
which @xmath , and whose intrinsic coordinates are @xmath . Furthermore,
the Dirac bracket on the surface exists, and on the constraint surface
we now have the symplectic structure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equivalently, for phase space functions independent of @xmath ,
analogously to ( 3.6 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the repeated variable @xmath is integrated over. As a last
corollary of the use of the Dirac bracket we have:

###### Corollary 1.

For any phase space functional @xmath , the transformed functional
@xmath is volume-preserving-conformally invariant (vpct-invariant).

To prove this, we must merely use ( 4.17 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can immediately see from ( 4.29 ) that the first class constraints
@xmath and @xmath remain first class. Alternatively, for the
diffeomorphism constraint, we can directly observe from ( 4.10 ) that
setting @xmath effects @xmath , yielding the usual diffeomorphism
constraint. We thus find the total Shape Dynamics Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the ADM phase space @xmath with the first class constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have thus effectively fixed the gauge @xmath at the surface @xmath .
We have lost the freedom to fix the lapse, but retained the freedom to
choose the conformal Lagrange multiplier @xmath .

The non-zero part of the constraint algebra is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which substantially simplifies the algebra of constraints of gravity if
compared to the ADM constraint algebra ( A.10 ). Now we have two
subalgebras, and the commutator of the two does not contain any
structure functions.

###### Further fixing of the gauge

As an explicit check to see whether we indeed have the same theory, we
can further gauge fix both ADM and Shape Dynamics to a system which
possesses exactly the same gauge fixed Hamiltonian. To do this, we
merely input further gauge fixings: @xmath in Shape Dynamics and @xmath
in ADM. On the Shape Dynamics side, we have that restriction to the
gauge fixing surface implies that we are over @xmath for which @xmath .
On the GR side, we have CMC slicing, which requires that @xmath , and
thus we arrive explicitly at GR in CMC gauge from both sides and have
thus verified that the trajectories of the two theories are the same.

###### Closing remarks on the procedure.

Let us briefly summarize some of the key questions that might arise from
our presentation of SD. First of all, it should be noted that imposing
the gauge fixing @xmath in the shape dynamics side will only fix a
volume-preserving conformal transformation. The argument is the
following: for it to be a gauge fixing, we should be able to take any
initial data @xmath to one that satisfies the gauge-fixing condition. We
know that there exists a vpct such that we can bring any @xmath to one
that satisfies @xmath , i.e. that brings the scalar constraint to a
constant value. But the global constraint @xmath demands that this
constant be zero. So the gauge fixing @xmath is (in Shape Dynamics)
weakly equal to the constraint @xmath .

What we mean by this is that gauge fixing the SD constraint does not
solve the entire LY equation ( 2.50 ), but the LY equation with an
inhomogeneous term. This permits the rest of the scalar constraint to be
accounted for by our global Hamiltonian, whose action indeed can and
does change the volume.

In SD, the actual gauge fixing is, analogously to @xmath , @xmath . The
gauge fixing @xmath completely gauge fixes the vpct constraint, because
the Dirac bracket is invertible between these two conditions. So we can
always find a unique vpct factor so that @xmath , and this is of course
also @xmath . But in the gauge fixation of SD, we get the complete
fixation of the Lagrange multiplier (or the velocity of the vpct facto)
@xmath , due to the invertibility of the bracket.

##### 4.3.3 Properties of @xmath

We now show that indeed we have the invertibility properties that we
need from the operator @xmath and that @xmath is unique and such that
@xmath . First of all, @xmath is an elliptic, linear, self-adjoint
second order differential operator on a compact manifold . The setting
for the analysis of its properties could not be more convenient.
Ellipticity and linearity already guarantee a fundamental solution (or
Green’s function) [ 32 ] , in the sense that there exists a distribution
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However for our purposes it is not sufficient that the fundamental
solution exist; it also needs to be unique, which we required to solve
for @xmath using the implicit function theorem. Thus we need to show
that for our purposes no non-zero homogeneous solution exists, i.e.,
@xmath .

First, one should note that we require solvability of ( 4.18 ) only on
the surface @xmath , which reduces @xmath to @xmath . Now, let us
rewrite the operator @xmath in the form of ( A.17 ) already using @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we further split @xmath using its traceless part @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting this back in ( 4.35 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus our operator @xmath can be written as @xmath where @xmath .

This already implies that the only homogeneous solution @xmath is @xmath
[ 32 ] . To see this in a simple way, suppose that there exists an
@xmath such that @xmath . Then since @xmath is compact, it follows that
@xmath attains a minimum, let us say at @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a contradiction. The same reasoning applies for @xmath . Thus we are
guaranteed not only existence but uniqueness of Green’s functions for
this case. For a complete proof taking into account the appropriate
domains as square integrable functions, etc, see Theorem 2.8 in [ 31 ] .
We thus have proven

###### Proposition 1.

If @xmath , ⁵ ⁵ 5 Of course, if @xmath in vacuum, then by the scalar
constraint the scalar curvature also vanishes, which all but trivializes
the range of such static solutions. the operator @xmath appearing in (
4.17 ) has a unique Green’s function associated with it.

Using the fact that @xmath is a canonical transformation, this also
means that we can find a unique solution away from @xmath whenever
@xmath . In its turn, this would require that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which upon contraction with @xmath and integrating yields @xmath , which
means again @xmath .

As stated in section 4.3 , we can choose the spatial constant @xmath
such that @xmath for every @xmath . Suppose then that @xmath (here the
primes have nothing to do with derivatives). From the above argument it
follows that if @xmath were negative anywhere, then at the minimum
@xmath , we would have @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath everywhere, which
would imply @xmath ; a contradiction. Thus @xmath is non-negative. By
the linearity in @xmath , we can now scale the constant @xmath so that
@xmath . We have

###### Proposition 2.

There exists a unique constant @xmath such that the solution @xmath
implies @xmath and @xmath .

###### Satisfaction of the exceptional requirements for the functioning
of our mechanism.

We briefly pause here to call attention to the fact that had we
attempted to use not volume-preserving-conformal-transformations
(vpct’s), but full conformal ones, the corresponding operator one ends
up with instead of ( 5.10 ) is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which not only does not possess the same good invertibility properties,
but even when invertible implies a frozen lapse. This fact, alluded to
in the introductory section 2.2.2 , is one of the reasons why it is of
such fundamental importance that we use the volume-preserving ansatz. It
allows a good definition of the theory everywhere on phase space (except
for a trivial subset) and it allows the system to evolve, i.e. time to
progress.

Furthermore, for our usage of the implicit function theorem and overall
workings of the theory, we utilized many times and in diverse situations
the fact that the gauge fixing @xmath is conjugate to a simple Lie
transformation. These threefold requirements; @xmath that it be a
partial gauge fixing of @xmath (owing to the good properties of the
operator ( 4.36 )), @xmath that it still allows for time-evolution
(owing to its leftover global constraint), and @xmath that it generates
a symmetry (owing to the fact that indeed @xmath generates a first class
constraint and true Lie group, see B.4 ) are each extremely non-trivial
demands. For example, a given gauge-fixing might leave an infinite
amount of scalar constraints unfixed, which would be an unlikely
advantage in the description of gravity. Or it might leave none, which
would not leave room in the theory for time evolution. Alternatively, it
might have led to an infinite chain of constraints, leading to an
inconsistent system. Moreover, it might have been impossible to
eliminate the extra variables simultaneously with solving the second
class constraints. Moreover, we might have been able to exchange all but
one of the scalar constraint with some other constraint, but this
constraint could have been such that no real gain in simplicity would
have been gained, as for instance if it was not linear in the momenta.
These are the main factors that obstruct the construction of such
symmetry trading in general.

#### 4.4 Construction of the section in @xmath

In section 4.3.1 we focused our attention on the operator @xmath . There
our primary objective was to use the implicit function theorem to solve
the second class constraints and eliminate the additional variable
@xmath . Now that we have established the properties of @xmath in
proposition 1 , we consider the whole construction in @xmath . After the
elimination of the auxiliary variables @xmath , what we have is that
there exists a unique functional @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have established the properties of @xmath in propositions 1 and
2 . We now investigate the slightly peripheral question of whether
@xmath yields a section of a bundle.

In section 8.4.1 we shall see that @xmath indeed forms a bundle under
conformal transformations as a gauge group. Furthermore, we can apply
the extended version of theorem 4 (see theorem 1.6 in [ 34 ] ) to the
conformal group. The extension to which we refer also guarantees the
existence of a section for @xmath whenever @xmath forms a normal
subgroup of @xmath . Volume-preserving conformal transformations are
particular instances of conformal transformations, but they do not form
a group. Since they depend on the metric @xmath , we only have the more
primitive notion of a groupoid. ⁶ ⁶ 6 We have already established that
the projection of @xmath under the “hat” map ( 4.4 ) acts as a subgroup
for each @xmath in section B.4 . Nonetheless, as the map ( 4.4 ) induces
the equivalence relation in @xmath : @xmath , we have a quotient by the
normal subgroup (since the group is abelian) of constant functions:
@xmath . Since the action of the group and the groupoid are both smooth,
uniqueness and existence of @xmath implies that this defines a “section”
also for the volume-preserving conformal transformations. In [ 35 ] it
is shown more explicitly how one can extend the notion of a principal
bundle to the smooth action of groupoids, we will not get into the
technicalities and from now on assume we have the existence of a
“section” under the volume-preserving conformal transformations.

So is @xmath a “section”? We note that we already have existence and
uniqueness of an element of each orbit @xmath for each @xmath . Leaving
aside the technical issue of whether one can define a section for a
groupoid (see above), we should prove that under volume-preserving
conformal transformations the “section” stays the same, i.e.:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This would imply that we can see the section as a function from the
quotient space @xmath to @xmath which intersects orbits once
(uniqueness) and transversely (existence, which implies that every orbit
is intercepted by the section). Furthermore, from ( 4.31 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any phase space functional @xmath , in particular for the canonical
variables. Since @xmath generate vpct’s, we indeed have ( 4.38 ). To see
this immediately from ( 4.39 ), let @xmath be a one-parameter family of
Lagrange multipliers for the vpct symmetry. Then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath .

###### Pictorial representation.

This enables us to use the picture shown in figure 4.1 .

This provides us with an illustration of the relation between GR to SD.
Both theories are defined by constraint surfaces on the ADM phase space.
There is a subset, @xmath , of @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then have a manifold ⁷ ⁷ 7 One could attempt to use the fact that our
surface, defined by ( 4.37 ), could now also be defined by the regular
value theorem and with the aid of proposition 6 . However one must
remember here that in general the rhs of ( 4.37 ) is a spatial constant
that depends on the point @xmath . So we want to regard the inverse
value of the whole real line @xmath . One would have to use the
transversality theorem to prove that @xmath is a manifold. This amounts
to proving that the composite map @xmath (where we have used the
abbreviation @xmath , and @xmath is the projection), is surjective and
its kernel splits. We will not attempt to prove this in this thesis, as
we already have an alternative proof. defined by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, for each @xmath there is a single element in the vpct-class of
@xmath that belongs to @xmath . It is a section of @xmath Riem under the
group of vpct transformations (it intersects once each orbit). Thus by
exploring the symmetry of @xmath we can solve all but one linear
combination of the scalar constraints, the global scalar constraint:
@xmath .

##### 4.4.1 Possibility of bypassing the linking theory construction

The crucial result in the intrinsic @xmath view is that there exists a
partial gauge fixing ( @xmath ) of the scalar constraint that is also a
generator of symmetry. This relies heavily on the fact is that one can
invert the Poisson bracket @xmath for a certain linear combination of
the scalar constraints: @xmath . Furthermore, this gauge fixing leaves
just one independent constraint @xmath . But could we have done
everything straight off in @xmath , without the introduction of the
extended phase space @xmath ?

Here the reader must be careful. For indeed we could have found @xmath
directly from the picture in @xmath . But to find @xmath we exploited
the conformal transformations, eventually finding a functional @xmath
which solved for @xmath and thus yielded our global Hamiltonian @xmath .
At the end of the process, we got rid of the extra variables together
with the second class constraints, expressing everything independently
of the gauge fixing function and its conjugate ( @xmath and @xmath
respectively).

We could attempt to forego the extended phase space and Linking Theory
in the construction, by just considering @xmath as a gauge-fixing in
@xmath . But the way would have to have been a little more roundabout.
To follow the Dirac analysis properly, we now make explicit the steps we
would have to take, writing in parentheses the ones we already took in
the construction of SD.

Step 1: impose @xmath as a gauge-fixing in ADM (impose @xmath ). Step 2:
we would first have to explicitly find the variable canonically
conjugate to @xmath , let us call it @xmath (this is just @xmath in our
case). Step 3: then we would have to find variables that Poisson
commuted with both @xmath and its canonical conjugate, @xmath . These
would already be vpct invariant variables (in our case these were just
@xmath ). Step 4: find the purely second class combination of the
constraints with respect to @xmath . This is given by @xmath . (in our
case this part is exactly analogous, ours being given by @xmath ). Step
5: Finally, show that indeed we could solve all but one of the original
scalar constraints @xmath for @xmath as a function of the remaining
variables (this is our @xmath , given in Proposition 1 ).

As all the quantities would be expressed in terms of variables that
Poisson commuted with @xmath we would automatically have a vpct
invariant theory without going into extended phase space. In the
author’s opinion, this is roughly what Dirac had in mind in [ 3 ] ,
albeit solely from a gauge fixing point of view, i.e. not involving a
“conformal transformation” conceptual background, and also limiting the
analysis to asymptotically flat space. We will discuss this a bit
further at the end of chapter 5 .

Thus we come to the conclusion that without all the baggage presented in
this chapter, in particular the use of the linking theory and extended
phase space, the picture presented in figure 4.1 is of very limited
value. It does not in itself present how the dynamics are made
consistent. Nonetheless it is a powerful pictorial representation of the
end result.

#### 4.5 Comparisons with earlier work

Now that we have explicitly constructed the theory of Shape Dynamics
(SD) we will present it against the backdrop of two its three main
sources, leaving the comparison with Dirac to the next chapter.

##### 4.5.1 Comparison with earlier work: Barbour et al

In [ 20 ] Barbour et al implemented best matching with respect to
volume-preserving-conformal transformations (vpcts). By doing so they
were able to derive the constraint @xmath and came indeed close to
arriving at the same theory we present in this thesis (SD). The main
issue that blind-sighted them was that they used the Lagragian BSW
formalism ( 2.55 ). This means they never sought to distinguish between
the first- and second-class sets of constraints, but were solely
concerned with propagating @xmath . Thus they indeed found the
transformed version of equation 4.18 , but could not possibly have found
our global scalar constraint ( 4.32 ). Furthermore, the Lagrangian BSW
formalism gives the scalar constraint as an identity (see section 2.3 )
so that there is no place for the trading of constraints we have in
Shape Dynamics. There is also some confusion over the fact that they
attempt to interpret the transformed constraint @xmath as an equation
for @xmath . Even if we are willing to grant this, more importantly the
extra variables @xmath are never seen as an extension of the phase
space, so that the initial degrees of freedom are not extended and no
extra constraint gained. The solvability of equation @xmath , which is
the LY equation, is then interpreted as defining a physical scale for
each metric . Of course if this is the case there is no room for
admitting scale-invariance, as in SD.

In summary, [ 20 ] constituted a very important initial step towards SD,
but fell short of finding a theory that contained vpct-invariance and a
global scalar constraint.

##### 4.5.2 Comparison with earlier work: York

We have already stressed in section 2.2.2 the fact that, although it did
not arise from canonical analysis of any sort, the York conformal method
must be physically conceived as just that: a method for solving the
initial value problem of general relativity. From the purely
mathematical point of view, the form of the defining equation for Shape
Dynamics is not too far removed from the Lichnerowicz-York equation (
2.50 ). The main difference in the form of the equations is that our
principal result, contained in Theorem 1 , requires the solution of a
non-homogeneous version of ( 2.50 ), i.e. containing a 0-th order term
in @xmath . It is not yet clear whether we can apply the same arguments
presented in [ 16 ] to such an equation, which is why we resort to the
implicit function theorem. We furthermore remark that it was not
possible in the case of the paper [ 16 ] to apply such methods to the
solvability of ( 2.50 ) for two main reasons. First, the LY equation (
2.50 ) in [ 16 ] did not arise from a gauge-fixing. This gauge fixing
has to satisfy the fundamental requirement of also being a symmetry
generator for the implicit function theorem to aid us in solving for the
second class constraint. Secondly, even if one did try to use the
generator of pure conformal transformations (without the
volume-preserving condition of Shape Dynamics), the corresponding
version of the linear operator given in ( 4.36 ) would not be invertible
everywhere on phase space.

### Chapter 5 Trading GR for SD: asymptotically flat case

Let us now apply proposition 1 and the construction leading to
proposition 2 to General Relativity to extend the results of section 4.3
to asymptotically flat Cauchy surfaces. One of the leading differences
is that it now makes no sense to talk about “volume-preserving” as the
volume is infinite. To recall, the volume-preserving condition is what
allowed us to find the purely second class part of the scalar constraint
and invert the Poisson bracket formed between itself and the gauge
fixing. A similar role will be played by an asymptotic fall-off
condition on the conformal factor, as we will see.

#### 5.1 Constructing the Linking Theory

To construct the linking gauge theory on a Cauchy-surface @xmath , we
must first properly define the appropriate setting. We fix a Euclidean
global chart (with radial coordinate @xmath ) and impose asymptotically
flat boundary conditions. We implement this through the fall-off
conditions of the 3-metric @xmath , its conjugate momentum density
@xmath , the lapse @xmath and shift @xmath in the limit @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We call @xmath the space of functions on @xmath with the fall-off rate
ascribed to @xmath . We should note that these conditions are not of
utmost importance in what follows, it is only the fall-off conditions on
@xmath that we ascribe below that is of relevance.

We start with the equivalent of ( 3.8 ) and denote the usual ADM
constraints as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

As before, we now embed the original system in an extended phase space
that includes the auxiliary variables @xmath . In accordance with the
boundary conditions we assume the scalar @xmath falls off as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and that its conjugate momentum density @xmath falls off
sufficiently fast at @xmath . We call the space of such @xmath @xmath .
The nontrivial canonical Poisson brackets are still given by ( 4.2 ).
Again have an extended phase space with @xmath , with the additional
constraint ( 3.9 ) @xmath determined by our embedding.

Following ( 3.11 ), we construct the generating function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where capitals denote the transformed variables. Note the lack of hatted
variables in this case. We find the canonical transformation analogous
to ( 3.12 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and again subsequently use these transformed variables to construct
three sets of constraints: the transformed scalar and diffeomorphism
constraint of GR as well as the transform of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using a scalar Lagrange-multiplier @xmath , which is required to fall
off as @xmath as @xmath , we define the total Hamiltonian ¹ ¹ 1 We
should for general purposes add a regularizing boundary term to the
total Hamiltonian, as it diverges in the present form. However since
this does not impinge on either the equations of motion nor on the
constraints, we omit it in order to avoid cluttering the paper.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This completely defines the linking @xmath as contained in section 3.1.2
in an analogous fashion to the compact closed case treated in the
previous section (see ( 4.12 )).

#### 5.2 Recovering General Relativity in the asymptotically flat.

Again the only nonvanishing Poisson-bracket of the gauge fixing
condition @xmath with the constraints of the linking theory is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and everything follows in the same way: we can follow through from (
4.12 ), and, in the language of Proposition 1 , arrive at @xmath and
@xmath equivalent to @xmath . We have lost the freedom to fix @xmath ,
but retained the freedom to fix the lapse.

#### 5.3 Recovering Shape Dynamics in the asymptotically flat case

Our main aim in this section will be to prove that part of the scalar
constraints can again be written again in the form @xmath on the
gauge-fixing surface @xmath .

The only weakly non-vanishing Poisson-bracket of the gauge-fixing
condition @xmath with the constraints of the linking theory is @xmath ,
which leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The differential operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is an elliptic, second order, self-adjoint operator, invertible for the
given boundary conditions . So for the boundary conditions given in (
5.1 ), we have the unique kernel

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, by the canonical transformation properties, we have a unique
solution for @xmath , @xmath .

Again, as in ( 4.21 ), we denote the one linear combination, among the
infinitely many @xmath constraints, that remains first class with
respect to all the other constraints by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, we separate the constraints into a first class part, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a purely second class part, given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### 5.3.1 Constraint Surface for Shape Dynamics

Now we again show that, even for the asymptotically flat case, the
constraint @xmath is equivalent to a constraint of the form @xmath .

We have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since these equations do not depend on @xmath , we can fix @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We thus take the set of constraints that is linearly independent of (
4.21 ), which is given by @xmath . Clearly @xmath , which means indeed
it lives in the dual space of the quotient of @xmath by @xmath .
Effectively, we must subtract from any @xmath the function @xmath given
by ( 5.11 ).

Consider the linear self adjoint elliptic operator we presently have:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.15)
  -- -- -- --------

If we then use ( D.10 ), we again have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then from the Fredholm alternative (Theorem 2 ) and self-adjointness

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The splitting is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the appropriate versions of both Proposition 3 and Theorem 1 work
in the asymptotically flat case. It is important that there is a
non-zero homogeneous solution to the @xmath operator, so we are left
with a first class component of @xmath . This is the reason for using
not full conformal transformations in the compact case, but only those
that preserve the total spatial volume. The analogous restriction arises
from the fall-off conditions in the present case.

The construction of the theory on the constraint surface and the further
fixing of the gauge therefore proceeds in the same manner as was shown
in the constant mean curvature case. Of course instead of having
constant mean curvature slicing, we now have the maximal slicing @xmath
.

##### 5.3.2 Comparison with Dirac’s work

As mentioned already in section 2.2.3 , and followed up in section 4.4 ,
in 1958 Dirac already anticipated much of the constructions present in
shape dynamics in the asymptotically flat case. We pick up from the end
of section 2.2.3 . After setting @xmath as a gauge-fixing condition, he
noticed that it will be second class only with respect to the scalar
constraint @xmath . Then he finds that there exists a variable
canonically conjugate to @xmath , namely @xmath , where @xmath is a
tensor density of weight @xmath (his equation 28). He then changed
variables to consider the metrics with unit determinant @xmath (a
coordinate-dependent statement), and the tensor density of weight @xmath
: @xmath , both of which have zero Poisson bracket with @xmath and its
conjugate variable. Then he assumed that one can solve the scalar
constraint by fixing the value of the variable @xmath as a function of
the tilded variables. After one does this, one has completely eliminated
@xmath , its conjugate and the scalar constraint. Although Dirac never
mentions it, since the remaining variables all commute with @xmath we
have a conformally invariant theory. Of course, as we are taking Poisson
brackets between tensor densities whose density does not add up to 1,
these statements are all coordinate-dependent, which is why he later
mentions that one would have to also fix the spatial coordinates.

This indeed bears a strong resemblance to the work presented in this
section, and indeed with the method we use for the Hamilton–Jacobi
equation (section 7 ). Even if we disregard the spatial
coordinate-dependence of the procedure Dirac outlined, there are still
several disparities with what we did. One, as we mentioned at the end of
section 4.4 , is that Dirac heuristically went through the entire
procedure from a gauge fixing point of view, and not as a symmetry
trading, one of the main selling points of SD which he never considered
or mentioned. Furthermore, Dirac falls into a bit of contradiction, as
he retains a non-zero global (which he calls “main”) Hamiltonian (his
equation 32). But without boundary considerations (which he did not seem
to have for these particular equations), solving the scalar constraint
(his equation 30) would set the “main” Hamiltonian (his equation 17)
also to zero. Lastly, of course, he never showed whether one can indeed
solve the scalar constraint in terms of the variable canonically
conjugate to @xmath (the specific case of ( 2.51 )). Had he done so, we
would have also anticipated the work of York et al [ 16 ] (see section
2.2.2 ).

Concluding, although there are several enticing hints and interesting
directions, that original paper falls reasonably short of actually
defining Shape Dynamics in the asymptotically flat case.

#### 5.4 Lagrangian Picture

Let us consider the Lagrangian of the linking gauge theory in an attempt
to relate the local degrees of Shape Dynamics with those of General
Relativity. The local degrees of freedom of standard General Relativity
are given by the ADM-decomposition of a 4-metric, i.e. a 3-metric, shift
vector field and lapse field, while shape dynamics is a local theory of
a 3-metric, a shift vector field, the conformal field @xmath and the
conformal Lagrange-multiplier @xmath . While the 3-metric and shift
vector field are naturally identified, one needs the Euler–Lagrange
equations to investigate further.

Using @xmath , @xmath and the supermetric @xmath we can write the action
for the linking theory in canonical form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the equations of motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

to eliminate the momenta. Coming purely from the Lagrangian one could
now think that it would be possible to find an equation that relates the
lapse and the conformal Lagrange multiplier. This basically would mean
we could relate the local speed of time to local speed of scale. To see
that this is not possible, we consider the general construction
principle for linking theories as explained in section 3.1.2 . We start
with the Gauss-Codazzi split of the Einstein-Hilbert action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and use the transfromation @xmath , which again yields the action for
the linking theory, i.e. the second line of ( 5.19 ), with @xmath
replaced by @xmath as it should be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is quite easy to show that the constraint @xmath comes out as a
primary constraint from the Legendre transform of this Lagrangian, as it
was to be expected from section 3.1.2 . However, there is no
relationship possible between the Lagrange multiplier @xmath of the
conformal constraint and the lapse @xmath , neither in the linking
theory (where both Lagrange multipliers are free), nor in Shape Dynamics
(where the lapse is fixed but @xmath is free). One could now argue that
one can write a relationship between @xmath and @xmath by imposing the
constraint @xmath . But this choice, as we showed in the previous
section, fixes @xmath . We thus find for this case that the Lagrangian
for Shape Dynamics is written as the second line of equation ( 5.19 )
with @xmath and @xmath , which admits no dynamical relation anymore.

### Chapter 6 Causal Structure and coupling to different fields

One of the outstanding features of Shape Dynamics (SD), is that it
contain one single global Hamiltonian constraint which generates
evolution. As this theory no longer possesses many fingered time, or
Lorentz invariance for that matter, it becomes a crucial concern of the
program to establish its causal structure. The natural way to do this,
which is what we pursue in this section,is to study propagation of a
scalar field.

#### 6.1 General criteria for coupling.

When we try to couple different fields to gravity, we will have to face
basically one question: how does one scale fields? What exponent shall
we choose in @xmath ? This is an important issue because if the scaling
is not correct we could encounter two difficult obstructions.

The first obstruction is that if we are dealing with a field that
possesses some kind of gauge symmetry it might not be possible to find a
constraint @xmath , as in ( 4.7 ), that is first class with respect to
the gauge constraint. The second is that the conserved charge (which we
call @xmath ) implicit inside @xmath that defines the foliation might
depend on the field. In this case, there might be an even worse
consequence if the field possesses some sort of gauge symmetry (like
electromagnetism). For then the charge could turn out to depend on the
gauge potential. This could be the case even if we can find a
field-dependent @xmath that is first class with respect to the gauge
generator of the field. Indeed with any other choice of scaling than the
one chosen in the text, this is what happens with the electromagnetic
field, where the generator of the gauge symmetry is the Gauss
constraint. We will not show it, but it is possible to make a scaling
choice different from the one we make in the following section, but
still such that the Gauss constraint is propagated. But what happens
then is that the charge is @xmath gauge dependent.

So any of the couplings that we choose should pass these two hurdles. As
it turns out, the solution exists only when we require the fields to
have trivial scaling with respect to the conformal factor, @xmath .

##### 6.1.1 Coupling to the scalar field.

The most natural way to approach the coupling of a scalar field is not
to try to develop it directly in SD, but to make use of the linking
theory to facilitate its introduction. We shall concentrate on the case
of the closed spatial manifold without boundary.

Let us define the fields we shall be working with. The usual Hamiltonian
density for a scalar field @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the momentum conjugate to the scalar field. The original
gravitational constraints amended by the constraints arising from the
coupling to the scalar field can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where for ease of manipulation we wrote the smeared version of the
diffeomorphism constraint.

We now embed the original system in an extended phase space including
the auxiliary variables @xmath in the same way. The new nontrivial
canonical Poisson bracket is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The extended phase space for these fields is now:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the additional constraint :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We construct the generating function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and find the previous canonical transformations and two new ones:

  -- -- -- -------
           (6.6)
  -- -- -- -------

We again use the transformed variables to construct three sets of
constraints: the transformed scalar- and diffeomorphism-constraint of GR
as well as the transform of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can again be shown that the @xmath constraint restricts the functions
in @xmath to be in a one to one relation with the functions on the
embedding of @xmath independent of @xmath (equivalently @xmath holds on
the image of @xmath as applied to functions dependent solely on the
original phase space coordinates). The fact that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

can also be explicitly computed using @xmath . We will refrain from
doing these calculations as they do not differ from the vacuum case.

The linking theory gravitational Hamiltonian is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we use the gauge fixing @xmath , and find that it weakly commutes
with all constraints except for @xmath . We get from equation ( A.21 ),
the modification of the @xmath operator ( 5.10 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

To show that this has the desired properties, we must again show that
the linear term @xmath is non-positive. To do so, we use the scalar
constraint to get the equation in the form of ( A.17 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allows us to use the same decomposition as in ( 4.36 ). Since the
extra term @xmath is negative, we still have uniqueness and existence of
the solution @xmath .

We then define the gauge-sfixed part of @xmath as @xmath . It can be
shown that @xmath can be written as @xmath in the same way as was done
in ( 1 ). This constraint exhausts the gauge fixing @xmath (they have
invertible Poisson bracket), and as second class constraint can be set
strongly to zero alongside @xmath to eliminate the extra variables and
allow us to use the usual Poisson bracket instead of the Dirac ones.

The two outstanding features of the coupling are that the constraint
@xmath does not depend on the scalar field @xmath and that one can still
uniquely solve the lapse fixing equation for a functional @xmath such
that @xmath . We thus have well defined shape dynamics coupled to a
scalar field given by the first class constraints:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used that with the reduction @xmath .

###### Adding a cosmological constant

We now show that our proof only works for a certain range of the
cosmological constant. If the new (modified) scalar constraint is given
by adding @xmath , it is trivial to see that this will contribute with a
term @xmath to the Poisson bracket @xmath . Thus to complete the @xmath
term, we must add and subtract @xmath getting the modified version of (
5.10 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

But if we now use the scalar constraint to get the equation in the form
of ( A.17 ), we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the same techniques as before (section 4.3.3 ), we only have
guaranteed uniqueness and existence for @xmath . We note that for
asymptotic de Sitter, @xmath . It is still interesting that such a bound
exists. Adding a massive potential term to the scalar field in the
previous section, of the form @xmath , puts the same bound on the
density of such a field. The set of conditions in which a field
initially respecting this bound will evolve to one that does not is
still under study.

##### 6.1.2 Coupling to the electromagnetic field.

In coupling the electromagnetic constraints we have one more ingredient
than in the scalar field case. Namely, now we must also remember to
include the Gauss constraint.

The Hamiltonian density for electromagnetism is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the vector density canonically conjugate to @xmath (and
not a vector field). The constraints are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath defines the electric vector field @xmath . We then replace
the last equation of ( 6.3 ) by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The generating functional is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new transformations are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new constraints are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we used

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, we reproduce ( 4.36 ) for electromagnetism. We get from equation (
A.24 ), the modified @xmath operator of ( 5.10 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

To show that this has the desired properties, we must again show that
the linear term @xmath is non-positive. To do so, we use the scalar
constraint to get the equation in the form of ( A.17 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allows us to use the same decomposition as in ( 4.36 ). Since the
extra term @xmath is negative, we still have uniqueness and existence of
the solution @xmath .

In the same way as with the scalar field, we now have well defined shape
dynamics coupled to vacuum electromagnetism, given by the first class
constraints:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 6.2 Emergence of the causal structure.

General Relativity is a theory of the spacetime metric, but the physical
interpretation of this metric arises through a clock and rod model.
Terms like light-cone put the operational meaning of geometry to the
forefront. Shape Dynamics does not immediately provide a spacetime
metric, but a spacetime interpretation of Shape Dynamics comes from a
clock and rod model in the same way as in General Relativity. The
simplest one of these is a multiplet of free scalar fields, which we
will consider in this section. For this we assume that the field
strength @xmath of the @xmath components of a scalar multiplet and
conjugate momentum density @xmath can be prepared at every point @xmath
and initial time @xmath , and that both are measurable at later times.
Moreover, we assume that the fields can be prepared as test fields, i.e.
the field strength and momentum density is small enough, so that the
back-reaction on gravity can be neglected. To recover the spacetime
metric at a point @xmath we first consider the equations of motion for
test fields with Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now prepare the first six components of the scalar multiplet around a
given point @xmath (in some chart) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This determines through ( 6.23 ) the metric at point @xmath up to @xmath
. The initial velocity of the field is prepared such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which translates into @xmath and thus we get from ( 6.23 ) the lapse
@xmath . We thus can recover the ADM-decomposition of the metric by
inverting this system for the components of the ADM metric.

##### 6.2.1 Testing different actions with the reconstruction of the
metric.

The shape dynamics Hamiltonian, given by @xmath , is a complicated
beast, given implicitly by an inverse elliptic operator. Suppose however
that we would like, from first principles, to come up with a Hamiltonian
that still obeys the symmetries of SD and that furthermore matches
general relativity to some given approximation, what would be a
reasonable form? In answer to this question, let us once again consider
the smeared form of the scalar constraint:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The most straightforward attempt to make something that is
volume-preserving-conformally invariant out of this is to have a gauge
fixing: @xmath where @xmath is a section of the fiber bundle with gauge
group @xmath . The most natural one, for which the gauge fixing
properties are known to work is the so called Yamabe gauge [ 31 ] . For
this gauge, the scalar curvature is a constant:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

To make it diffeomorphism invariant, we integrate over each term with
the constant smearing @xmath . Since our gauge freedom does not involve
the volume, in the end we get the following Hamiltonian, separated by
the powers of volume involved in the conformal weight of each term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the traceless part of @xmath , and @xmath is the Yamabe
functional, chosen so that we keep vpct invariance of each term. There
are of course other choices of vpct invariant actions. Interestingly,
upon making a formal volume expansion of the SD Hamiltonian we get
@xmath as the first three terms appearing (see section 7 ), which is why
we labeled this Hamiltonian as @xmath . This guarantees that at least to
the allowed order in volume @xmath agrees dynamically with general
relativity.

In the same way, we can use the construction principle for the
Hamiltonian of the gravitational field coupled to a scalar field
presented in the previous section. For an interesting comparison with
general relativity, we can now use the reconstruction of space-time
presented in section 6.2 , replacing @xmath with @xmath .

### Chapter 7 Volume expansions and Hamilton-Jacobi approach.

In this section, we give an explicit perturbative construction of SD in
a large-volume expansion. This was our first attempt at an approximation
scheme to the global Hamiltonian of SD. More fruitful schemes are being
carried out at present, but will not be contained in this thesis.

The comparison with earlier work in the classical HJ approach to GR [ 36
, 27 ] brings to light at least one great practical advantage of SD over
GR: the ability to implement all local constraints of SD, as in SD we
are able to work out all local degrees of freedom due to the linearity
in the momenta of the constraints. Remarkably, this construction
provides a rigorous classical correspondence between gravity at very
large volumes and conformal field theory (CFT).

The SD Hamiltonian can be explicitly constructed by solving an elliptic
differential equation whose coefficients are local phase space
functions. The nonlocality of the solution of this differential equation
introduces nonlocality into SD. However, we will show that, with some
caveats, it is possible to construct explicit solutions in a large
volume expansion at least to third order.

This analysis may be of interest for the semiclassical
dS/CFT-correspondence. The AdS/CFT-correspondence [ 37 , 38 ] , which
relates the asymptotic wavefunction of quantum gravity in the bulk to
the partition function of a CFT on the boundary, has generated an
incredible amount of interest. The correspondence applies strictly to
special limits of Type IIB string theory and @xmath super Yang–Mills
theory, but has lately been cast as an example of a more general
gauge/gravity duality. In rough terms, the AdS/CFT dictionary relates
radial evolution in AdS space with renormalization group flow of a
conformal field theory on the boundary.

The results of this section can be tentatively interpreted in terms of
the correspondence. As it stands however, the connection is not direct
and we will refrain from drawing too many parallels. Heuristically, by
considering a CMC trajectory that approaches a homogeneous spacetime at
large volume so that the spatial volume becomes an asymptotic clock, the
correspondence would arise from interpreting “volume time” as the
“Renormalization Group (RG) time” of an Euclidean CFT partition
function. The advantage of SD over GR in this setting is the following:
in GR, the implementation of all local constraints is complicated by the
nonlinearity of the constraints [ 36 ] ; whereas, in SD, one can
determine the local physical degrees of freedom because the local
constraints are linear in the momenta.

#### 7.1 A practical way to calculate the global Hamiltonian.

The defining characteristic of our global Hamiltonian is the non-local
functional @xmath , given by Proposition 1 . A more pragmatic approach
to calculating the global Hamiltonian together with the functional
@xmath is to use equation ( 4.37 ), which we reproduce here for
convenience:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then our aim is basically to simultaneously solve the two equations. We
assume a priori that there exists a unique solution (see theorem 1 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and @xmath .

Proposition 1 allows us to assume that there exists a @xmath such that (
7.1 ) implies @xmath is a spatial constant. Thus we can take the mean
without further consequences: @xmath . This will be our main tool in
calculating the effective global Hamiltonian. Let us rewrite the
conformally transformed scalar constraint ( 4.8 ) with a slightly more
convenient notation here:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath eliminates the divergence squared term from ( 4.8 ).

Before going on, we will consider a slightly different SD Hamiltonian,
where the difference is however “pure gauge”. We do this as follows: as
@xmath is first-class wrt @xmath , where @xmath , we can choose a
different basis of first class constraints made up of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can check that if we Poisson commute

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which thus implies we can follow through the proof of Proposition 1 by
merely substituting @xmath by @xmath wherever it appears.

Thus by setting @xmath strongly to zero, we see that instead of using (
7.3 ) to solve ( 7.1 ) we can use

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the above expression, we have defined the traceless momenta @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For convenience we will also define:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

From now on, we will use @xmath instead of @xmath but drop the prime for
convenience.

The last preparatory result is that, assuming again that a unique
solution exists (Theorem 1 ), we can exploit the conformal invariance
and thus go to the Yamabe gauge (see section E.0.5 ). This relies on the
result that all closed manifolds are conformally constant curvature. For
this, one needs to show that a constant @xmath can be found such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some non–local functional @xmath of @xmath . The restriction @xmath
selects a unique value of @xmath and determines the metric
representative (up to a diffemomorphism).

#### 7.2 Large volume expansion

To perform this expansion we write the SD Hamiltonian as a power series
in @xmath , where @xmath denotes the total spatial volume. To expand
@xmath in powers of @xmath , the explicit @xmath dependence of @xmath
must be isolated. This can be done using the change of variables @xmath
given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.10)
     @xmath               (7.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a fixed reference volume. One can easily verify that
@xmath and @xmath , defined in ( 7.8 ), are canonically conjugate:
@xmath . Furthermore @xmath , so that the barred variables are
independent of @xmath (as they were designed to be). Note that @xmath
and @xmath are not canonically conjugate. Exploiting the fact that the
unique solution for the conformal factor implies we can use vpct
invariance, we will consider all the variables to be taken in the Yamabe
gauge ( E.2 ) from now on.

Then @xmath is found by simultaneously solving the equations

  -- -------- -- --------
                 (7.12)
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where barred quantities are calculated using @xmath and the
(super)subscript @xmath in this section denotes the Yamabe gauge.

The large @xmath expansion is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The restriction ( 7.13 ) is trivially solved by @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath . We can solve for the @xmath ’s by inserting the expansion,
taking the mean, and using the fact that @xmath is constant.

The complete solution up to order @xmath is calculated in section C.2 .
It is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

A couple of comments are in order. First, we note that each term in the
expansion is diffeomorphism invariant but vpct gauge dependent. Thus we
conformally covariantize it, so that it coincides with the above
equation over the Yamabe section. We get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Second, note that to first order in V the evolution generates just
global conformal transformations. This does not mean of course that at
asymptotic large volumes the Universe itself is homogeneous, which would
indeed exclude all interesting asymptotic solutions of GR. It means only
that evolution becomes homogeneous, or that in a sense evolution
“freezes out” at asymptotically late times.

#### 7.3 Hamilton-Jacobi equation for large volume.

In the case of unconstrained systems, the Hamilton-Jacobi theory
provides a bridge between classical and quantum mechanics. As we have
all first class linear local constraints here, we also have a classical
Hamilton-Jacobi formulation of the theory for our case. With non-linear
first class constraints, one is simply not able to implement the
constraints at the level of Hamilton’s principal function (see [ 39 ] ,
section 5.4.4). The principal function is of course very different from
the large volume expansion studied in the previous section. First of
all, we must choose an initial metric, then the Hamilton-Jacobi
functional of a metric @xmath is considered to be the action of a
solution connecting the initial metric and @xmath . The value of the
action can in principle change if there are more than one solution
between the two points. In the case of first class constraints, which
generate gauge symmetries, this does not happen. That is the fundamental
reason why it is not possible to implement second class constraints in
the HJ approach as opposed to first class ones.

We can now solve the HJ equation for SD in the large volume limit. Again
making use of our gauge principles, our point of departure will be the
gauge fixed ( 7.15 ), as opposed to the gauge invariant ( 7.16 ). After
performing the necessary calculations in this particular gauge we will
“covariantize” the results to a general one.

First we recall that @xmath and @xmath are not canonically conjugate;
the barred variables defined in ( 7.10 ) were only specifically designed
to be independent of @xmath . We show that the canonical Poisson
brackets between the barred variables and @xmath and @xmath vanish in
section C . Hence we can obtain the HJ equation from making the
substitutions in our volume expanded Hamiltonian ( 7.15 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the HJ functional that depends on the metric @xmath and
parametrically on integration constants @xmath . These constants @xmath
are symmetric tensor densities of weight 1: they parametrize the
non-gauge part of the initial conditions (or the initial point in the
constraint manifold) in the Hamilton-Jacobi approach. We will fix our
initial point to be given by asymptotic de Sitter, which translates into
defining a homogeneous separation constant. These conditions are
compatible with asymptotic (in time) dS space, which has maximally
symmetric CMC slices. The treatment of other separation constants is
currently under investigation. Unlike the usual (A)dS/CFT
correspondence, this is not the most general case that can be considered
within our framework (the generalization to the Euclidean AdS case is
trivial, requiring the scalar constraint to be expressed as a radial,
instead of a time, evolution operator).

We can express @xmath in terms of @xmath and use the chain rule to write
the result in terms of @xmath and @xmath . We prove that the @xmath
derivatives drop out of the final expression in ( C.9 ). The final
expression for @xmath we use is

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.18)
  -- -- -- --------

Let us note that in the gauge fixed version, the variations of @xmath
can be found using the standard variations of @xmath . The @xmath ’s can
be found recursively using our solution for @xmath and by collecting
powers of @xmath . The equation we are then trying to solve is:

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.19)
  -- -- -- --------

The expansion we are going to use, still of course in powers of @xmath ,
to solve this is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then insert this expansion into the HJ equation obtained using the
substitutions above. as mentioned, to obtain a complete integral of the
HJ equation, @xmath can be taken of the form @xmath . The linear
constraints determine @xmath to be transverse and with covariantly
constant trace. The leading order HJ equation determines the value of
the trace of @xmath , as we will see. This restricts the freely
specifiable components of @xmath precisely to the freely specifiable
momentum data in York’s approach [ 14 ] . To encode an initial point
that is asymptotically deSitter, we restrict ourselves to separation
constants with vanishing transverse traceless part.

To be explicit , the first terms (reinstating @xmath from the
calculations done in section C.2.1 , are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath and @xmath are the only terms with positive dimension.
Gauge invariant solutions can be obtained by restoring the @xmath
dependence of the tilded variables. To draw a contrast of this result
with that of [ 36 , 27 ] , we briefly note that these terms all solve
the local HJ constraints of SD in asymptotic dS space.

## Part II Gauge Theory in Riem.

### Chapter 8 Riem as a principal fiber bundle

In this Chapter we will build the technical tools to be used in Chapter
9 . Most of the content of the present Chapter can be found in [ 40 ]
and [ 34 ] , albeit in slightly different language.

#### 8.1 Introduction

Gauge theory, needless to say, has a long and rich history, and it is
probably not an exaggeration to state it has by now permeated all areas
of theoretical physics as an essential tool for existing frameworks and
guide for future developments. It describes systems which possess some
inherent symmetry in their parametrizations, and for classical fields
over spacetime it has a well-developed geometrical understanding through
the use of principal fiber bundles.

Geometrodynamics, as championed by Wheeler, is the study of gravitation
through a primary focus on space and changes therein rather than on
space-time itself. Space-time is essentially ‘sliced-up’ and described
as an evolution of the geometry of these spatial slices through time. It
is fundamentally a dynamical view of GR, technically taking form as its
constrained canonical, or ADM formulation [ 2 ] .

Although widely regarded as a gauge theory (since all of its constraints
are first class and thus interpreted as symmetry generating), there is
no specific description of ADM as a gauge theory in the geometric, fiber
bundle sense, making use of connection forms, sections and so forth.
This is in part because a connection over configuration space seems to
be far removed from reality. What would such a connection do? This is
one of the questions we aim to answer in this part.

As is well known, the unconstrained configuration space for General
Relativity is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Hamiltonian dynamics thus takes place on (a constraint submanifold
of) @xmath . By a geometrical setting of gauge theory, mathematically we
mean the existence of a principal fiber bundle and, most importantly, a
connection form on it. The first inkling of a connection form in @xmath
arose in [ 9 , 41 ] , where the mention of horizontal and vertical
components of metric velocities first appears. It is however our
understanding that the concept was not fully explored, and one of the
purposes of the present work, at least from the mathematical standpoint,
is to investigate exactly what constitutes a connection over
configuration space. That is, what are the properties such a connection
has to satisfy and how can we construct one both formally and
explicitly. In doing so we would like to shed light on explicit
infinite-dimensional geometrical gauge theories over configuration
space, a point of view so far as we know original. From the physical
point of view, this may be connected with a richer history of relational
ideas (see section 2.3 ).

A second reason why this approach has not been attempted before is
because of the difficulties in interpreting the action of the
Hamiltonian constraint as a group action, and other issues related to
the infamous “problem of time” [ 1 ] . As in the first part of the
thesis we have shown that it is possible to have a theory of gravity
which no longer possesses the scalar (or Hamiltonian) constraint, and
thus no refoliation invariance. Unlike what is the case in ADM, the
constraints of this dual theory then form subalgebras, reflecting the
kind of group structure suitable for an exhaustive principal fiber
bundle formulation. This points in a new direction for the development
of gauge theoretic tools for gravity and sets the stage for applying
more standard methods for the quantization of gravity as a gauge theory.

Motivated by the possibility of now describing the symmetry groups of
general relativity in a full geometrical gauge-theoretic setting, we
will attempt to make explicit the gauge connections relating to the
action of these two groups; the group of three dimensional
diffeomorphisms, which we denote by @xmath , and that of
three-dimensional conformal transformations @xmath . Both @xmath and
@xmath groups have right actions on the natural configuration space
@xmath . We will constrain our attention to the case of @xmath being
compact and closed, which is of more interest to the relational approach
for various reasons [ 17 ] .

##### 8.1.1 Principal fiber bundles and gauge theory.

Here we will briefly introduce the concept of a principal fiber-bundle,
depicted in figure 8.1 . We will first present the formal definitions
and

###### Definition 1.

A principal fiber bundle with smooth structural group @xmath is a smooth
manifold @xmath on which @xmath acts @xmath and for which the action of
@xmath is smooth and free. By a free action we mean that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, the isotropy group of every point is the identity.

One then constructs a projection

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the base manifold @xmath is defined with the quotient topology
with respect to the equivalence relation @xmath , for some @xmath . We
call an orbit of @xmath (or of @xmath ) a fiber , and also denote it by
@xmath .

For finite-dimensional manifolds, by the freedom of the group action, we
can see that the orbits are isomorphic to the group @xmath , but have no
preferred identity element. ¹ ¹ 1 Such objects are in modern
mathematical language called @xmath -torsors. A smooth choice of
identity element in each fiber coincides with the definition of a local
section:

###### Definition 2.

Let @xmath be an open set in @xmath . We define a local section of
@xmath over @xmath as a submanifold @xmath of @xmath such that for every
@xmath , @xmath is transversal to the orbits, @xmath ,  and @xmath
intersects orbits over @xmath at a single point; i.e. for @xmath then
@xmath

In rough terms, this means that a section @xmath never has a component
along the orbits and intersects every orbit (transversality) @xmath that
it intersects each orbit once. These facts are enough to show that we
can completely characterize an element of @xmath over @xmath by its
location on the base and an element of the group which says where it is
wrt the section. A choice of section is also called a choice of local
gauge . One can prove from this definition that in finite dimensions
there always exists a slice for our definition of a principal fiber
bundle (definition 1 ) (see [ 42 ] ² ² 2 Or see Theorem 19 in [ 43 ] for
a detailed proof in the language used in section 8.3 . ). Indeed, it is
using the same outlines of that proof that we are able to show that a
section for the action of different groups on Riem exists (see section
8.3 ). A slice implies that @xmath has a local product structure that we
can patch together to form an atlas of the manifold, and that all slices
over the same open set are diffeomorphic. These sections are then
equivalent to the concept of a gauge, and transition maps from one gauge
(or section) to the other can be shown to be functions @xmath .

###### Example: the bundle of bases.

The simplest and most telling example of a principal fiber bundle, is
the one of all linear bases of @xmath , for a given manifold @xmath .
The group @xmath acts smoothly and has trivial isotropy, meaning it
doesn’t act trivially on any base. There is no preferred identity
element (a preferred basis of each tangent space), and yet we can take
every base to every other base by an action of @xmath , making each
fiber isomorphic to @xmath . It is useful for us to already preview the
concept of a connection in this setting. Given a base @xmath over the
point @xmath and a vector @xmath , a connection will basically tell us
which base corresponds to @xmath in that given direction, i.e., how to
define parallel transport of the basis @xmath in each direction.

#### 8.2 The 3-diffeomorphism group.

Let @xmath denote the symmetric product of the cotangent bundle, and
@xmath the space of smooth sections over this bundle ³ ³ 3 It is a
Frechét space (Metrizable Complete Locally Convex Topological Vector
space). . The space of positive definite smooth sections of @xmath is
what we call @xmath . i.e. @xmath , it is a positive open cone over the
vector space @xmath (meaning that adding two metrics with positive
coefficients is still a metric).

Let us also review the following general facts, which characterize the
action of what will play the role of a Lie algebra and Lie group [ 40 ]
:

-   The set @xmath of smooth diffeomorphisms of @xmath is an infinite
    dimensional Lie group, and it acts on @xmath on the right as a group
    of transformations by pulling back metrics:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    an action which is smooth with respect to the @xmath -structures of
    @xmath and @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 The natural action is on the right since of
    course @xmath . . We call @xmath , the action for fixed @xmath , the
    orbit map. It is clear that two metrics are isometric if and only if
    they lie in the same orbit,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   The derivative of the orbit map @xmath at the identity is

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.2)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the infinitesimal generator of a given curve of
    diffeomorphisms of @xmath . The spaces @xmath , tangent to the
    orbits will be called vertical and are defined as:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since @xmath is compact, every @xmath is complete and @xmath forms
    an infinite dimensional Lie algebra under the usual commutator of
    vector fields, @xmath .

The quotient @xmath is known to be a stratified manifold whose singular
sets correspond to the diffeomorphism classes of metrics with
non-discrete isometry groups:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are always groups of dimension at most 6. The singular sets are
nested according to the dimension of @xmath .

When dealing with the space of metrics with no symmetries @xmath , the
space @xmath is indeed a manifold and the existence of a section [ 40 ]
allows us to construct its local product structure @xmath through bundle
charts for @xmath and open set of the quotient and properly define
@xmath as a principal fiber bundle (PFB). With the PFB @xmath we have
the usual constructions of gauge theory working properly, as we will
see.

There are other ways to resolve the singularities in the stratified
structure of @xmath than the one adopted here, which has the
disadvantage of excising metrics with high degrees of symmetry such as
the ones used to find explicit solutions of the Einstein equations. To
excuse ourselves from that obvious criticism, we remark that only a
meagre set of initial data will reach such boundaries, that our
arguments are of a generic nature and that we can always approximate as
well as we like any of those symmetric states. One of the other ways to
resolve the singularity involves assuming that the topology of the
underlying manifold does not allow for any continuous symmetry group, so
called wild topologies, which are infinite in number. Another involves
slightly modifying the group @xmath one works with, to @xmath the
diffeomorphism which leaves point @xmath fixed. But perhaps the most
useful route is to consider not @xmath but @xmath , where @xmath is the
bundle of oriented frames over @xmath . Since the action of @xmath can
be seen to be free over this space, the quotient is indeed a manifold,
and it is also a principal fiber bundle over said space. Our view here
though is to be minimal with respect to the structures we use.

#### 8.3 Gauge structures over Riem: Slice theorem.

The important result for a gauge theory in @xmath is the Ebin-Palais
slice theorem [ 40 ] . It is analogous to the usual slice theorem, and
it is that which reveals the principal fiber bundle structure in @xmath
. We describe necessary material for the construction of a principal
connection in @xmath , with the main aim being achieved in Theorem 3 .
But to see why the analogy between the free action of the @xmath group
on @xmath and finite-dimensional principal fiber bundles is more than an
analogy we refer the reader to [ 35 ] .

To a certain degree the material in the first section follows [ 40 ] ,
but for the reader’s convenience we give a description in our language
of the material that we need, i.e., the material necessary for the
rigorous definition and construction of the connection through the use
of a metric in @xmath .

##### 8.3.1 Constructing the vertical projection operator for the
PFB-structure of @xmath

The constructions here include technicalities needed in order to define
the spaces we work with as proper Hilbert manifolds, in order that we
can use certain theorems only applicable in that domain. If the reader
is happy that we can make certain restrictions in @xmath and @xmath so
that we have Hilbert manifolds, on which a Riemannian metric is defined,
she can skip the first two subsections. We use these Hilbert spaces and
the Riemannian metric in the third subsection, to define the structure
of the @xmath orbits in @xmath . It is here that we define and use the
Fredholm alternative most intensely. The bundle normal to the orbits
(called the horizontal bundle in the main text) and the orthogonal
projection with respect to such a decomposition is constructed. Hence
this is the section used in the following chapter in the construction of
the principal connection @xmath on @xmath , based on the existence of a
metric on the Hilbert completion @xmath (see below). Although the
constructions here are based in @xmath , it can be shown that they can
be later transported to our merely @xmath setting of @xmath [ 40 ] .
Lastly we state and sketch the remaining steps in the proof of the slice
theorem, on which the whole gauge apparatus is based.

###### @xmath-manifolds. Sobolev Lemma and all that

Suppose that @xmath is a vector bundle over a smooth closed manifold
@xmath ; @xmath .

-   Let @xmath be the space of @xmath -differentiable sections of @xmath
    , this is a Banach space with topology of uniform convergence up to
    @xmath derivatives.

-   Let @xmath be the @xmath -th jet bundle of @xmath , which we endow
    with (for now) any Riemannian structure @xmath . For a fixed volume
    element of @xmath , let us call it @xmath , we get the inner product
    on the space of sections @xmath by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since there is a natural linear map from @xmath to @xmath (basically
    given by successive linearizations), this also defines an inner
    product on @xmath . Now we define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    As such it is a Hilbert space whose norm depends on the choices of
    inner product and volume form, but whose topology does not. In local
    coordinates, this is the space of sections of @xmath which in local
    coordinates have partial derivatives up to order @xmath square
    integrable, i.e. for @xmath the norm is given in local coordinates
    by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We note in passing that for @xmath the above is not a Hilbert space
    for the @xmath norm.

Now to construct the appropriate manifolds, we will need the following

###### Lemma 1 (Sobolev Lemma).

For @xmath , if @xmath we have that @xmath and the inclusion is a linear
continuous map.

Note that the lemma is very far from trivial, since, of course we always
have @xmath , but the @xmath -th completion of the @xmath sections could
have elements that were not smooth.

##### 8.3.2 Defining @xmath, a Riemmanian structure for @xmath, and an
@xmath map.

Let @xmath , the symmetric product of the cotangent bundle. The space of
positive definite smooth sections of @xmath is what we call @xmath .
i.e. @xmath . Abusing notation, let @xmath be the space of merely
continuous metrics on @xmath , which is an open subset of @xmath . The
set @xmath still is only endowed with a topology. To make it into the
appropriate Hilbert manifold, we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, by the Sobolev lemma, the inclusion @xmath is continuous for @xmath
in @xmath . Since @xmath is an open subset of @xmath , we have that
@xmath is an open set in @xmath and hence a Hilbert manifold. A similar
construction is available to transform the group of diffeomorphisms
@xmath into a Hilbert manifold @xmath , but as we will not get into the
intricacies of the last part of the proof of the Ebin-Palais section
theorem, we will not need it, and hence just use the generic @xmath as
the tangent space to the identity of @xmath .

For each point of the Hilbert manifold @xmath we have that @xmath ,
being an inner product on @xmath , induces an inner product in all
product bundles over @xmath , and hence we have an induced inner product
on @xmath , which we call @xmath . It furthermore induces a volume form,
and thus we have the induced inner product on each @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , @xmath induces the @xmath topology on @xmath , there
might be sequences in @xmath that converge with respect to @xmath but
not to an element @xmath . This is what we mean when we say that @xmath
is merely a weak Riemannian metric on @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 This sort of lack
of metric convergence in @xmath , poses certain issues when objects are
only implicitly defined by the metric.

For @xmath , as extensively used in the main text, @xmath acts linearly,
so furthermore @xmath . From the properties @xmath and @xmath it is
straightforward to show that @xmath is @xmath -invariant.

##### 8.3.3 The orbit manifold and splittings

Consider now the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As in the previous section, the image of @xmath , @xmath is called the
orbit of @xmath through @xmath . We have that the derivative of the
orbit map @xmath at the identity, which we will call @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the infinitesimal generator of a given curve of
diffeomorphisms of @xmath . We may also write @xmath as @xmath , which
may make the meaning of the map more clear. It takes each element of the
Lie algebra into its fundamental vector field, i.e. it gives directions
along the orbits corresponding to certain directions along the group.

We want to calculate what @xmath is with respect to @xmath . For @xmath
and @xmath the right action of diffeomorphisms (for which @xmath ), we
have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This equation is of course equivalent to saying that at @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the maps above are isomorphisms, we conclude from ( 8.6 ) that
@xmath is isomorphic to @xmath , and thus all tangent spaces to the
orbits are isomorphic.

For a finite dimensional vector space @xmath , we can always
algebraically split a subspace @xmath from its complement @xmath . For
infinite-dimensional vector spaces, a closed finite-dimensional subspace
also always has a closed complement subspace. In the general case of
closed infinite-dimensional subspaces though, the complement @xmath of
@xmath is not necessarily closed, and upon closure it might not be in
the complement (see Section E.0.2 ).

Now we have to show that the tangent space to the orbits splits. I.e.
that not only is the image of @xmath a closed linear subspace of @xmath
, but also that it has a closed complement @xmath and thus @xmath . We
will do this in the following detour through functional analysis.

###### Splitting of @xmath by @xmath.

In local charts of @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath and @xmath vector
bundles over @xmath , a @xmath -th order differential operator @xmath ,
acting on @xmath can be written as ⁶ ⁶ 6 Here we use @xmath to make the
analogy with vector-valued functions in local charts more transparent :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath dim @xmath and @xmath and @xmath .

For each @xmath and for @xmath , the symbol of an operator @xmath is a
linear map @xmath . Basically what one does, in local coordinates, is to
replace the highest order partial derivatives by the components of
@xmath : @xmath . The symbol of a differential operator will be said to
be injective if the resulting linear operator is injective.

The @xmath -th order differential operator @xmath trivially extends
uniquely to a continuous linear map between the Hilbert spaces @xmath .
If inner products @xmath in @xmath and @xmath respectively, together
with a measure for @xmath are given, we call @xmath the inner products
induced in @xmath and @xmath respectively. By the Riesz representation
theorem, there then exists a unique adjoint for any such @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, a well-known theorem in functional analysis tells us that, if a
differential operator is elliptic it possesses the splitting property :

###### Theorem 2 (Fredholm Alternative).

Let @xmath be an elliptic differential operator of @xmath -th order, ⁷ ⁷
7 There are subtleties here regarding the order @xmath of the Sobolev
spaces in each side [ 40 ] , but these do not concern us here. For the
avid reader, the order of the spaces can be worked out by the Regularity
theorem , which states that for an elliptic operator of order @xmath ,
and @xmath , @xmath implies @xmath . The Weyl lemma, stating that if the
Laplacian (which is an elliptic operator) of an @xmath function is zero
(and zero is in @xmath for any @xmath ) then the function @xmath is
@xmath , is an immediate corollary of the regularity theorem. then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This stems from the more general fact, that for any linear
densely-defined (i.e., having a domain of definition that is dense in H)
operator @xmath , not necessarily bounded, we have the splitting
property:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the overline denotes closure. We will not dwell on the proof, we
merely mention that the necessary ingredients are norm bounds in the
presence of elliptic operators to show that @xmath is closed, and that
@xmath implies an @xmath splitting. For a different take on the Fredholm
alternative, see [ 44 ] .

The operator @xmath can easily be shown to have injective symbol, since
for @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where again the subscript @xmath stands for the symmetrized tensor
product. Furthermore, since @xmath , it follows that if @xmath is
injective, then for positive definite inner product we automatically
have @xmath surjective and @xmath (trivial, see proof of Proposition 3
). Then @xmath is an isomorphism, which by definition makes @xmath , or
in our case, @xmath an elliptic operator. Applying the above equation (
8.8 ) to @xmath we arrive at

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which we conclude that @xmath is an isomorphism.

We will now sketch how under the present conditions, using ellipticity
of @xmath , a similar splitting automatically applies for @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.

If @xmath elliptic and the restricted inner products @xmath and @xmath
are non-degenerate, then @xmath and @xmath which implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

Proof. That @xmath is clear. Now suppose @xmath , then if @xmath , we
have @xmath for all @xmath which implies @xmath if the inner product
restricted to Im @xmath is non-degenerate. This shows @xmath .

Also @xmath from the outset. To show @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath we
have merely to show that @xmath . Suppose @xmath , i.e. @xmath and
@xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath . Then if the inner product in
@xmath restricted to @xmath is non-degenerate, @xmath . Thus we have
proved the first part of the proposition.

Now for the second part we already have @xmath ; to show that @xmath is
generated by @xmath we write: ⁸ ⁸ 8 Even though we have only shown the
above direct sum exists in the linear algebraic sense, the closed graph
theorem guarantees it extends to the topological domain (see section
E.0.2 ). ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that, in the first part of the proposition, @xmath is equivalent to
@xmath , if the inner product in @xmath is positive-definite. And of
course, if @xmath is injective, this is equivalent to @xmath , which is
the usual equation to define the orthogonality relation (but not a
projection).

Now it is relatively straightforward to show that ( 8.8 ) is valid for
@xmath , which shows that for @xmath , the map orbits are injective
immersions. To show that they are also embeddings requires more work,
which again we will not go through since it does not contribute anything
to our constructions. Thus omitting the prof we shall, for @xmath , take
@xmath to be an embedding.

##### 8.3.4 The normal bundle to the orbits and construction of the
vertical projection operator.

The bundle orthogonal to @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given a Riemannian structure on @xmath , the bundle orthogonal with
respect to it would automatically be a smooth subbundle, however we
possess so far merely a weak Riemannian metric, and so must put in a
little more effort.

From the previous subsection we have seen that for any @xmath , there
exists an isomorphism

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, since for @xmath it follows that @xmath and @xmath we have that
@xmath .

We shall thus define a smooth, surjective map: @xmath , such that @xmath
which will turn out to be exactly the vertical projection @xmath we need
for the definition of the principal connection @xmath . Before
proceeding we note that in finite dimensions an orthogonal projection
operator can be easily defined from a basis, but that in the present
case an orthogonality relation does not automatically define a
projection, even for a positive definite inner product.

From Proposition 3 we have Im @xmath ; hence for each point @xmath ,
@xmath . From the above consideration we can regard @xmath as a map from
@xmath to itself, which, from self-adjointness and ellipticity, means it
is in fact an isomorphism, having thus a smooth inverse. Hence we
define:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is clear that @xmath , that @xmath , and that for a vertical vector,
i.e. @xmath , we get @xmath , hence the projection acts as the identity
on the vertical space. Thus the following decomposition holds ⁹ ⁹ 9
Again, to go from merely algebraic decomposition to topological
decomposition, one must use the closed graph theorem, which says that
for Banach spaces @xmath then for a continuous linear operator @xmath
such that @xmath is a closed subspace, then there is a closed complement
@xmath , such that @xmath . : @xmath . and thus:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

All that is left to do is check the transformation properties of @xmath
.

Let us recall first of all that @xmath , and from ( 8.6 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus we can prove the equivariance of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since @xmath is automatically smooth, all that is left to check is that
@xmath is smooth, since @xmath is an isomorphism and the inverse map in
the restricted Banach space is smooth. We shall not perform this
calculation, which stems directly from the construction of the adjoint.
Thus we have proven the following theorem ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We have actually
proven it for the Hilbert extension @xmath , but it is shown in [ 40 ]
how these constructions can be more or less straightforwardly translated
to the @xmath setting.

###### Theorem 3.

Given a @xmath invariant positive definite metric in @xmath , the
operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

has the following properties:

-   @xmath -equivariant.

-   @xmath and @xmath

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath .

So we call it the vertical projection operator for this metric.

Let us go through the exact structures that were needed for this theorem
(and were implied by positive-defiteness of the @xmath and @xmath inner
products ).

-   The adjoint of the operator @xmath exists and is smooth (in the main
    text @xmath where @xmath is the group multiplication operator).

-   @xmath is elliptic (which can be checked by its symbol). Then from
    self-adjointness and the decomposition ( 8.8 ) we concluded that
    @xmath was an isomorphism.

-   Im @xmath , which allowed us to regard @xmath as a map from @xmath
    to itself, which meant @xmath was in fact an isomorphism, having
    thus a smooth inverse. Note that for this, from Proposition 3 , we
    needed only that @xmath and @xmath be positive definite. Thus the
    injectivity of @xmath , combined with the previous item says @xmath
    .

-   The metric in @xmath is @xmath invariant. We used to derive the
    transformation properties of @xmath .

##### 8.3.5 The Slice Theorem

Since we have come this far into the constructions in a reasonable
degree of detail, we now state

###### Theorem 4 (Slice for @xmath, [40]).

For each @xmath there exists a contractible submanifold @xmath of @xmath
containing @xmath such that

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.   There exists a local cross section @xmath where @xmath is an open
    neighborhood of the identity, such that

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.16)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.17)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is an open neighborhood of @xmath , is a
    diffeomorphism.

For @xmath the space of metrics with no symmetries, the space @xmath is
indeed a manifold and the existence of a section above allows us to
construct its local product structure @xmath through bundle charts and
properly define @xmath as a PFB . ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 In the MK sense. See [ 35 ]
for an appropriate way to formulate the usual theorems of calculus in
this infinite-dimensional setting. With this in hand, the usual
properties of a principal fiber bundle are proved as in finite
dimensions.

###### Remaining gaps in the proof

For the convenience of the reader we point out the leftover gaps in the
proof of the slice theorem. The steps that we have omitted are @xmath to
take better care of the isotropy group, which we have largely ignored by
restricting our attention to the subset of metrics without symmetries
(see the notes [ 45 ] for a more thorough topological treatment of this
subset); @xmath the actual construction of a tubular neighborhood for
each fiber using the properties of the exponential map. However, since
we have indeed addressed the major issues that separate the
finite-dimensional case to the present infinite dimensional one, these
remaining steps are closely analogous to the usual finite-dimensional
proofs.

Regarding @xmath , the isotropy group at @xmath is defined as @xmath .
As @xmath is a finite-dimensional, and hence splitting, subspace of
@xmath , all major infinite-dimensional difficulties are more or less
easily dissolved. Since the Lie bracket of vector fields over @xmath
commutes with the pull-back by diffeomorphisms, the distribution of the
spaces tangent to @xmath is involutive. Hence, using the Frobenius
theorem, we can construct the quotient manifold @xmath and a section for
@xmath on a neighborhood of the identity, @xmath . Now define @xmath by
@xmath . Basically we must now replace our results about orbit
embeddings for @xmath by the same results for the effective action,
@xmath , which is the embedding.

Regarding @xmath , given a Riemannian metric on a Hilbert manifold,
there exists a unique Levi-Civita connection (which respects both metric
compatibility and the no-torsion condition). As we mentioned before,
existence of certain objects implicitly defined by a weak metric is not
guaranteed, for these objects might lie in the Sobolev completion of the
@xmath . Thus uniqueness, but not existence is guaranteed for the
Levi-Civita connection. From the two usual coordinate-free Levi-Civita
conditions, using the Jacobi identity one gets for @xmath vector fields
on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then explicitly calculate the formula above for three arbitrary
vector fields, and upon isolation of the @xmath vector field on the
right hand side find an explicit expression for the Levi-Civita
connection. We will not perform this calculation, which can be checked
in [ 46 ] . After this construction we have a smooth exponential map
@xmath that is furthermore a local diffeomorphism around the zero
section (for fixed base points). Combining this with the invariance of
the metric we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

These relations are instrumental in the building of a section for the
action of @xmath .

We have thus constructed an exponential map for a Hilbert manifold, and
we call the map @xmath the normal exponential . It can be seen to be a
diffeomorphism onto a neighborhood of the zero section as follows: the
tangent space at a zero normal vector over any point can be given the
direct sum decomposition @xmath . Over a fixed fiber of @xmath , i.e.
for @xmath , @xmath . We have, taking @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So we have shown that @xmath which by the inverse function theorem for
Hilbert manifolds makes the normal exponential a local diffeomorphism
that respects the normal decomposition.

Thus all we now have to do is find a small enough neighborhoods of the
zero section of the normal bundle such that the @xmath -transported
exponential of some neighborhood of zero on @xmath satisfies the first
and second item of Theorem 4 . Finding an appropriate section @xmath of
the isotropy group such that the last property is satisfied requires
only a small amount of extra work, but it is enough to make it too much
of a detour on the purpose of this section. We refer the reader to [ 40
] for the remaining details.

It is important to notice that by exponentiating the horizontal subspace
at @xmath one does not necessarily obtain a horizontal submanifold even
for the simple positive definite @xmath -invariant metric we have used
here. If this were so, there would exist a section in which the
connection could be set to zero and thus the curvature of the connection
would automatically vanish. We can see this is not the case since the
tool in maintaining orthogonality through the push-forward of
exponential map, the Gauss exponential lemma, only works if one of the
vectors is radial. In other words, in general notation @xmath but @xmath
. Thus suppose @xmath is vertical; then it will keep its orthogonality
with the radial vector along the exponential, but it will not
necessarily keep orthogonal to the exponential push-forward of another
horizontal vector @xmath . It will do this only if the connection has no
curvature.

#### 8.4 The conformal bundle.

We now give a brief description of the action of the conformal group
@xmath , since it has much nicer mathematical properties and seems to be
given a new importance in recent dual approaches to general relativity
described in the first part of this thesis.

Basic results.

Let @xmath be the multiplicative group of positive smooth functions on
@xmath . We denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with group structure @xmath where @xmath just means scalar
multiplication at each @xmath as @xmath . As with @xmath , @xmath is an
infinite-dimensional regular Lie group and it acts on @xmath on the
right as a group of transformations by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For more information on the mathematical properties of conformal
superspace and the analogous constructions of Ebin [ 40 ] , see [ 34 ] .
For instance, it is fairly easy to prove in the same fashion as done in
section 8.3 that a slice theorem exists also for @xmath (see theorem 1.6
in [ 34 ] ). Here however, if we want to form properly a principal fiber
bundle, we would have to regard the manifold @xmath consisting of
metrics with no non-trivial conformal isometries. It can be shown that
this restriction does not have serious topological implications [ 45 ] .

The derivative of the orbit map @xmath at the identity is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and which can be easily evaluated from @xmath , where
@xmath .

##### 8.4.1 York splitting.

As a last auxiliary result for the main text we here state and sketch
the York splitting theorem for the action of the conformal group of
transformations.

From the demonstrated good behavior of the orthogonal projection
operators in section 9.4 , in all cases of interest (i.e. for all @xmath
), we have a well defined normal bundle (see ( 8.12 )) and thus a slice
for the action of @xmath . This means that we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the section of @xmath , given, for the canonical
supermetric (DeWitt for @xmath ), by the exponentiation at @xmath of the
kernel of @xmath ( 9.30 ). This kernel is composed of divergenceless
(transverse) traceless tensors (TT tensors), which we denote by @xmath
and can be by definition decomposed further into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the transverse (or divergenceless) tensors and @xmath
are the traceless tensors. Exponentiated these spaces respectively form
the section @xmath for @xmath we used in the subsection 8.3.5 , and the
space of constant volume forms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the volume form associated to @xmath .

Equation ( 8.21 ) is said to be an integrable decomposition in the sense
that the tangent space at any point @xmath on the lhs, is the direct sum
of tangents to two submanifolds on the rhs. What is more interesting to
us though, is that the second factor in ( 8.21 ) admits two sets of
integrable decompositions. One of the sets of suborbits, is the natural
one given already by the action of the group written as @xmath , as
mentioned above. As we are excluding the conformal Killing metrics, i.e.
@xmath , the action of the algebras also clearly splits:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it is easy to see that the orbit @xmath is a submanifold [ 34 ] ,
and thus as we already know this is also true for the @xmath group (see
section 8.3.3 ) we have an integrable decomposition.

The other can be seen by splitting the image of @xmath in its traceless
and trace part:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For the preceding decomposition to be true in the integrable sense
written above ( 8.23 ), we only need to check wether @xmath is actually
a manifold. One can see this since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is just the operator that assigns volume forms to metrics
(and @xmath is the space of volume forms). Thus @xmath is a manifold,
since it is given by an inverse regular value, as can be deduced from
@xmath , which, for @xmath , is surjective. I.e. @xmath where @xmath .
In the end we have the decomposition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

or in words, we can decompose the space into “the
volume–form–preserving–divergenceless directions + the
scaling–of–the–metric direction + the diffeomorphisms–that
preserve–the–volume–form directions”.

### Chapter 9 Connection Forms

In the following we have provided a natural extension of the
construction of a principal fiber bundle structure to Riem. That next
step is of course, the construction and interpretation of connections
for infinite-dimensional groups acting on Riem, and that is the topic of
this chapter.

#### 9.1 Introduction

It is a much repeated story that in a diffeomorphism invariant theory
points lose their meaning, their individuality becoming dissolved by the
active interpretation of these global “coordinate changes” [ 47 ] . ¹ ¹
1 In a sense then our notion of space is nothing but a @xmath -torsor
(see footnote 1 ). In fact, since we will be dealing exclusively with
global, and thus active, diffeomorphisms, we will use the expression ”
change of labeling ” to distinguish the nomenclature from that of the
passive, local “coordinate changes”.

It is the case that in pure gravity only the metrics over the manifolds
attribute any real significance to the spatial points of @xmath . We
indicate this dependence by @xmath , a family of diffeomorphic manifolds
parametrized by @xmath .

In the canonical analysis, the 3+1 decomposition of the four dimensional
metric involves a ‘shift’ vector field and a lapse scalar, which
parametrize the diffeomorphism from a globally hyperbolic space-time to
@xmath . This entails in our notation a one-parameter family of
diffeomorphic manifolds @xmath .

The lapse encodes the temporal distance element in the embedding of the
one parameter family of hypersurfaces. The ’shift’ vector field
effectively already requires some identification between the points of
“neighboring” @xmath ’s. The shift itself is an infinitesimal deviation
from the background identification of @xmath and @xmath by vectors
orthogonal to @xmath with respect to the ambient Lorentzian metric. If
we propose here to at least momentarily disregard four dimensional
embedding, specially in view of the first part of this thesis, then the
shift vector field loses its meaning, and we must find a new way to
string together the @xmath ’s along time.

The need to somehow identify points of our manifolds along time,
naturally brings us to the concept of best-matching [ 17 ] , and forces
us to introduce a form of “parallel transport” of point labels. From
this concept it is a small step to see this parallel transport as taking
place in the gauge setting, where the structural group should be @xmath
, since it is this group that parametrizes the ways with which we can
connect @xmath and @xmath . It is this concept and its generalization
that we will study in this chapter. We regard this construction as an
elaboration of the concept of best-matching, as spelled out in section
2.3 .

Our aim is not just to construct the decomposition @xmath of the
principal fiber bundle, but to explicitly construct the Lie algebra
valued one form @xmath . This does not in fact require the introduction
of new mathematical apparatus, but it certainly implies a shift in the
way one views gauge theory over these configuration spaces towards
indeed an original perspective. The connection form then has a very
physical interpretation, as something that acts on metric velocities and
yields vector fields. Its interpretation is that it yields a preferred
infinitesimal “label change” from each infinitesimal metric change. It
is the general study of such connections and what they imply (as for
example wrt locality) that this chapter is devoted. In principle, a
connection could be derived from a more general action over the whole of
Riem(M), including curvature forms. As this requires more work to be
made sense of, we start with a certain type of metric induced
connections, yielding equation ( 9.18 ) as our main result.

#### 9.2 Connection forms: basic properties

Let us first of all define a connection form for a finite-dimensional
principal fiber bundle @xmath :

###### Definition 3.

In finite-dimensions a connection form is defined as a
Lie-algebra-valued one form @xmath which acts on vertical vectors as:
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is the group action. The connection
must also transform as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the above @xmath is the push-forward right action: @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath is the right action by the group element @xmath . The
adjoint acts on the algebra as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the group exponential. Let us also define equivariance
as a term that encompasses both the covariant and contravariant
denominations. Different spaces might have different equivariance
properties. For instance the usual Yang-Mills curvature form transforms
equivariantly in the adjoint representation, but the local expression
for the connection does not, as it does not transform homogeneously.

The connection form in our present infinite-dimensional setting will
then be a Lie-algebra valued linear functional on @xmath (metric
velocities). Since technically the Lie algebra here is just the space of
infinitesimal diffeomorphisms of @xmath , the connection form turns out
to be a vector-field-valued distribution, taking metric velocities as
test functions. We are thus led to the meaning of a gauge connection
over @xmath as representing a Machian notion of relational space, since
it relates spatial points along time in a manner depending on the
dynamics of the entire Universe (depending strictly and globally on the
metric velocities). The connection form is not an empty mathematical
construct. Its interpretation as yielding parallel transportation of
spatial points ² ² 2 The connection form for the conformal group would
then yield a notion of parallel transport of local scale. is suggestive
and interesting (especially from a relational point of view).

##### 9.2.1 An equivariant splitting.

A choice of connection form in @xmath amounts as usual to choosing an
equivariant decomposition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where by equivariant we mean that the decomposition is maintained by the
group action.

In the infinite-dimensional case, we have to separate the requirement of
the direct sum in three separate conditions:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will shortly discuss the mathematical instruments and conditions
required for these conditions. The physical purpose of the decomposition
is so that we can distinguish what is a label change, which would be
given by projection of metric change along the orbits, and the remnant
of the metric change, which could be identified with pure geometrical
change.

This amounts to defining an equivariant projection on the vertical
space, which we call @xmath , having the properties @xmath and
equivariance: @xmath . But to be able to construct the actual connection
form we need more than just the equivariant direct sum decomposition,
but also conditions on the representation of the algebra (that it forms
a fundamental vector field with the correct equivariance properties).
This is necessary to derive the correct transformation properties of the
connection itself @xmath . We also include this criterion and show that
indeed such a connection has these properties.

##### 9.2.2 The connection form obtained from the vertical projection

The vertical sub-bundle, the bundle tangent to the orbits, is given by
@xmath , where @xmath is the Lie derivative. The canonical
representation of the diffeomorphism group on @xmath is the adjoint
representation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, for the representation of the Lie algebra on itself, we have @xmath
since @xmath Hence the Lie algebra bracket is just the vector field
commutator.

If we have a right action of a Lie group on any manifold @xmath ( @xmath
is allowed to be infinite-dimensional) @xmath , for @xmath we define the
fundamental vector field @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we redundantly keep the subscript @xmath in @xmath , to remind
ourselves that this is the zero vector at the point @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.

A fundamental vector field must satisfy the following properties for
@xmath :

1.  @xmath is linear.

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

where we have denoted, for fixed @xmath , in the same way as in ( 9.3 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us explicitly check property 2 for the @xmath action on @xmath . To
make the actions clearer we expand @xmath and so we have that, according
to ( 9.4 ), for @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using @xmath for the right action of the group on itself we also have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any @xmath , where @xmath is the conjugate action of the group on
itself: @xmath , and again @xmath is composition of maps (in this case
diffeomorphisms).

Using ( 9.6 ) and ( 9.5 ) we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we used ( 9.7 ) to go from the fifth to the sixth line.

We can then identify @xmath in Lemma 2 with @xmath and verify that it
automatically satisfies the first and third identities required for a
fundamental vector field . So the key properties of the action of the
Lie algebra on the bundle are satisfied by the Lie derivative of vector
fields, a fact that is of utmost importance for our treatment and that
allows us to take the “gauge analogy” to be not merely an analogy.

We then define the Lie-algebra valued connection form:

###### Definition 4.

Given a tangential decomposition as in ( 9.2 ), if we can construct a
vertical projection @xmath satisfying @xmath and ³ ³ 3 We pause to note
that for usual push-forward and pull-back maps for “constant”
diffeomorphisms, we could have used extra “ @xmath ”’s: @xmath . This is
the exact analogous of the tangent left translation @xmath in the usual
action of Lie groups. In this setting this is superfluous since due to
the vector space structure of @xmath , we have @xmath . From now on we
will omit the double star notation. @xmath , we then define the vector
field valued connection form as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is an isomorphism over its image, i.e. over the vertical
space, we can take inverses.

Clearly we then have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Thus vertical projection of a velocity is equal to the
Lie derivative of the metric along the preferred direction @xmath .

By the transformation properties of the Lie derivative (see ( 9.8 )) and
equivariance of the vertical projection we have the usual transformation
property:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

confirming that this can indeed be interpreted as a connection form.

Because @xmath admits the exponential map, we have not only uniqueness,
but also existence of a @xmath -equivariant smooth parallel transport.
This means that we can integrate forward from some initial labeling,
finding some relative preferred identification of spatial point along
time. ⁴ ⁴ 4 We do note for completeness that it is well known that the
exponential map of @xmath is not surjective on any neighborhood of the
identity. We however abstain from speculating on the relevance of this
fact for our approach. To be more explicit, let us consider a heuristic
example. Let us suppose we describe (supposing we could observe the
entire Universe) a time evolution of the metric, i.e. a one-parameter
family @xmath . Given an initial labeling of the manifold at @xmath , we
can then integrate the connection along time to find the preferred point
that is “equilocal” to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Interlude: interpretation of non-trivial holonomy.

So what would it mean to have two paths in shape space @xmath and @xmath
(this hypothetical situation then by definition already falls outside of
the domain of classical physics), starting from the same shape @xmath ,
such that their horizontal lifts @xmath and @xmath , although arriving
at the same shape @xmath , fall on different places on the orbit @xmath
? For the diffeomorphism group, it would mean that best matched
observers who agree on the “location” of points initially would, through
( 9.12 ), disagree on their location in the end. We leave a thought her
for the reader: what would it mean for the conformal group?

##### 9.2.3 Locality of connection forms.

Another factor of extreme importance is the question of local
representability of the connection form. That is, @xmath at each @xmath
is an element of @xmath . However, since we are dealing with
infinite-dimensional spaces, we cannot a priori identify the space of
linear functionals acting on @xmath , which we call @xmath , with @xmath
.

As an initial attempt to construct such a local representation, we could
choose a partition of unity of @xmath , defined by the characteristic
functions @xmath of the open sets @xmath . Then for an element @xmath by
linearity we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where in this section we have denoted functional dependence by square
brackets. In the limit, this would come to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

In fact, what we have is that elements of @xmath are tensors with
compact support, which can thus be considered as a space of test
functions (or more precisely, test tensors ⁵ ⁵ 5 Since @xmath is
compact, we can take the components of an element of @xmath as the test
functions. ). We have that the space @xmath is of course a space of
distributions on @xmath , and the space defined above by elements of the
simple form of ( 9.13 ) are dense inside @xmath .

We will ignore these subtleties and now express @xmath (up to
discrepancies on sets with vanishing measure) as the two-point tensor:
@xmath . Pointwise:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used DeWitt’s notation, denoting tensorial character at
@xmath by primed indices. In the examples we will find, the connection
form will always be given by the simple form of ( 9.13 ).

The geometrical interpretation of the connection form viewed in this way
is that, for each metric @xmath , a given metric velocity @xmath at a
point @xmath will contribute for the “best-matching” vector field at
each other point @xmath . In this way then, we get a non-local
contribution to the best-matching vector field at each point of @xmath .
These contributions however may come from metric velocities at that and
every other point of @xmath . This goes in line with relational
arguments, since this implies that the stringing of points throughout
time (equilocality) are determined by the kinematics of the entire
universe .

#### 9.3 Construction of connection forms in @xmath through
orthogonality

Now that we have written down the basic structures that allow a gauge
treatment of labelings using the @xmath group, we will derive explicit
formulae for the connection forms through the use of the orbit maps and
their adjoints. Of course in this case a supermetric fixes the
connection, if it exists, once and for all. It is not, as it is in
Yang-Mills, determined by an action principle. So when we consider
actions involving such fixed connections, our system works in analogy to
a particle in a fixed electromagnetic potential.

To let the connection be determined through a variational principle, one
would require a term like @xmath in the action, where @xmath is the
curvature form of @xmath . However, as @xmath , it cannot appear in the
‘classical trajectory in @xmath ’ action we are considering. Nonetheless
this can be done for a field theory in @xmath , a treatment which will
show up in future work.

Now we shall address the three items in ( 9.2 ) and present a direct
formula for the connection form and the pre-requisite conditions on its
components. We emphasize that no mathematical breakthrough is needed in
the construction of the vertical projection The only thing that is
mathematically novel in the present work is the use of a connection, and
this is a very direct consequence of @xmath @xmath forming a Lie algebra
and @xmath the Lie derivative of the metric along these fields forming a
fundamental vector field on @xmath .

Nonetheless, the emphasis here is completely different than that of
usual treatments, as it introduces the explicit use of a connection form
and focuses on the conditions necessary for its definition from the
basic ingredients. We will generalize the statements in this section to
the case of the conformal group.

##### 9.3.1 Construction through orthogonality and the momentum
constraint

We could initially attempt to define an equivariant direct sum
decomposition ( 9.1 ) implicitly, through an equivariant inner product
in @xmath , by orthogonality with respect to the vertical bundle.

In other words, by defining the horizontal subspace by orthogonality to
the canonical fibers with respect to some @xmath -invariant supermetric
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

For instance, writing the canonical momentum as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain that the momentum constraint is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath given by ( 9.10 ), we have that ( 9.16 ) is implicitly
exactly of the form of ( 9.15 ), with @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has to be valid for all @xmath . This is how the momentum
constraint can be shown to be merely a statement to the effect that the
connection is induced by orthogonality to the fibers.

If a horizontal space is well defined with respect to such an invariant
supermetric, the projections should themselves be equivariant, e.g.
@xmath However, the fact that one is dealing with (completions in)
function spaces obstructs such a direct approach. In the
infinite-dimensional setting one cannot know if for instance @xmath and
@xmath are closed, the first requirement of ( 9.2 ). Furthermore, this
procedure does not provide us with an explicit formula for our
connection form. Even the vertical projection operator, which would in
the finite dimensional case be defined as @xmath , for @xmath an
orthonormal basis for @xmath , requires modification in the present
infinite-dimensional case.

We shall proceed differently, and find that there exists a more
comprehensive way to define a vertical projection operator and valid
connection explicitly. This includes the orthogonality criterion. For
this we need to use the Fredholm alternative.

##### 9.3.2 Using the Fredholm Alternative

In Subsection 8.3.4 we have shown that if the horizontal bundle is
defined as the space orthogonal to the orbits, i.e. orthogonal to @xmath
(where we remind the reader that @xmath is the tangent to the orbit map
at the identity), @xmath is given by @xmath , (since @xmath if @xmath ).

Taking any supermetric, without further assumptions (see alternative
formulation of Theorem 3 ):

-   The operator @xmath and also its symbol @xmath are injective. The
    first of these requirements is equivalent to a restriction to
    configurations that do not possess symmetry wrt the relevant group.
    For @xmath for example, it amounts to restricting our attention to
    @xmath ;

-   A smooth adjoint of @xmath exists with respect to the fiber metrics
    in @xmath and @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath . The condition
    @xmath can be seen in fact to be equivalent to requiring the
    supermetric on @xmath to be non-degenerate (see Proposition 3 in
    section 8.3.1 ). This is a condition automatically implemented in
    the Fredholm alternative that encodes the criterion for @xmath ;

-   The supermetric is @xmath -equivariant.

Then the operator defined by ( 8.13 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

is well-defined and satisfies all required properties of a vertical
projection operator:

-   @xmath is @xmath -equivariant.

-   It is idempotent, @xmath .

-   @xmath for @xmath .

-   The space orthogonal to the orbits (or horizontal) satisfies: @xmath
    and @xmath and thus @xmath .

In fact, the invariance of the supermetric is only used in the
construction of the @xmath operator in order to find the necessary
transformation properties of @xmath . It ensures that the adjoint of
@xmath , where @xmath is right translation by @xmath , is indeed @xmath
and so @xmath transforms in the appropriate way. It is also worth
noticing that the appearance of the inverse differential operator @xmath
in the definition of the vertical projection operator confirms the
non-locality of the connection form explicit in ( 9.14 ).

From the vertical projection operator we obtain the connection form in
the usual way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that if the vertical operator is well-defined, so is @xmath .

##### 9.3.3 Equivariant metrics

We here first list a wide range of inner products in @xmath which are
@xmath -invariant. We are able to prove equivariance for any supermetric
of the form @xmath where @xmath is a one-parameter family of
supermetrics, weighted by a functional @xmath , which we call lapse
potential and define as:

###### Definition 5.

A lapse potential is any functional @xmath formed from @xmath and its
curvature tensor by means of tensor product, index raising or lowering,
contraction and covariant differentiation.

To prove that the above mentioned class of supermetrics indeed induces
an invariant inner product, one must simply apply a theorem (see for
instance Theorem 9.12.13 of [ 48 ] ) which establishes that, for such a
lapse potential @xmath , @xmath . Furthermore it is easy to show that
@xmath , for any @xmath , is a Killing vector for the generalized
supermetric ( 1.1 ) [ 9 ] . Combining these facts we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 9.3.4 Ellipticity of @xmath

We have already shown that @xmath has injective symbol in subsection
8.3.3 , furthermore, by the very definition of @xmath , it obviously
true that @xmath is injective over @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.

For each @xmath , for the inner products @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath respectively, for @xmath and @xmath any lapse potential, @xmath .

Proof.  We first calculate the symbol of @xmath (see subsection 8.3.3 ).
For @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath , we have @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

From now on we omit the @xmath in the notation. For @xmath the adjoint
symbol can be directly defined by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this one easily calculates (we also omit the @xmath dependence to
avoid cumbersome notation) @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now inserting @xmath for some @xmath , and assuming @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and thus @xmath , which fed back into the equations can easily be seen
to only have a solution for @xmath . @xmath .

So if we are not approaching @xmath this part of the requirements for
the vertical projection operator for such supermetrics is satisfied.
However, the value @xmath is the one present in the canonical 3+1
decomposition of general relativity, and is the one value for which one
retains foliation invariance. However, there exist different approaches
to gravity that encode fixed foliations, such as [ 49 ] and the theory
of Shape Dynamics presented in the first part of this thesis. In
particular, SD yields a theory even classically dynamically equivalent
to GR which does include a preferred foliation through the use of the
conformal group as a symmetry group.

As we will see, a trivial consequence of using the conformal group is
that the equivalent of @xmath is indeed elliptic for all @xmath and
lapse potentials.

##### 9.3.5 The intersection @xmath

There is a potential problem even in the simple implicit orthogonality
view, which stems from the non-definiteness of the deWitt supermetric.
If the direct sum decomposition is to be determined by an orthogonality
relation with respect to a metric that is not definite (it has signature
@xmath ), we could run the risk of having elements of the vertical space
that are orthogonal to the vertical space, i.e. @xmath such that @xmath
for some @xmath , hence @xmath as well.

The adjoint @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, even if we simplify the treatment to the case where the
functional @xmath is spatially constant, we can already glimpse severe
obstructions to @xmath having zero intersection. First note that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the Riemannian Laplacian. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

If one assumes @xmath , then the operator is elliptic. However, even for
@xmath , it can be shown that non-trivial ⁶ ⁶ 6 Since we have excluded
Killing fields from our considerations, trivial solutions to these
equations are the ones for which @xmath . sets of solutions (or lack
thereof) of ( 9.24 ) (which is equivalent in this case to @xmath )
depend on the metrics @xmath [ 9 ] . There are a number of solutions and
domains of validity for the condition @xmath even for @xmath . For
example, for all Ricci-negative geometries (which always exist for
closed @xmath [ 50 ] ) the condition holds, as well as for non-flat
Einstein metrics. For a more extensive study of these matters see [ 9 ]
. We remark though that as this would still not give a splitting of
@xmath , it would not count as a connection in the sense applied here,
which requires it to exist on the whole principal fiber bundle.

#### 9.4 The conformal diffeomorphism group.

Now we apply the same reasoning as in the previous section to the case
of the conformal group.

The symbol of @xmath , for @xmath and @xmath can be seen to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, take the metric @xmath in @xmath to be @xmath . ⁷ ⁷ 7 Note that in
our notation the lapse potential here appears multiplying the metric, as
opposed to the usual lapse in ADM which for the kinetic term appears
dividing it. This will make it easier to deal with powers and negative
signs. The inner product in @xmath is taken to be @xmath . Then for
@xmath from the definition of the adjoint symbol:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we easily find @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Ellipticity of @xmath

Now suppose @xmath and @xmath . Then we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Contracting the last equation with @xmath and substituting ( D.53 ) in
the result yields @xmath which only has solution for @xmath , in which
case @xmath is also obligatorily zero as well. Thus we have proven that

###### Proposition 5.

For the given action of @xmath on @xmath , @xmath is an elliptic
operator and @xmath . Thus @xmath is an elliptic operator.

The intersection @xmath

Since we have gone directly to the calculation of the symbol @xmath , we
now write down the actual operator, for @xmath . First of all, we check
that the supermetric defined by ( 1.1 ) is equivariant with respect to
the action of @xmath (global gauge transformations). One must merely see
that @xmath acts on the covariant metric tensor @xmath , as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus for global transformations we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for the supermetric to be conformally invariant, @xmath must now
not only be a lapse potential , but also must be further constrained:

###### Definition 6.

A conformal lapse functional is one for which @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will give an example of such a lapse potential below.

Calculating the adjoint operator we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since for the kernel of @xmath the trace part of @xmath is zero from the
first component of ( 9.30 ), we immediately see that (inputting the
@xmath back into the notation for the adjoint) @xmath . Thus @xmath .
Hence @xmath . Thus, under the supposition that the lapse is a strictly
positive function, exactly as the result @xmath contained in Section 8.3
(see also [ 34 ] ), a result dependent on a positive definite inner
product on both the target and domain spaces, one can show that @xmath .
For completeness, the specific equations for elements of @xmath , are,
for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equivariance of @xmath .

Now all that is left to prove that indeed we have a well-defined
connection form for the conformal group (given implicitly by the
generalized metrics in @xmath ) is to check wether @xmath transforms
equivariantly, or in other words, that @xmath is extended to be right
invariant. As one can see from equation ( 8.14 ), this is dependent
strictly on equation ( 8.6 ), which we now compute for this action. This
computation is equivalent to finding out if the action of the group
produces a fundamental vector field, as we did for the diffeomorphism
group.

The left hand side of ( 8.6 ) gives, for @xmath the integral
diffeomorphism of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath produces the integral curves of the field @xmath . In its
turn the right hand side gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This is equivalent to the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence we find that for the conformal group every structure works nicely
and we have a metric-induced connection in @xmath for every choice of
@xmath in the supermetric and positive lapse potential. The actual
equations, writing @xmath take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.35)
     @xmath      (9.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

meaning the corrected velocities are both traceless and transverse with
respect to the positive definite (ultra-local) metric in @xmath given by
@xmath .

Thus we have guaranteed existence and uniqueness of solutions for the
connection form for @xmath .

##### 9.4.1 A fully conformally invariant action with two metric degrees
of freedom.

###### Horava gravity with detailed balance.

Let us briefly examine one recent gravity theory which breaks foliation
invariance and possesses powerful indications towards conformal
invariance. The so-called Horava-Lifshitz gravity has recently received
a great deal of attention, we present its “detailed balance” formulation
[ 49 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are coupling constants. The cotton tensor used
here is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Cotton tensor is symmetric, transverse and traceless:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

It also homogeneously scales conformally with weight @xmath . Thus under
@xmath we get @xmath .

We shall not explain the more interesting aspects of why the action (
9.37 ) was introduced in the first place. At this level, it suffices to
say that it possesses different numbers of spatial and time derivatives,
making it space-time anisotropic and power-counting renormalizable. By
the previous work on this section we need not check that the constraints
associated to the action of @xmath and @xmath (the “diffeomorphism” and
“conformal” constraints) propagate, have the right transformation
properties, or any of a multitude of laborious computations; if the
system is consistent, we have designed a well-defined gauge system, in
every possible sense. Thus all that is required for conformal invariance
is to impose equations ( 9.35 ) and ( 9.36 ) for our fixed connection
form. The remaining constraint, the scalar constraint of theory ( 9.37 )
is of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

are the traverse traceless metric velocities.

Let us proceed to count the degrees of freedom of the conformally
invariant system we expect to obtain (if the action is consistent).
First of all, since we no longer have full Lorentz invariance, the
modified version of the Hamiltonian constraint ( 9.40 ), does not
automatically propagate, yielding one further constraint on our
variables. Thus we have: @xmath (degrees of freedom in @xmath and @xmath
) minus ‘the equations of motion for N (or ‘Hamiltonian constraint’) and
its propagation equation, which are (at least) 2 in number, the
‘conformal constraints on corrected velocities’ ( 9.35 ) and ( 9.36 )
(which gives @xmath more), and finally the additional @xmath coming from
the choice of section for @xmath . Thus we have @xmath remaining degrees
of freedom, which is one too little.

A model with the right number of degrees of freedom.

First of all, we see that to make a fully @xmath -invariant theory, we
must have a local lapse, and if so, to get the right number of degrees
of freedom the lapse equations of motion have to be automatically
propagated by the other constraints and equations of motion, which is a
very tall order.

An alternative, which we propose here, does not have a lapse, and thus
has no Hamiltonian constraint and yields a theory with the right number
of degrees of freedom (12-4-4=4). For this we simply choose the
following lapse potential, satisfying ( 9.29 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its conformal weight is given by @xmath , and it clearly satisfied all
the items of Definition 5 ) and thus all our gauge constructions are
valid. We thus have the action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian for this is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

To stress, this is a fully @xmath -invariant action with the same number
of degrees of freedom as GR, but which does not have a Hamiltonian
constraint. Equation ( 9.43 ) is furthermore a purely geodesic-type
action in Riem, with just one global lapse and thus one global notion of
time, as such it also possesses inherent value in a relationalist
setting.

In the first part of this thesis we were able to see GR fully as
conformally invariant theory. So if any, this formalism has hopes only
of recovering this dual formulation of GR, something which will be
investigated further.

### Chapter 10 Conclusions

In this chapter we will briefly sum up our vision of what has so far
been achieved and possible immediate future directions. We repeat some
of the statements made in the introductory chapter, now with more
technical detail.

#### Results and directions for Shape Dynamics.

###### Brief statement of results.

We have found a theory of gravity with two physical degrees of freedom
that possesses local scale invariance. Only in a certain conformal gauge
it is identical to ADM in constant mean curvature gauge. The total Shape
Dynamics Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the ADM phase space @xmath parametrized by the usual coordinates
@xmath , where @xmath , @xmath is an arbitrary Lagrange multiplier
function, and @xmath is our unique global Hamiltonian, which is a
non-local functional of @xmath which does not depend on the point @xmath
. Shape Dynamics possesses the local first class constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the global mean of the function @xmath over the
3-manifold @xmath . These are the generators of volume-preserving
conformal transformations and spatial diffeomorphisms, respectively. The
non-zero part of the constraint algebra is given solely by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For the asymptotically flat case we have a similar result, where the
conformal generator is given by @xmath only, and its Lagrange multiplier
respects certain asymptotic boundary conditions.

The way to achieve this was to enlarge the original theory by a process
akin to the Stueckelberg mechanism [ 28 ] , thereby obtaining a theory
with more constraints then the original one, but still without conformal
symmetry. By then performing two distinct preferred gauge fixings on the
enlarged gauge theory, we regain either GR in ADM form, or the theory of
Shape Dynamics (SD) outlined above. The technical crux of the matter is
that the gauge fixing leading to SD leaves a single scalar constraint
unfixed, and that the resulting second class constraints can be fully
solved in terms of the formerly introduced extra fields.

We have furthermore found how we can extend the treatment that leads to
( 10.1 ) to the electromagnetic, massive and massless scalar fields (see
chapter 6 ), with their usual Hamiltonians. The only thing that changes
above is that one has a different @xmath (which nonetheless still
generates diffeomorphisms), a different global Hamiltonian @xmath ,
which is now also a functional of the added field variables, and, in the
case of electromagnetism, the Gauss constraint is also added to the mix.
It should also be said that for the massive scalar field the algorithm
works only up to a certain field density. Here, the only necessary
requirement was that the fields only scale through their coupling to the
metric, i.e. the fields themselves do not scale, only the metric does.
Once matter couplings are achieved, it becomes very simple to regain a
causal (and indeed metric) structure of a space and time.

We also show here that different approximation schemes are available for
the global Hamiltonian, and in this thesis we perform a large volume
expansion for it (chapter 7 ), obtaining the first three terms. We use
this expansion to find the Hamilton–Jacobi version of the global
Hamiltonian, a first step towards quantization. We have found that this
bears strong resemblance to certain holographic dualities between
gravity and traditional conformal field theories [ 27 ] .

Other interesting results that are not yet ready for print and will not
be included in this thesis are: the 2+1 formulation and quantization of
the shape dynamics Hamiltonian, a second order expansion of the global
Hamiltonian around the De Sitter vacuum, and the formulation of shape
dynamics using Ashtekar variables.

###### Why is this an interesting result?

Here we present the significance of Shape Dynamics in light of previous
problems and research programs, and then point to some promising
directions of research in SD.

Shape Dynamics provides the theory that fulfills the requirements of a
complete theory of the gravitational field on conformal superspace. Our
results justify York’s intuitive remarks regarding the configuration
space of gravity: conformal superspace is not the reduced configuration
space of general relativity but that of Shape Dynamics. Shape Dynamics
also meets Barbour’s relational arguments for a truly relational theory
of the Universe, encapsulated by the aphorism: “size and motion are
relative, and time is given by change”.

It is also true, although unseen by us at the time of its conception,
that SD is the completion and formalization of Dirac’s 1958 paper [ 3 ]
. Although his idea was put in a less developed form, was only valid for
asymptotically flat spaces, did not perceive the role of conformal
invariance or symmetry trading, and suffers from a few other drawbacks
(as made explicit in section 5.3.2 ), the idea behind the mathematical
algorithm is basically the same. Made explicit and put into context
however, it gains significance way beyond that of a mere “fixation of
the coordinates”, providing truly an alternative description of gravity.

The local constraints are all linear in momenta, being easily
implementable in configuration space. The true gravitational degrees of
freedom are easily found. The constraint algebra is incredibly simple,
making it possible that the attempts at the quantization of gravity that
encounter the obstacle posed by structure functions being present in the
algebra of constraints (as opposed to structure constants) might be more
successful in Shape Dynamics.

As we can now couple matter and have a second order perturbation theory
around DeSitter space, it also becomes possible to try our hand in
perturbative cosmology through the prism of shape dynamics. The
possibility of doing cosmology brings about another interesting
possibility, this time concerning the uniqueness theorems of general
relativity.

For 4-dimensionally covariant theories, there exist tight restrictions
on the form of the action. In fact, for an action that is
4-dimensionally covariant, divergenceless, and only depends on the
metric up to second derivatives, Lovelock’s theorem (theorem 1 ¹ ¹ 1
There exists a result which can be said to be a 3+1 dimensional version
of Lovelock’s theorem (although it in fact uses Lovelock’s theorem in
its proof), [ 51 ] . ) tells us that the only action available is indeed
the Einstein–Hilbert one. But now we have a different set of symmetry
principles with which to guide us, and thus a different theory space. We
can construct other actions that only match SD (hence ADM in CMC) in
certain limits, whilst still respecting the same symmetry principles. We
already have two natural candidates, one of which is just taking the
first three terms in the volume expansion mentioned above. This has an
explicit form, is completely tractable, matches ADM in CMC for large
volumes of the Universe, and by our results in coupling with matter and
regaining a metric structure, can be tested classically against ADM in
CMC (and thus GR). In my personal opinion this is now the most promising
new area of research opened up by Shape Dynamics.

This brings us to another way to gain insight into GR through Shape
Dynamics. Suppose we do not impose the gauge fixing @xmath in Shape
Dynamics, but find solutions to some other gauge fixing condition an
epsilon away from @xmath . We would then have a modified gravity theory.
But, any solution of such a modified theory must have a cousin which is
a solution to GR, a dual. We can then identify what this solution
represents by returning to the linking theory and performing the
appropriate gauge transformations.

Summing up, Shape Dynamics definitely provides a completely different
view on classical general relativity, and thus in prospects for its
quantization. More than that, it provides interesting new ways to deform
general relativity, breaking general covariance but not the
3-dimensional conformal covariance.

## Appendix

### Appendix A Variational Formulae

First we establish some preliminary results, being as extensive as
possible. We first note that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We need the variation of the Christoffel symbols. These can be derived
from functional differentiation of both the the no torsion law: @xmath
(where @xmath is a smooth function) and compatibility with the metric:
@xmath . The variation of this last equation is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can then be used together with the symmetry given by the no
torsion to yield:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where we already input the semi-colon notation for the covariant
derivative, which we utilize from now on, and denote @xmath to
distinguish it from @xmath . From these equations we can derive the
following equation for the variation of the Ricci scalar:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . The variation of the metric determinant can be
seen to be @xmath . Thus:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### a.1 Poisson brackets of constraints.

##### a.1.1 Pure gravity.

The scalar constraint is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Its variation is thus:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The smeared version is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now for the momentum variation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The only non-trivial Poisson bracket for ADM, since as we saw the
momentum constraint generate only 3-diffeomorphisms, is @xmath . Using (
A.7 ) and ( A.8 ) this is very easily calculated. For the smeared
version, all the terms that are both linear in the smearings will cancel
out upon anti-symmetrization, so in the end we only have to calculate:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

And thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the anti-symmetrization cancelled the mixed derivatives.

###### Important variations for SD.

Another calculation which will prove to be useful is the following one
arising from @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We remark that it can easily be seen that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the trace of the tensor @xmath .

The last preparatory results for us are the following:

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.12)
  -- -- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we calculate the first part of the most important Poisson bracket
for our results, that is @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.14)
  -- -- -- --------

where we completed @xmath by adding @xmath , and again we use the
notation that @xmath denotes whatever comes before it in an equation (in
this case @xmath ). Now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining ( A.14 ) and ( A.15 ) we get:

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.16)
  -- -- -- --------

which we can rewrite if we so choose by using the scalar constraint as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### a.2 Scalar and Electromagnetic fields.

##### a.2.1 Scalar.

We start with the total scalar constraint, which is now:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have simply added the scalar field Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

To find the contribution this extra term will have to the lapse fixing
equation ( A.16 ), due to the absence of any terms containing the metric
momenta, we must merely calculate:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used ( A.1 ). But going back to ( A.16 ), we must still
complete the @xmath appearing there, with @xmath , so that we can
discard this term as weakly vanishing. To do so we add and subtract
@xmath obtaining:

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.21)
  -- -- -- --------

which is the equation we need in the main text, in section 6.1.1 .

##### a.2.2 Electromagnetic.

Now we add to the gravitational Hamiltonian the electromagnetic
Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again we must calculate solely:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again from ( A.16 ), we must still complete the @xmath appearing there,
with @xmath , so that we can discard this term as weakly vanishing. To
do so we add and subtract @xmath obtaining:

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.24)
  -- -- -- --------

which is the equation we use in section 6.1.2 .

### Appendix B Relevant formulae for volume-preserving-conformal
transformations.

#### b.1 Basic variations.

We start from the definition of the surjection map given by ( 4.4 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we use the mean @xmath and 3-volume @xmath . We will mainly work
with the simplified exponentiated version:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Generalizing to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the same way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Generalizing to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### b.2 Canonical transformation properties

With the basic variations calculated in the last section we can, as a
consistency check, verify explicitly that the transformation is
canonical:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The first two also verify that the constraint @xmath commutes with any
function @xmath .

Let us start with a direct proof of the last identity ( B.9 ). As @xmath
does not appear in the equation, and @xmath does not contain @xmath ,
the calculation is made a lot simpler.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second element we need is (using ( B.4 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Upon multiplying and integrating over @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we already discarded the terms that come in with opposite signs,
and used the fact that the integral present runs only over the @xmath
dependent terms, and @xmath .

To finish this explicit verification that we are indeed deling with a
canonical transformation, we separate the remaining steps into three:
@xmath @xmath does not change under the transformations, @xmath , and
the change in @xmath is just the conserved charge, which is @xmath
independent, and thus the Poisson brackets @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are conserved. @xmath @xmath clearly stays the same as does @xmath , as
none of the original canonical variables transforms to something
containing @xmath . @xmath This step is the most difficult one. Here we
must explicitly compute that @xmath . To do so, we use the preceding
proof of ( B.9 ) and the fact that @xmath is invariant under @xmath , to
resort to the equivalent calculation of @xmath .

By ( B.6 ), we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( A.13 ), we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

which upon acting with @xmath and multiplying by 4 clearly gives us the
sought for equality.

Now, using the form of @xmath given in ( 4.6 ), and again ( B.6 ):

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.15)
  -- -- -- --------

On the other hand we have by ( A.12 )

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.16)
  -- -- -- --------

which upon acting with @xmath and multiplying by 4, after a little
manipulation using the fact that @xmath transforms trivially, yields (
B.15 ).

#### b.3 Tangent space to the space of volume-preserving conformal
transformations.

Thus if we fix the metric, it is easy to see what constitutes the space
of tangent functions to the volume-preserving ones (at @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a one parameter family of @xmath , such that @xmath . Let us call
the function @xmath . Since the metric is fixed we get from ( B.5 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the @xmath notation employed in section D.1 . And we
have thus proven the assertion needed in section 4.3.1 .

#### b.4 Group structure.

Now we check that indeed volume preserving conformal transformations
form a groupoid. For each metric @xmath the action of @xmath will form a
subgroup. Let @xmath be the generators of two vpcts. From ( 4.6 ) we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we see what happens when we iterate the transformation with @xmath .
For ease of manipulation, we will just call the transformed variables
above by @xmath and @xmath . All we have to do now is replace all
occurrences of @xmath by @xmath , and all occurrences of the unbarred
variables by the barred variables. It turns out to be more convenient to
express

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the momenta the equations are more involved. Let us first right down
@xmath in terms of @xmath and barred variables (except for the last
term, where we already input ( B.22 )):

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.24)
  -- -- -- --------

where in the above equation we use the letters @xmath to mean operations
in that order. @xmath pairs multiplicative inverses, @xmath cancels
terms, and @xmath (which can be used only after @xmath ) also pairs
multiplicative inverses. This finishes the proof that volume-preserving
conformal transformations acts as a commutative groupoid on phase space.
We note that for commutative groupoids, the structure constants of the
algebra are zero, and thus for the algebra there is no leftover
dependence on the base point.

### Appendix C Hamilton-Jacobi auxiliary calculations.

#### c.1 Volume decoupling for @xmath.

Here we show that the canonical Poisson brackets between the barred
variables

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.1)
     @xmath               (C.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

in section 7 are trivial. Furthermore we will show how to use the chain
rule to prove the important identity ( 7.18 ). Let us start with the
relations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We then have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which means

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, under @xmath , @xmath goes to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### c.2 Volume expansion for the SD Hamiltonian

We find @xmath by simultaneously solving the equations

  -- -------- -- --------
                 (C.10)
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where barred quantities are calculated using @xmath and the
(super)subscript @xmath denotes the Yamabe gauge.

The large @xmath expansion is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Explicitly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( C.11 ), the restriction is trivially solved by @xmath for @xmath
and @xmath . We can solve for the @xmath ’s by inserting the expansion,
taking the mean, and using the fact that @xmath is constant. That is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

For order zero we get thus:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

as it does not depend on the volume expansion, this already cancels out
separately in the expansion ( C.10 ).

To order @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used equation ( 2.48 ) on the last equality. Taking the mean

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

the equation now reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which tells us that @xmath would take the metric to the Yamabe gauge.
But since we’re already working in the Yamabe gauge, and our Yamabe
metric is unique (up to conformal diffeomorphisms), this equation
reduces to @xmath . Then the solution for @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now let us expand the conformal factor to second order:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting, for order @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the mean, and using @xmath , we get @xmath . The conformal factor
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will assume that the operator @xmath does have a unique inverse, and
thus @xmath is the unique solution ¹ ¹ 1 We note that since the manifold
is compact, @xmath has discrete spectrum. Thus an operator of the form
@xmath will generically have a unique Green’s function, as generically
@xmath will not fall into that spectrum. If the reader finds this
argument insufficient, using more sophisticated analytical tools [ 31 ]
, one can show that if the metric is not the standard one on @xmath ,
then the operator above has a unique Green’s function. And if it is the
standard one, we still generically have uniqueness. .

Finally to order @xmath , using again ( C.21 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used that @xmath for @xmath . Note that already at this stage
the solution of @xmath becomes significantly more complex,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The complete solution, up to order @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

A couple of comments are in order. First, we note that each term in the
expansion is diffeomorphism invariant but vpct gauge dependent. Thus we
conformally covariantize it, so that it coincides with the above
equation over the Yamabe section. We get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### c.2.1 Explicit calculation of the first three terms in the
Hamilton-Jacobi volume expansion.

The equation we are then trying to solve is:

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.27)
  -- -- -- --------

The expansion we are going to use, still of course in steps of @xmath ,
to solve this is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 0-th order equation then becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used @xmath and that @xmath is for our boundary conditions pure
trace, and thus its traceless part vanishes. Thus we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the next order, the relevant terms are those that contribute with
@xmath , coming from @xmath and:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the next order term we get the term @xmath coming from the last
order of ( C.31 ), the term coming from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is just

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and finally, the term:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yielding

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.33)
  -- -- -- --------

Now we use the fact that ² ² 2 Assuming for simplicity that in the
barred variables @xmath . @xmath , we can discard the boundary terms of
the variation to get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Contraction with @xmath yields @xmath and thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

As can easily be seen the term @xmath yields to this order:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Inputting this back into ( C.33 ) yields:

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.36)
  -- -- -- --------

Complete solution:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we separated the factors @xmath to show that the @xmath step is
accompanied by a @xmath one.

### Appendix D Manifold structure for constraint set.

#### d.1 Poisson Brackets and Linear maps

To make what we mean more precise and evaluation more straightforward
(specially the linear algebra part), I will employ the Fischer-Marsden
notation. So we start by notation. Riem @xmath .

We define the variation as a tangent map in these spaces (for example
for @xmath which we are considering to be densities):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so on. Note we are omiting in the @xmath notation that this has both
continuous @xmath and discrete @xmath indices. Both types of indices are
summed over through the dot notation. This mimics the action of matrices
in linear algebra.

Now, we have natural inner products on @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this way, what we usually mean for a smearing of a function @xmath is
seen as an inner product:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will omit the subscript @xmath from now on. Of course to be more
precise we should be working not with the space of smooth functions (on
the second entry of the inner product), but the space of
square-integrable functions. However, as we can sidestep most of the
difficulties arising from this simplification, we will merely make a
side note whenever the difference becomes relevant.

We can write the Poisson bracket as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where one can simplify notation by using the @xmath map (the symplectic
structure) which inverts the order of contraction (so to speak).

In much the same way as in linear algebra, we can define the adjoint of
the tangent map linear operator (in this case for @xmath taking values
in @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is exactly by finding the adjoint that we actually find the
variational derivative; i.e. we have to isolate @xmath , more usually
denoted by @xmath . As an example, let us study both the scalar and the
momentum constraints ( 2.38 ), ( 2.40 ).

Let us start with the smeared version of the momentum constraint:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used integration by parts to transfer the Lie derivative.
There is an easy way to check consistency of this formula by using the
formula for the Lie derivative of the density:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Upon contraction with @xmath and discarding the term @xmath as a total
derivative, one obtains the desired relation. This makes it very easy to
calculate any Poisson bracket between the smeared momentum constraint
and functionals of @xmath . The fundamental Poisson brackets are easily
calculated to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

And thus by the chain rule we get that for any functional of phase
space:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the above notation, for the scalar constraint we have, from ( A.6
) and ( A.8 ):

  -- -- -- -------
           (D.6)
  -- -- -- -------

The adjoint is given using ( D.2 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given by ( A.7 ).

For the momentum constraint we have (remembering that if we consider the
momentum constraint as a map into the space of vector fields @xmath , we
need to lower indices with the metric):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The next issue is do we get such things as the lapse fixing equation,
which is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus @xmath is the lapse fixing equation and @xmath is the lapse fixing
operator. We can still use the canonical transformation properties and
@xmath . We get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### d.2 Constraint manifold for GR.

We now investigate under which circumstances the set of phase space
points obeying both constraints form a manifold. I.e., under which
conditions the intersection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

forms a manifold. From the form of the constraint algebra for the
constraints ( A.10 ) we already know that the constraint set is
maintained by the evolution equations for all choices of lapse and
shift.

Now suppose again that if @xmath then @xmath is not flat. We prove the
following proposition:

###### Proposition 6.

Under the assumption that whenever @xmath then @xmath is not flat,
@xmath forms a manifold.

To prove this we use the Fredholm alternative ( 8.8 ) for the
differential operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we remind the reader that @xmath is not the actual space of linear
functionals on @xmath , but the space of sections of @xmath the
symmetric product of the tangent bundle. See section 8 for a more
thorough explanation of these spaces. The reasoning is quite familiar
from section 8.3.1 and again quite simple: if the operator is elliptic,
we can use the Fredholm splitting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an @xmath orthogonal splitting (i.e. in the positive
definite metric used in this section ( D.2 )). Then we must merely show
that @xmath is injective, which will imply that @xmath is surjective. By
the regular value theorem we then have that @xmath is (at least locally)
a submanifold, with tangent space @xmath . For @xmath denoting the
principal symbol of the operator @xmath , we have @xmath . This means
that if @xmath is injective, for positive definite inner product, we
automatically have @xmath surjective and thus that the operator is
elliptic (see proposition 3 ). And thus we are left to prove that the
operator is injective and has injective symbol.

This calculation is typical of chapter 9 (see ( 9.20 ), ( 9.26 ), ( 9.27
), etc) and by now we can skip the preliminaries and assert that the
symbol of @xmath , given in ( D.7 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

which by doing the usual trick of taking the trace, guarantees the
operator is elliptic. Now from ( D.7 ), we have two equations that we
must satisfy if @xmath . Taking the trace of the second one we get
@xmath , which when input back into the same equation yields @xmath .
When input back into the first of these equations (denoted by @xmath )
we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

By taking the trace we arrive at:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now if we substitute the scalar constraint for @xmath , and since @xmath
we get @xmath which means @xmath is a constant. But we furthermore have
that @xmath , which implies that @xmath everywhere (i.e @xmath ), as it
is a constant. Thus @xmath is injective. @xmath .

We will not prove the same for the diffeomorphism group, which goes
through quite simply. What changes when we try to prove that the
intersection is a manifold? Now we have the mapping:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

And the adjoint given in ( D.7 ) differs from that by the term @xmath .
We will not go through the calculations here (since the tricks used are
basically the same as before), but the only condition under which this
is still injective is if @xmath , a constant [ 29 ] . This is further
circumstantial evidence that the domain which has good theoretical
properties is not the entire one of general relativity, but that of
shape dynamics.

#### d.3 Propagation of the constraints.

We now show how the Poisson brackets of the ADM constraints, propagate.
As mentioned in section 2.1.4 , we will take this opportunity to
illustrate how the Lagrangian formalism, as opposed to the Hamiltonian
one, is cumbersome when dealing with canonical dynamical systems. In the
Hamiltonian formalism the only non-trivial bracket is the one given by
@xmath , which was easily calculated in ( A.10 ). Not so in the
Lagrangian formalism, where we will have to prove every propagation
non-trivially. We will also take the opportunity to demonstrate two
other points that arise in the text. First is the propagation of the
constraints in BSW form (section 2.3 ). Second is the use of a more
general supermetric in the propagation (section 8 ) and the conditions
it gives rise to. To emphasize then, in this section we will compute
propagation of the BSW constraints with a generalized supermetric.

##### d.3.1 Momentum Constraint

We shall start with the BSW action given by the Lagrangian density
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath a closed manifold without boundary again, and
where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To distinguish the BSW momenta from the ADM one, we denote it by @xmath
, as opposed to @xmath .

Now we are ready to start with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also assume both the Hamiltonian and momentum constraints:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.19)
     @xmath      (D.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term yields naturally:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term gives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating by parts, and noting that the covariant derivative of the
density function @xmath is zero, we have an equivalence of ( D.23 ) up
to a boundary term, with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now for the third term we have that the inverse of @xmath is: @xmath .
We must first calculate:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inverting ( D.18 ) we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (D.28)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Finally the third term yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now from ( A.2 ) we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is equivalence up to boundary terms. Now, the formula for
the Lie derivative of a density reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus we get from ( D.30 ), already discarding the terms that
disappear due to the momentum constraint @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Putting it all together we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Now we move forward to check if the momentum constraint is propagated.
We must thus calculate @xmath . We have that for a tensor density of
weight one:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then using ( A.2 ) in ( D.35 ) we get for the second term:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Where on the first term we used the momentum constraint and on the
second term we had:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we used the Hamiltonian constraint on the last equality.

Finally, going back to ( D.33 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then from ( D.35 ), the third term of ( D.38 ) can be seen to cancel
with the first term of ( LABEL:Gamma1 ).

Combining the part @xmath of the second term of ( LABEL:Gamma1 ) (or the
first term of ( D.37 )) with the first term of ( D.38 ) we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the Bianchi identity in 3D to set @xmath . The second term
of ( D.38 ) is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now combining ( D.39 ) and ( D.40 ) we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which cancels with the second term of ( D.37 ). Thus, in ( D.33 ), we
have already used up all the terms that don’t explicitly involve @xmath
, being left with the third term of ( LABEL:Gamma1 ), the fourth term of
( D.38 ).

We start by writing out @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where on the last line we have used the momentum constraint, implying
@xmath and the Riemman curvature formula as applied to a type @xmath
tensor. Now combining the third (last) term of ( LABEL:Gamma1 ) and the
fourth (last) term of ( D.38 ). We get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

And so finally we have shown that ( D.35 ) is indeed zero, and thus the
momentum constraint propagates.

##### d.3.2 Hamiltonian Constraint

We rewrite equation ( D.19 ), for convenience:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we dot it:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting for now only the undifferentiated @xmath through the use of
( D.26 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we left on the last line the terms we will deal with shortly. Let
us re-write the last equation, enumerating some of the terms so that
they are more easily manipulable:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we have that for the @xmath terms, using ( D.33 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

So from ( D.45 ) we are left with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where we already denoted the terms that will be cancelled by the next
set of equations with underbraces.

Now, to substitute the @xmath term, using ( D.26 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                         
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.49)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

And thus:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus finally we are left with:

  -- -- -- --------
           (D.51)
  -- -- -- --------

Where once again we group the terms for easier future manipulation.

Now, using ( D.31 ), we expand the remaining @xmath term, term 5:

  -- -- -- --------
           (D.52)
  -- -- -- --------

Where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the Bianchi identity. Combining ( D.53 ) with element 2 of
( D.51 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

This cancels with term 4 of ( D.51 ). Thus we are left with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

This vanishes for @xmath , but for different @xmath it generates a
further constraint, @xmath . Taking the mean we get @xmath , but this
does not mean that the constraint is @xmath . It could be given by any
constant functional @xmath that this would still propagate the scalar
constraint. We will not calculate propagation of the new constraint or
follow the Dirac analysis in the Lagrangian formalism, as it is
obviously too unwieldily. If one just assumes that @xmath is any
constant functional, i.e. @xmath , then we know from section A.1 that
this implies the familiar equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be solved for uniquely only on asymptotically flat manifolds.
This case @xmath , is the one analyzed in [ 52 ] , where they reach the
same conclusion. Other works by Barbour et al, such as [ 18 ] , had
already reached the same conclusion using the Lagrangian framework some
years ago. This also points to an interesting connection between the
present theory and Horava theory, which is what is being studied in [ 52
] .

### Appendix E Some useful mathematical theorems.

Except for Lovelock’s theorem and the Yamabe conjecture, for which we
give the specific references, all theorems can be found in the form in
which we present them here in [ 33 ] . In the category of topological
vector spaces, the appropriate name of isomorphisms are called
topological linear isomorphims (toplinear).

##### e.0.1 Lovelock’s theorem

Lovelock’s theorem was proved in a series of papers [ 53 , 54 , 55 ] ,
and its statement is the following:

###### Theorem 1.

In 4 dimensions, if the tensor @xmath depends exclusively on the metric
tensor @xmath and on its first and second partial derivatives, and if it
also satisfies the continuity equation @xmath then necessarily

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are constants and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the Einstein tensor.

It is highly restrictively on the possible actions for General
Relativity, as the second order condition is required if we would like
to keep initial data that just depend on positions and velocities.

##### e.0.2 Closed graph theorem.

We use two aspects of the closed graph theorem:

###### Proposition 7.

Every continuous bijective linear between Banach spaces @xmath and
@xmath is a toplinear isomorphim.

###### Proposition 8.

If @xmath is a Banach space and @xmath are two closed subspaces which
are complementary ( @xmath and @xmath ) then the map of @xmath given by
the sum is a toplinear isomorphism.

We will say that a closed subspace @xmath of a Banach space @xmath is
such that there exists a closed complement @xmath such that @xmath is
isomorphic to the product @xmath in the above manner, that @xmath splits
@xmath .

##### e.0.3 Regular value theorem.

The regular value theorem is of the same family as the implicit function
theorem. It gives us a local description of a submanifold as always
being given by the regular values of some function in the ambient
manifold.

###### Theorem 2.

Let @xmath be an open subset of a Banach space @xmath and @xmath a map
into a Banach space @xmath . Let @xmath and assume that the tangent map
@xmath is surjective and that its Kernel splits. Then there exists an
open subset @xmath of @xmath containing @xmath and an isomorphism:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the map @xmath is a projection:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the second map is an isomorphism.

##### e.0.4 Implicit function theorem.

###### Theorem 3.

Let @xmath be open sets of Banach spaces @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a @xmath mapping. Let @xmath , and assume that @xmath is a toplinear
isomorphism. Let @xmath . Then for a sufficiently small neighborhood
@xmath of @xmath there exists a unique continuous map @xmath defined on
an open neighborhood @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath and such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

##### e.0.5 Yamabe problem

The Yamabe problem, which was proven in different dimensions by
different people (see [ 31 ] for a review), can be simply stated as

###### Theorem 4.

Given a compact closed metric manifold @xmath of dimension @xmath ,
there exists a conformal transformation of @xmath , let us call it
@xmath , such that @xmath has constant scalar curvature. Furthermore
@xmath is unique up to global scaling.

For us, this means that we can implicitly go uniquely to the Yamabe
gauge:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------