The Higgs boson is the only elementary particle predicted by the
Standard Model (SM) that has not yet been observed experimentally. If it
exists, it explains the spontaneous electroweak symmetry breaking and
the origin of mass for gauge bosons and fermions. We test the validity
of the SM by performing a search for the associated production of a
Higgs boson and a @xmath boson in the channel where the Higgs boson
decays to a bottom-antibottom quark pair and the @xmath boson decays to
a charged lepton and a neutrino (the @xmath channel). We study a dataset
of proton-antiproton collisions at a centre-of-mass energy @xmath
provided by the Tevatron accelerator, corresponding to an integrated
luminosity of 5.7 fb @xmath , and recorded using the Collider Detector
at Fermilab (CDF). We select events consistent with the signature of
exactly one charged lepton (electron or muon), missing transverse energy
due to the undetected neutrino (MET) and two collimated streams of
particles (jets), at least one of which is required to be identified as
originating from a bottom quark. We improve the discrimination of Higgs
signal from backgrounds through the use of an artificial neural network.
Using a Bayesian statistical inference approach, we set for each
hypothetical Higgs boson mass in the range 100 - 150 @xmath with 5
@xmath increments a @xmath credibility level (CL) upper limit on the
ratio between the Higgs production cross section times branching
fraction and the SM prediction.

Our main original contributions are the addition of a novel charged
lepton reconstruction algorithm with looser requirements (ISOTRK) with
respect the electron or muon tight criteria (TIGHT), as well as the
introduction of a novel trigger-combination method that allows to
maximize the event yield while avoiding trigger correlations and that is
used for the ISOTRK category.

The ISOTRK candidate is a high-transverse-momentum good-quality track
isolated from other activity in the tracking system and not required to
match a calorimeter cluster, as for a tight electron candidate, or an
energy deposit in the muon detector, as for a tight muon candidate. The
ISOTRK category recovers real charged leptons that otherwise would be
lost in the non-instrumented regions of the detector. This allows the
reconstruction of more @xmath boson candidates, which in turn increases
the number of reconstructed @xmath signal candidate events, and
therefore improves the sensitivity of the @xmath search.

For the TIGHT charged lepton categories, we employ
charged-lepton-dedicated triggers to improve the rate of WH signal
acceptance during data taking. Since there is no ISOTRK-dedicated
trigger at CDF, for the ISOTRK charged lepton category we employ three
MET-plus-jets-based triggers. For each trigger we first identify the jet
selection where the trigger efficiency is flat with respect to jet
information (transverse energy and direction of motion in the transverse
plane for the two jets in the event) and then we parametrize the trigger
efficiency as a function of trigger MET. On an event-by-event basis, for
each trigger we compute a trigger efficiency as a function of trigger
parametrization, trigger MET, jet information, trigger prescale and
information about whether the trigger is defined or not. For the ISOTRK
category we combine the three triggers using a novel method, which
allows the combination of any number of triggers in order to maximize
the event yield while avoiding trigger correlations. On an
event-by-event basis, only the trigger with the largest efficiency is
used. By avoiding a logical “OR” between triggers, the loss in the yield
of events accepted by the trigger combination is compensated by a
smaller and easier-to-compute corresponding systematic uncertainty.

The addition of the ISOTRK charged lepton category to the TIGHT category
produces an increase of 33% in the @xmath signal yield and a decrease of
15.5% to 19.0% in the median expected 95% CL cross-section upper limits
across the entire studied Higgs mass interval. The improvement in
analysis sensitivity is smaller than the improvement in signal yield
because the ISOTRK category has a smaller signal over background ratio
than the TIGHT category, due to the looser ISOTRK reconstruction
criteria. The observed (median expected) 95% CL SM Higgs upper limits on
cross section times branching ratio vary between 2.39 @xmath SM (2.73
@xmath SM) for a Higgs mass of 100 @xmath to 31.1 @xmath SM (31.2 @xmath
SM) for a Higgs mass of 150 @xmath , while the value for a 115 @xmath
Higgs boson is that of 5.08 @xmath SM (3.79 @xmath SM).

The novel trigger combination method is already in use by several CDF
analyses. It is applicable to any analysis that uses triggers based on
MET and jets, such as supersymmetry searches at the ATLAS and CMS
experiments at the Large Hadron Collider. In its most general form, the
method can be used by any analysis that combines any number of different
triggers.
