###### Contents

-    I Symmetry Breaking in AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath
    -    1 Overview
    -    2 AdS @xmath backgrounds and Abelian symmetries
        -    2.1 Freund-Rubin solutions
        -    2.2 @xmath -field modes
        -    2.3 Baryonic symmetries and wrapped branes
            -    2.3.1 Vector fields in AdS @xmath , boundary conditions
                and dual CFTs
            -    2.3.2 Boundary conditions and sources for gauge fields:
                M5 branes in toric manifolds
    -    3 Baryonic symmetries in QCS theories
        -    3.1 @xmath QCS theories
        -    3.2 The @xmath theory
            -    3.2.1 The theory and its moduli space
            -    3.2.2 Gauged versus global Abelian subgroups and @xmath
        -    3.3 QCS theories dual to isolated toric Calabi-Yau
            four-fold singularities
            -    3.3.1 The number of gauge nodes in the dual QCS
                theories
            -    3.3.2 Complete classification of the singularities
            -    3.3.3 Candidate duals
    -    4 Gravity duals of baryonic symmetry-breaking
        -    4.1 Baryonic symmetry-breaking in the @xmath theory
            -    4.1.1 Resolutions of @xmath
                -    4.1.1.1 Algebraic analysis
                -    4.1.1.2 Supergravity analysis
            -    4.1.2 Higgsing the @xmath field theory
                -    4.1.2.1 Higgsing @xmath
            -    4.1.3 Baryonic condensates and M5 branes in the @xmath
                solution
            -    4.1.4 Wrapped branes and the phase of the condensate
                -    4.1.4.1 Harmonic forms
        -    4.2 General warped resolved CY backgrounds
            -    4.2.1 Gravity backgrounds
            -    4.2.2 Harmonic two-forms
            -    4.2.3 Baryonic condensates: M5 branes in general warped
                geometries
        -    4.3 Torsion @xmath -flux in warped resolved Calabi-Yau
            backgrounds
            -    4.3.1 @xmath -flux and the supergravity dual of
                Higgsing
            -    4.3.2 @xmath : Gravity results
            -    4.3.3 @xmath : Field theory results
        -    4.4 Exotic renormalization group flows
            -    4.4.1 M-theory circle and Higgsing
        -    4.5 Six-cycles and non-perturbative superpotentials
            -    4.5.1 Non-perturbative superpotentials
            -    4.5.2 Instantons in the resolved @xmath background
                -    4.5.2.1 Warped volumes
                -    4.5.2.2 The @xmath harmonic two-form
                -    4.5.2.3 Critical points
            -    4.5.3 EM5 brane instantons: general discussion
                -    4.5.3.1 Geometric set-up
                -    4.5.3.2 @xmath harmonic two-forms
                -    4.5.3.3 The instanton action
                -    4.5.3.4 The superpotential
    -    5 Conclusions
-    II Symmetry Breaking in AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath
    -    6 Overview
    -    7 AdS @xmath backgrounds and field theories
        -    7.1 Quiver gauge theories
            -    7.1.1 Classical vacuum moduli space
        -    7.2 Gravity backgrounds
            -    7.2.1 AdS @xmath backgrounds
            -    7.2.2 Symmetry-breaking backgrounds
    -    8 The @xmath orbifold
        -    8.1 Field theory description
            -    8.1.1 The GLSM description
            -    8.1.2 The non-conformal theory
            -    8.1.3 @xmath theory - moduli space
        -    8.2 Gravity description
            -    8.2.1 Gravity moduli: B-field and @xmath
            -    8.2.2 The periodicity of @xmath and @xmath
            -    8.2.3 D3 branes on the resolved cone and global strings
            -    8.2.4 The fluctuation containing the Goldstone mode
    -    9 Final comments and summary
    -    A Un-Higgsing in QCS theories
        -    A.0.1 Calabi-Yau, toric and tiling conditions
        -    A.0.2 The un-Higgsing algorithm
    -    B The warp factor for resolutions of @xmath and @xmath
        -    B.1 Angular eigenfunctions in @xmath
        -    B.2 Angular eigenfunctions in @xmath
        -    B.3 The warp factor for @xmath
        -    B.4 The warp factor for @xmath

### Introduction

The AdS/CFT correspondence is a conjectured duality between string
theory (and hence gravity) in AdS space and a conformal field theory on
the boundary of this space [ 4 ] . The duality has produced major
progress in our understanding of the intimate relationship between the
dynamics of gauge theories and strings. A remarkable fact about the
duality is that whenever one description is strongly coupled the dual
description is weakly coupled. Thus, besides being of great theoretical
interest, the duality is becoming a useful tool for studying strongly
coupled gauge theories. Our main interest will be to study various
symmetry considerations, that dominate modern fundamental physics, in
this framework.

The AdS/CFT correspondence is one realization of the holographic
principle, in which a theory that includes gravity is dual to a
non-gravitational field theory on the boundary. This is believed to be a
general property of quantum gravity, thus more general realizations of
string/gauge dualities are expected. One immediate extension of the
correspondence is to non-AdS spaces that are dual to field theories in
which the conformal invariance is broken. This can be achieved by
deforming the action with gauge invariant operators or by giving vacuum
expectation values (VEVs) to operators in the field theory. Such
operations induce renormalization group (RG) flows that could end at an
infra-red (IR) fixed point, or develop non-trivial IR non-conformal
dynamics, like confinement. The energy scale in the field theory is
geometrized and encoded as the radial coordinate in the gravity dual
background. Thus, the correspondence translates the study of RG flow in
the field theory to the analysis of gravity equations of motion in this
background. This makes the study of such RG flows in strongly coupled
field theories highly feasible. No less important is the fact that such
flows are translated to interesting physics in the string theory dual.

The breaking of conformal invariance of interest to us will be induced
by non-vanishing VEVs for operators that carry charge under gauge and
global symmetries in supersymmetric field theories. As we will show,
information about the condensates of these operators can be gained by
studying certain instantonic brane configurations in the dual string
theory. The breaking of symmetries by giving non-vanishing VEVs to
scalar operators is the main component in the idea of spontaneous
symmetry-breaking (SSB). In realistic systems, such broken symmetries
are not manifest to us because the vacuum state is not invariant. This
idea plays a crucial role in understanding various phenomena such as
ferromagnetism, superconductivity, low energy interactions of pions, and
electroweak unification of the Standard Model. In the cases in which the
field theories are strongly coupled, there are generally no efficient
tools with which symmetry-breaking can be studied, and therefore the
AdS/CFT correspondence might be an important tool for filling this gap.

The main interest in this thesis will be Type IIB string theory in AdS
@xmath and M-theory in AdS @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
Sasaki-Einstein five-manifolds and seven-manifolds, respectively. One
important point to note is that the field theory in the AdS @xmath /CFT
@xmath correspondence admits a Lagrangian description since the
Yang-Mills coupling can be tuned to a small value. This is because this
coupling, which is related to the dilation in the string background, is
exactly marginal. In this limit one expects to be able to describe the
theory classically. Considering the AdS @xmath background, it seems that
the dual field theory is always strongly coupled. This originates from
the fact that in M-theory one does not have the dilaton that can be set
small. In order to overcome this apparent problem, Aharony, Bergman,
Jafferis and Maldacena (ABJM) [ 7 ] considered instead the AdS @xmath
geometries. The large @xmath limit reduces the geometry to AdS @xmath in
Type IIA string theory, which is weakly coupled. The existence of this
limit guarantees the existence of a Lagrangian description for the dual
field theory. This theory was shown to be a Chern-Simons (CS) theory
coupled to matter in [ 7 ] , where the orbifold rank @xmath is encoded
by the CS levels.

The Type IIB and M-theory backgrounds just discussed originate from the
near-horizon limit of branes probing the cone over a Sasaki-Eintein
manifold, which is a Calabi-Yau (CY) cone by definition. Thus the moduli
space of the field theory contains a branch that corresponds to the
position of the stack of branes on the CY space. One can study breaking
of symmetries by moving the stack of branes away from the tip of the
cone. In addition, one may break gauge symmetry, global symmetry and
conformal invariance by moving in the Kähler moduli space or by giving
VEVs to form-fields in supergravity. These will be the scenarios of
interest to us in this thesis. This was first studied in the AdS @xmath
/CFT @xmath correspondence by Klebanov-Witten [ 43 ] . There it was
shown that the RG flow in the field theory can be described by a string
theory background with two asymptotically AdS boundaries that correspond
to the IR and UV conformal fixed points. With such solutions at hand,
many properties of the strongly coupled RG flows can be studied.

We begin in § I with the study of symmetry-breaking in AdS @xmath /CFT
@xmath correspondence, which has been little researched owing to the
fact that the dual theories have been discovered only recently. We
discover that the analysis required is much more involved than that
found in the AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath correspondence (see § 1 for an
overview). In § II we study symmetry-breaking in the AdS @xmath /CFT
@xmath correspondence for toric CY three-folds with vanishing
four-cycles. In these examples, we identify an interesting and important
phenomenon, namely the emergence of global symmetries during the RG
flows (see § 6 for an overview).

## Part I Symmetry Breaking in AdS@xmath/Cft@xmath

### Chapter 1 Overview

Over the last two years there have been major advances towards
understanding the AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath duality. Elaborating on [ 5 , 6
] , ABJM [ 7 ] proposed a theory conjectured to be dual to M2 branes
probing a @xmath singularity, where @xmath acts with weights @xmath on
the coordinates of @xmath . This low energy theory on the world-volume
of @xmath coincident M2 branes is a @xmath quiver Chern-Simons (QCS)
theory. Motivated by this progress in understanding the maximally SUSY
case, it is natural to consider M2 branes moving in less symmetric
spaces, leading to versions of the duality with reduced SUSY. Inspired
by ABJM [ 7 ] , the theories considered are @xmath QCS theories with
bifundamental and fundamental matter. This study was initiated in [ 11 ,
12 ] , followed by a large number of works [ 13 , 29 , 22 , 25 , 24 , 23
, 16 , 14 , 27 , 15 , 17 , 28 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 20 , 30 , 31 , 26 ] . It
has been argued in [ 57 , 58 ] that the sum @xmath corresponds to the
Type IIA supergravity Romans mass parameter, which is just the
Ramond-Ramond (R-R) zero-form @xmath . In this thesis we will focus
entirely on the case in which the Romans mass vanishes and the system
admits an M-theory lift.

Systematic ways to obtain field theories dual to M2 branes on toric
conical CY four-folds were developed recently. These constructions
exploit the fact that these CYs can be written as a @xmath fibration
over a seven-manifold. Considering this @xmath as the M-theory circle
and reducing on this direction one obtains D2 branes probing @xmath in
Type IIA string theory with R-R two-form flux. After compactifying the
@xmath direction to a circle and T-dualizing over this circle one
obtains D3 branes probing a CY three-fold in Type IIB. The dual circle
should shrink to zero size, thus the field theory on the D3 branes is
effectively @xmath d. Fortunately, the field theories living on such D3
branes probing toric CY three-folds are known. To obtain the theories on
the M2 branes one needs to add CS terms to such quivers [ 11 , 12 ] .
These CS terms originate from the coupling of the R-R flux to the
D-branes [ 50 , 51 ] . The above description is valid when the @xmath
does not degenerate over the base. Degenerations, however, should result
in extra objects in the Type IIA picture. In particular, degenerations
on non-compact co-dimension two sub-manifolds of the @xmath correspond
to D6 branes in the Type IIA reduction. In [ 23 , 22 ] it was suggested
that flavours should be added to the quivers in order to obtain
candidate duals. These proposals were added to the already known
theories that do not contain flavours; however, it is still not clear if
these different types of theories are indeed connected by duality. In
this thesis we will always discuss the latter type of candidates
whenever a comparison with field theory will be made. Applying our
discussion to the theories with flavours is left for future work. If the
M-theory circle degenerates over compact divisor, the D6 branes in the
Type IIA background wrap compact four-cycles in the CY three-fold. In [
25 ] the authors suggested dual field theories for some geometries with
such degenerations. In these candidates the ranks of the quivers, that
are inferred from the Type IIA reduction described above, are not equal
in general as a result of the presence of D6 branes. The M-theory circle
in these backgrounds affects the Higgsing of the field theories in an
interesting way, as we will discuss in § 4.4 .

In general, the presence of global symmetries is of great help in
classifying the spectrum of a gauge theory. One particularly important
example of a global symmetry is the R-symmetry. In three dimensions a
theory preserving @xmath supersymmetries admits the action of an @xmath
R-symmetry. Thus the existence of a non-trivial R-symmetry, which can
then provide important constraints on the dynamics, requires that we
focus on @xmath , implying there is at least a @xmath . In particular,
assuming that the theory flows to an IR superconformal fixed point, it
follows that the scaling dimensions of chiral primary operators coincide
with their R-charges. We note that, generically, the @xmath theories
considered have classically irrelevant superpotentials. Strong gauge
dynamics is required to give large anomalous dimensions, thus making it
possible to reach a non-trivial IR fixed point.

Recently an analogous version of @xmath -maximization [ 61 ] , which for
four-dimensional @xmath theories allows one to determine the R-charge in
the superconformal algebra at the IR fixed point, was suggested [ 33 ,
34 , 35 , 36 ] . According to this suggestion the correct R-charges
locally maximize the free energy @xmath on a three-dimensional sphere.
This quantity, that reduces to a certain matrix integral by using
localization, seems to be a good measure of the number of degrees of
freedom in the field theory. Due to the fact that it can be calculated
at strong coupling, both in the gauge theory and in AdS supergravity, it
can be used to test the correspondence. In [ 37 , 38 , 39 ] this
suggestion was confirmed for several examples of @xmath CS theories.
However, it is fair to say that this is still poorly understood, and
more work should be done to generalize those computations to other
theories.

The @xmath QCS theories that we consider are expected to be dual to M2
branes moving in a CY four-fold cone over a seven-dimensional
Sasaki-Einstein base @xmath , thus giving rise to an AdS @xmath near
horizon dual geometry. Such Sasaki-Einstein manifolds @xmath will
typically have non-trivial topology, implying the existence of
Kaluza-Klein (KK) modes obtained by reduction of supergravity fields
along the corresponding homology cycles. Of particular interest are
five-cycles, on which one can reduce the M-theory six-form potential to
obtain @xmath vector fields in AdS @xmath . These vector fields are part
of short multiplets of the KK reduction on @xmath , known as Betti
multiplets [ 62 , 63 ] (for a discussion relevant to the cases we will
consider, see also [ 64 , 65 ] ). In analogy with the Type IIB case,
where the constant gauge transformations in the bulk are well known to
correspond to global baryonic symmetries on the boundary [ 43 ] , we
will sometimes employ the same terminology here and refer to these as
baryonic @xmath s.

In this part of the thesis we set out to study the above symmetries in
the AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath correspondence. In the rather
better-understood AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath correspondence in Type IIB
string theory, from the field theory point of view these baryonic @xmath
symmetries appear as non-anomalous combinations of the diagonal @xmath
factors inside the @xmath gauge groups ¹ ¹ 1 This will be discussed in
more detail in § II . . The key point is that, in four dimensions,
Abelian gauge fields are IR free and thus become global symmetries in
the IR. However, this is no longer true in three dimensions, thus
raising the question of the fate of these Abelian symmetries. From the
gravity perspective, in the dual AdS @xmath the vector fields admit two
admissible fall-offs at the boundary of AdS @xmath [ 67 , 68 ] . This is
in contrast to the AdS @xmath case where only one of them is allowed,
for which the interpretation as dual to a global current is required.
That the two behaviours are permitted implies that the corresponding
boundary symmetries remain either gauged or ungauged, respectively,
defining in each case a different boundary CFT. This issue is closely
related to the gauge groups being either @xmath or @xmath in the case at
hand. From the point of view of the QCS theory with @xmath gauge groups,
at lowest CS level @xmath there is no real distinction between @xmath
and @xmath gauge groups [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] . Therefore the discussion in [ 67
] can be applied to the Abelian part of the symmetry. In this way it is
possible to connect the @xmath and the @xmath theories while keeping
track of the corresponding action on the gravity side, which amounts to
selecting one particular fall-off for the vector fields in AdS @xmath .
This provides motivation to look at the @xmath version of the theory as
dual to a particular choice of boundary conditions in the dual gravity
picture.

We start by focusing on the simplest class of examples, namely isolated
toric CY four-fold singularities with no vanishing six-cycles. These are
discussed in more detail in § 3.3 . In particular, we study in detail
the example of the cone over the Sasaki-Einstein manifold @xmath , which
from now on will be denoted as @xmath . @xmath is a regular
Sasaki-Einstein seven-manifold that can be described as a principal
@xmath bundle over a @xmath base. It is called regular since the fibres
all close and have the same length. Motivated by the analysis of the
behaviour of gauge fields in AdS @xmath , we will choose boundary
conditions where the diagonal @xmath factors inside @xmath of the @xmath
gauge factors in the field theory are ungauged. This amounts to focusing
on a certain version of the theory with gauge group @xmath . On the
other hand, gauge fields in AdS @xmath can have a priori both electric
and magnetic sources. These are the M2 branes and M5 branes wrapping
two-cycles and five-cycles in the Sasaki-Einstein manifold,
respectively. These wrapped branes form particles in the AdS @xmath
space. It turns out that the boundary conditions necessary to define the
AdS/CFT correspondence allow for just one of the two types at a time [
67 ] . In particular, the chosen @xmath quantization allows only for
electric sources; that is, wrapped supersymmetric M5 branes. In turn,
these correspond to baryonic operators [ 69 ] in the field theory that
are charged under the global symmetries. We will analyse this
correspondence in detail, finding the expected agreement.

On the other hand, magnetic sources correspond to M2 branes [ 69 ] .
While in the AdS geometry these wrap non-supersymmetric cycles, we can
also consider resolutions of the corresponding cone where there are
supersymmetric wrapped M2 branes. Along the lines of [ 70 , 71 ] , we
will identify the relevant operator, responsible for the resolution,
which is acquiring a VEV. It is possible to find an interpretation of
these solutions as spontaneous symmetry-breaking backgrounds through the
explicit appearance of a Goldstone boson in the supergravity dual.

A natural next step is to enlarge the class of singularities under
consideration by allowing dual geometries with exceptional six-cycles.
One such example is a @xmath orbifold of @xmath known as @xmath . The
interpretation of such six-cycles is somewhat obscure holographically.
Indeed, such six-cycles, when resolved, can support M5 brane instantons
leading to non-perturbative corrections [ 72 ] . In § 4.5 we set up the
study of such corrections by finding a general expression for the
Euclidean action of such branes in terms of normalizable harmonic
two-forms, and compute this explicitly for @xmath . We leave a full
understanding of such non-perturbative effects from the gauge theory
point of view for future work.

An important difference between the M2 brane and D3 brane cases is that,
typically for the background AdS @xmath , one is allowed to turn on
torsion @xmath -flux in @xmath ; whereas for AdS @xmath backgrounds,
with @xmath a toric Sasaki-Einstein five-manifold, there is never
torsion in @xmath . Indeed, typically @xmath is non-trivial, and each
different choice of flux should give a physically distinct theory.
Turning on a torsion @xmath -flux is equivalent to turning on a closed
three-form @xmath with non-zero periods through torsion three-cycles in
the Sasaki-Einstein manifold. This was first discussed in this context
by [ 10 ] , who considered the ABJM model with @xmath . In this case
@xmath , so there are @xmath distinct M-theory backgrounds corresponding
to the @xmath choices of torsion @xmath -flux. The authors of [ 10 ]
argued this corresponds to changing the ranks of the ABJM theory from
@xmath to @xmath , where @xmath . As we explain quite generally,
theories with non-zero torsion @xmath -flux have a richer behaviour
under Higgsing than those without any flux. As for the D3 brane case,
when there is no flux one can argue from the supergravity dual that one
expects to obtain field theories for all partial resolutions of a given
singularity by Higgsing the original theory. However, once one turns on
torsion flux the story is more complicated. This can lead to interesting
predictions for the expected patterns of Higgsings observed in the dual
field theory. We examine this in detail in the example where @xmath is a
certain non-trivial Sasaki-Einstein seven-manifold, finding precise
agreement between the supergravity analysis and field theory analysis.

The organization of this part of the thesis is as follows. In § 2 we
review the Freund-Rubin-type solutions which are eleven-dimensional AdS
@xmath backgrounds. We then turn to KK reduction of the supergravity
six-form potential on five-cycles in @xmath , leading to the Betti
multiplets of interest. General analysis of gauge fields in AdS @xmath
shows that two possible fall-offs are admissible. We then review the
construction in [ 67 ] relating these different boundary conditions for
a single Abelian gauge field in AdS @xmath to the action of @xmath . In
§ 3 we turn in more detail to the field theory description. We start by
reviewing general aspects of @xmath QCS theories that have appeared in
the literature, before turning in § 3.2 to the example of interest. We
then propose a set of boundary conditions dual to the @xmath theory. We
identify the ungauged @xmath s via the electric M5 branes wrapping
holomorphic divisors in the geometry. In § 4 we turn to the spontaneous
breaking of these baryonic symmetries. We compute on the gravity side
the baryonic condensate and identify the Goldstone boson of the SSB. In
§ 4.3 we explore the role of supergravity fluxes in the dual description
of the Higgs effect. In § 4.4 we discuss the importance of the M-theory
circle in the dual Higgsing of the field theories and the study of the
related exotic baryonic branches and RG flow scenarios. In § 4.5 we
initiate the study of exceptional six-cycles. We compute the warped
volume of a Euclidean brane in the resolved @xmath geometry. By
extending our results on warped volumes to arbitrary geometries, both
for the baryonic condensate and the Euclidean brane, we find general
formulae for such warped volumes. We end with some concluding comments
in § 5 . In two appendices we present the un-Higgsing algorithm (§ A ),
and a number of relevant calculations and formulae (§ B ).

### Chapter 2 AdS@xmath backgrounds and Abelian symmetries

We begin by reviewing general properties of Freund-Rubin AdS @xmath
backgrounds, and also introduce the @xmath and @xmath examples of main
interest. KK reduction of the M-theory potentials on topologically
non-trivial cycles leads to gauge symmetries in AdS @xmath . We review
their dynamics in the AdS/CFT context and the sources allowed, depending
on the chosen quantization. Of central relevance for our purposes will
be wrapped supersymmetric M5 branes.

#### 2.1 Freund-Rubin solutions

The AdS @xmath backgrounds of interest are of Freund-Rubin type, with
eleven-dimensional metric and four-form given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath stands for the volume form of the AdS @xmath space and the
AdS @xmath metric is normalized so that @xmath . The Einstein equations
imply that @xmath is an Einstein manifold of positive Ricci curvature,
with metric normalized so that @xmath . With complete analogy to quantum
electromagnetism, the generalized Dirac quantization condition requires

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.1.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

This then leads to the relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the eleven-dimensional Planck length and @xmath is
the volume of the Sasaki-Einstein manifold.

As is well-known, such solutions arise as the near-horizon limit of
@xmath M2 branes placed at the tip @xmath of the Ricci-flat cone

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

More precisely, the eleven-dimensional solution is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where in the case at hand we take the eight-manifold to be the cone over
the Sasaki-Einstein manifold @xmath with conical metric ( 2.1.4 ).
Placing @xmath Minkowski space-filling M2 branes at @xmath leads, after
including their gravitational back-reaction, to the warp factor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the near-horizon limit, near to @xmath , the background ( 2.1.5 )
approaches the AdS @xmath background ( 2.1.1 ). In fact the warp factor
@xmath is precisely the AdS @xmath background in a Poincaré slicing.
More precisely, writing

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

leads to the metric ( 2.1.1 ).

We restrict attention to the @xmath Sasaki-Einstein case, which includes
the @xmath three-Sasakian geometry as a special case. It is then
equivalent to say that the cone metric on @xmath is Kähler as well as
Ricci-flat, i.e. CY. Geometries with @xmath supersymmetries are
necessarily quotients of @xmath .

Until recently the only known examples of such Sasaki-Einstein
seven-manifolds were homogeneous spaces. Since then there has been
dramatic progress. Three-Sasakian manifolds, with @xmath , may be
constructed via an analogue of the hyperKähler quotient, leading to rich
infinite classes of examples [ 73 ] . For @xmath supersymmetry one could
take @xmath to be one of the explicit @xmath manifolds constructed in [
55 ] , and further studied in [ 56 , 29 ] , or any of their subsequent
generalizations. These @xmath examples are all toric, meaning that the
isometry group contains @xmath as a subgroup. In fact, toric
Sasaki-Einstein manifolds are now completely classified thanks to the
general existence and uniqueness result in [ 74 ] . At the other
extreme, there are also non-explicit metrics in which @xmath is the only
isometry [ 73 ] .

However, for our purposes it will be sufficient to focus on two specific
homogeneous examples, namely @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath being along
the R-symmetry of @xmath . These will turn out to be simple enough so
that everything can be computed explicitly, and yet at the same time we
shall argue that many of the features seen in these cases hold also for
the more general geometries mentioned above. In both cases the isometry
group is @xmath , and in local coordinates the explicit metrics are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath are standard coordinates on three copies of @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath has period @xmath for @xmath and period @xmath for @xmath .
The two Killing spinors are charged under @xmath , which is dual to the
@xmath symmetry. The metric ( 2.1.8 ) shows very explicitly the regular
structure of a @xmath bundle over the standard Kähler-Einstein metric on
@xmath , where @xmath is the fibre coordinate and the Chern numbers are
@xmath and @xmath respectively. These are hence natural generalizations
¹ ¹ 1 The other natural such generalization is the homogeneous space
@xmath , which has been studied in detail in [ 21 ] . to seven
dimensions of the @xmath and @xmath manifolds.

#### 2.2 @xmath-field modes

One might wonder whether it is possible to turn on an internal @xmath
-flux @xmath on @xmath , in addition to the @xmath -field in ( 2.1.1 ),
and still preserve supersymmetry, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In fact necessarily @xmath . This follows from the results of [ 54 ] :
for any warped CY four-fold background with metric of the form ( 2.1.5
), one can turn on a @xmath -field @xmath on @xmath without changing the
CY metric on @xmath only if @xmath is self-dual. But for a cone, with
@xmath a pull-back from the base @xmath , this obviously implies that
@xmath .

However, more precisely the @xmath -field in M-theory determines a class
² ² 2 This is true since the membrane global anomaly described in [ 75 ]
is always zero on a seven-manifold @xmath that is spin. in @xmath . The
differential form part of @xmath captures only the image of this in
@xmath , and so @xmath still allows for a topologically non-trivial
@xmath -field classified by the torsion part @xmath . This is also
captured, up to gauge equivalence, by the holonomy of the corresponding
flat @xmath -field through dual torsion three-cycles in @xmath . There
are hence @xmath physically distinct AdS @xmath Freund-Rubin backgrounds
associated to the same geometry, which should thus correspond to
physically inequivalent dual SCFTs. Different choices of this torsion
@xmath -flux have been argued to be dual to changing the ranks in the
quiver [ 21 , 10 , 1 , 24 , 25 ] . In particular, for example, one can
compute @xmath , implying there are two distinct M-theory backgrounds
with the same @xmath geometry but different @xmath -fields.

More straightforwardly, if one has @xmath three-cycles in @xmath then
one can also turn on a closed three-form @xmath with non-zero periods
through these cycles. Including large gauge transformations, this gives
a space @xmath of such flat @xmath -fields. Since these are continuously
connected to each other they would be dual to marginal deformations in
the dual field theory. Indeed, the harmonic three-forms on a
Sasaki-Einstein seven-manifold are in fact paired by an almost complex
structure [ 76 ] and thus @xmath is always even, allowing these to pair
naturally into complex parameters as required by @xmath supersymmetry.
However, for the class of toric singularities studied in this thesis,
including @xmath and @xmath , it is straightforward ³ ³ 3 There are,
however, examples: the CY four-fold hypersurfaces @xmath , where @xmath
, are known to have CY cone metrics, and these have @xmath , @xmath ,
respectively [ 76 ] . to show that @xmath and there are hence no such
marginal deformations associated to the @xmath -field.

Finally, since @xmath for any positively curved Einstein seven-manifold
[ 52 ] , there are never periods of the dual potential @xmath through
six-cycles in @xmath .

#### 2.3 Baryonic symmetries and wrapped branes

Of central interest in this thesis will be symmetries associated to the
topology of @xmath , and the corresponding charged BPS states associated
to wrapped M branes. By analogy with the corresponding situation in AdS
@xmath in Type IIB string theory, we shall refer to these symmetries as
baryonic symmetries; the name will turn out to be justified.

Denote by @xmath the second Betti number of @xmath . By Poincaré duality
we have @xmath . Let @xmath be a set of dual harmonic five-forms with
integer periods. Then for the @xmath Freund-Rubin background we may
write the KK ansatz

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the M5 brane tension. This gives rise to @xmath massless
@xmath gauge fields @xmath in AdS @xmath . For a supersymmetric theory
these gauge fields of course sit in certain multiplets, known as Betti
multiplets . See, for example, [ 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 ] .

##### 2.3.1 Vector fields in AdS@xmath, boundary conditions and dual
CFTs

The AdS/CFT duality requires specifying the boundary conditions for the
fluctuating fields in AdS. In particular, vector fields in AdS @xmath
admit different sets of boundary conditions [ 67 , 68 ] leading to
different boundary CFTs. In order to see this, let us consider a vector
field in AdS @xmath using the coordinates in ( 2.1.7 ). In the gauge
@xmath the bulk equations of motion set

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath satisfy the free Maxwell equation in Lorentz
gauge in the Minkowski space. It is not hard to see that in @xmath both
behaviours have finite action, and thus can be used to define a
consistent AdS/CFT duality [ 67 , 68 ] . In order to have a well-defined
variational problem for the gauge field in AdS @xmath we should be
careful with the boundary terms when varying the action. As discussed in
[ 68 ] , we need to impose boundary conditions where @xmath or @xmath is
fixed on the boundary.

Fixing @xmath on the boundary while leaving @xmath unfixed is
interpreted as providing a generating functional for the global current
correlators in the field theory

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the conserved current of the boundary theory. If one
does not wish to insert sources in the field theory then @xmath should
in fact be set to zero. In addition, the one-point function of this
current is related to the sub-leading behaviour of @xmath near the
boundary. On the other hand, when @xmath is fixed on the boundary and
@xmath is left unrestricted, the latter should be integrated over in the
path integral. Thus, @xmath is interpreted as a dynamical gauge field in
the field theory with the action perturbed as before ( 2.3.12 ). Notice
that the equation of motion of @xmath gives @xmath , which is exactly
the same as fixing @xmath on the boundary.

Defining @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The two sets of boundary conditions then correspond to either setting
@xmath while leaving @xmath unrestricted, or setting @xmath while
leaving @xmath unrestricted.

As noted, @xmath and @xmath are naturally identified with a dynamical
gauge field and a global current in the boundary, respectively. In
accordance with this identification, eq. ( 2.3.11 ) and the usual
AdS/CFT prescription show each field to have the correct scaling
dimension for this interpretation: for a gauge field @xmath , while for
a global current @xmath . Therefore, the quantization @xmath is dual to
a boundary CFT where the @xmath gauge field is dynamical; while the
quantization @xmath is dual to a boundary CFT where the @xmath is
ungauged and is instead a global symmetry. Furthermore, as discussed in
[ 43 ] for the scalar counterpart, once the improved action is taken
into account the two quantizations are Legendre transformations of one
another [ 44 ] , as can be seen by, for example, computing the free
energy in each case.

Electric-magnetic duality in the bulk theory, which exchanges @xmath ,
translates in the boundary theory into the so-called @xmath operation [
67 ] . This is an operation on three-dimensional CFTs with a global
@xmath symmetry, taking one such CFT to another. In addition, in
four-dimensional Abelian gauge theory, the following term can be added
to the action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is possible to construct a @xmath operation , which amounts to a
shift of the bulk @xmath -angle by @xmath and thus leaves @xmath
invariant. Following [ 67 ] , we can be more precise in defining these
actions in the boundary CFT. Starting with a three-dimensional CFT with
a global @xmath current @xmath , one can couple this global current to a
background gauge field @xmath resulting in the action @xmath . The
@xmath operation then promotes @xmath to a dynamical gauge field and
adds a BF coupling of @xmath to a new background field @xmath , while
the @xmath operation instead adds a CS term for the background gauge
field @xmath :

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.3.15)
  -- -- -- ----------

As shown in [ 67 ] , these two operations generate the group @xmath ⁴ ⁴
4 Even though we are explicitly discussing the effect of @xmath on the
vector fields, since these are part of a whole Betti multiplet we expect
a similar action on the other fields of the multiplet. We leave this
investigation for future work. . In turn, as discussed above, the @xmath
and @xmath operations have the bulk interpretation of exchanging @xmath
and shifting the bulk @xmath -angle by @xmath , respectively. It is
important to stress that these actions on the bulk theory change the
boundary conditions. Because of this, the dual CFTs living on the
boundary are different.

##### 2.3.2 Boundary conditions and sources for gauge fields: M5 branes
in toric manifolds

We are interested in gauge symmetries in AdS @xmath associated to the
topology of @xmath ; that is, arising from KK reductions as in ( 2.3.10
). All KK modes, and hence their dual operators, carry zero charge under
these @xmath @xmath symmetries. However, there are operators associated
to wrapped M branes that do carry charge under this group. In
particular, an M5 brane wrapped on a five-manifold @xmath , such that
the cone @xmath is a complex divisor in the Kähler cone @xmath , is
supersymmetric and leads to a BPS particle propagating in AdS @xmath .
Since the M5 brane is a source for @xmath , this particle is
electrically charged under the @xmath massless @xmath gauge fields
@xmath . One might also consider M2 branes wrapped on two-cycles in
@xmath . However, such wrapped M2 branes are supersymmetric only if the
cone @xmath over the two-submanifold @xmath is calibrated in the CY
cone, and there are no such calibrating three-forms. Thus these
particles, although topologically stable, are not BPS. They are
magnetically charged under the @xmath gauge fields in AdS @xmath [ 69 ]
.

As discussed above, the AdS/CFT duality instructs us to choose, for each
@xmath gauge field, a set of boundary conditions where either @xmath or
@xmath vanishes. Clearly, only the latter possibility allows for the
existence of the SUSY electric M5 branes, otherwise forbidden by the
boundary conditions. In turn, this quantization leaves, in the boundary
theory, the @xmath symmetry as a global symmetry. Therefore, in this
case we should expect to find operators in the field theory that are
charged under the global baryonic symmetries and dual to the M5 brane
states. We turn to this point in the next chapter.

For toric manifolds there is a canonical set of such wrapped M5 brane
states, where @xmath are taken to be the toric divisors. Each such state
leads to a corresponding dual chiral primary operator that is charged
under the @xmath global symmetries, and will also have definite charge
under the @xmath flavour group dual to the isometries of @xmath . We
refer the reader to the standard literature for a thorough introduction
to toric geometry. However, the basic idea is simple to state. The cone
@xmath fibres over a polyhedral cone @xmath in @xmath with generic fibre
@xmath . This polyhedral cone is by definition a convex set of the form
@xmath , where @xmath are integer vectors. This set of vectors is
precisely the set of charge vectors specifying the @xmath subgroups of
@xmath that have complex codimension one fixed point sets. These fixed
point sets are, by definition, the toric divisors referred to above. The
CY condition implies that, with a suitable choice of basis, we can write
@xmath , with @xmath . If we plot these latter points in @xmath and take
their convex hull, we obtain the toric diagram .

For the @xmath example the toric divisors are given by @xmath or @xmath
, for any @xmath , which are six five-manifolds in @xmath . The toric
diagram for @xmath is shown in Figure 4.1 on page 37, where one sees
clearly these six toric divisors as the six external vertices. Notice
that for @xmath the full isometry group may be used to rotate @xmath
into @xmath , specifically using the @xmath th copy of @xmath in the
@xmath isometry group. In fact these two five-manifolds are two points
in an @xmath family of such five-manifolds related via the isometry
group. Similar comments apply also to @xmath .

### Chapter 3 Baryonic symmetries in QCS theories

In this chapter we turn to a more precise field theoretic description of
the global @xmath . We begin with a brief review of the @xmath theories
considered in the literature, before turning to our @xmath example and
considering the role of the Abelian symmetries in this case.

#### 3.1 @xmath QCS theories

Let us start by considering the @xmath theories. The Lagrangian, in
@xmath superspace notation, for a theory containing an arbitrary number
of bifundamentals @xmath in the representation @xmath under the @xmath
-th gauge groups and a choice of superpotential @xmath , reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.1.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Here @xmath are the CS levels for the vector multiplet @xmath . For
future convenience we define @xmath .

The classical vacuum moduli space (VMS) is determined in general by the
following equations [ 11 , 12 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the scalar component of @xmath . Following [ 11 ] , upon
diagonalization of the fields using @xmath rotations, one can focus on
the branch where @xmath , @xmath , so that the last equation is
immediately satisfied ¹ ¹ 1 We stress that there might be, and indeed
even in the @xmath example there are, other branches of the moduli space
where the condition @xmath for all @xmath is not met, and yet still the
bosonic potential is minimized. . Under the assumption that @xmath , the
equations for the moment maps @xmath boil down to a system of @xmath
independent equations for the bifundamental fields, analogous to D-term
equations. Since for toric superpotentials the set of F-flat
configurations, determining the so-called master space @xmath [ 48 ] ,
is of dimension @xmath , upon imposing the @xmath D-terms and dividing
by the associated gauge symmetries we have a @xmath moduli space @xmath
where the M2 branes move.

However, due to the peculiarities of the CS kinetic terms, extra care
has to be taken with the diagonal part of the gauge symmetry. At a
generic point of the moduli space the gauge group is broken to @xmath
copies of @xmath . The diagonal gauge field @xmath is completely
decoupled from the matter fields, and only appears coupled to @xmath
through

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath appears only through its field strength, it can be dualized
into a scalar @xmath . Following the standard procedure, it is easy to
see that integrating out @xmath sets

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

such that the relevant part of the action becomes a total derivative

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.1.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

Around a charge @xmath monopole in the diagonal @xmath gauge field
@xmath we then have @xmath , so that @xmath must have period @xmath in
order for the above phase to be unobservable [ 11 ] . Gauge
transformations of @xmath then allow one to gauge-fix @xmath to a
particular value via ( 3.1.4 ), but this still leaves a residual
discrete set of @xmath gauge symmetries that leave this gauge choice
invariant. The space of solutions to ( 3.1.2 ) is then quotiented by
gauge transformations where the parameters @xmath satisfy @xmath ,
together with the residual discrete @xmath gauge transformations
generated by @xmath for all @xmath . Altogether this leads to a @xmath
quotient. We refer to [ 11 ] for further discussion, and to [ 28 ] for a
discussion in the context of the @xmath theory in particular.

#### 3.2 The @xmath theory

##### 3.2.1 The theory and its moduli space

A field theory candidate dual to M2 branes probing @xmath was proposed
in [ 27 ] and further studied in [ 28 ] . The proposal in those
references is a @xmath Chern-Simons gauge theory with CS levels @xmath ,
with matter content summarized by the quiver in Figure 3.1 .

In addition, there is a superpotential given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As expected for a field theory dual to @xmath point-like branes moving
in @xmath , the moduli space contains a branch which is the symmetric
product of @xmath copies of this conical singularity. To see this, let
us begin with the Abelian theory in which all the gauge groups are
@xmath . As shown in [ 28 ] , after integrating out the auxiliary @xmath
scalar the geometric branch of the moduli space with @xmath is described
by @xmath D-term equations. Recalling the special role played by @xmath
, it is useful to introduce the following basis for the @xmath gauge
fields:

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the two D-terms to impose are those for @xmath . In turn, the
charge matrix is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice the appearance of the @xmath global symmetry, under which the
pair @xmath transform as doublet. This is a subgroup of the expected
@xmath global symmetry which is not manifest in the Lagrangian due to
the choice of the M-theory circle ² ² 2 The M-theory circle can be
deduced from the @xmath action on the moduli space. .

Since for the Abelian theory the superpotential is identically zero, one
can determine the Abelian moduli space by constructing the
gauge-invariants with respect to the gauge transformations for @xmath .
Borrowing the results from [ 28 ] , for CS level @xmath these are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can then check explicitly that these satisfy the nine relations
defining @xmath as an affine variety:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is an affine toric variety, with toric diagram given by Figure 4.1
on page 37. Indeed, we also notice that for the Abelian theory the
description of the moduli space as a @xmath Kähler quotient of @xmath
with coordinates @xmath is precisely the minimal gauged linear sigma
model (GLSM) description. Thus the six toric divisors in Figure 4.1 ,
discussed in § 2.3 , are defined by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

For CS level @xmath one obtains an @xmath supersymmetric @xmath orbifold
of @xmath . Notice that @xmath are invariant under this action, while
@xmath and @xmath are rotated with equal and opposite phase. On the
other hand, for the non-Abelian theory with @xmath it was shown in [ 28
] that for large @xmath , where the use of still poorly-understood
monopole operators is evaded, upon using the F-terms of the full
non-Abelian superpotential ( 3.2.6 ) the chiral ring matches that
expected for the corresponding orbifold. In this case the chiral
primaries at the non-Abelian level are just the usual gauge-invariants
given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

An important subtlety in this theory is that @xmath does not act freely
on @xmath : it fixes two disjoint copies of @xmath inside @xmath .
Indeed, using ( 3.2.7 ) one sees that the corresponding two cones @xmath
are parametrized respectively by @xmath and @xmath , with in each case
all other @xmath . Thus for @xmath the horizon @xmath has orbifold
singularities in co-dimension four. This means that the supergravity
approximation cannot be trusted for @xmath . In fact these are @xmath
singularities which can support “fractional” M2 branes wrapping the
collapsed cycles, and one expects an @xmath gauge theory to be supported
on these @xmath s. A different perspective can be obtained by
interpreting @xmath as the M-theory circle and reducing to Type IIA.
This results in @xmath D6 branes wrapping these two @xmath sub-manifolds
³ ³ 3 In [ 23 , 22 ] this picture led the authors to propose a different
@xmath dual candidate that contains flavours and correspond to the same
M-theory circle. It will be interesting to check if this theory is dual
in the IR to the one without flavours that we just described. . From now
on we will therefore assume that @xmath .

##### 3.2.2 Gauged versus global Abelian subgroups and @xmath

At @xmath the orbifold identification due to the CS terms is trivial.
Indeed, in this case there is no real distinction between @xmath and
@xmath gauge groups, as discussed in [ 7 , 8 , 9 ] for the ABJM theory
and orbifolds of it. We shall argue that ungauging some of the @xmath s
is dual to a particular choice of boundary conditions on the gravity
side. That is, we apply the general discussion in § 2.3 to the @xmath
@xmath gauge fields, and argue that the associated @xmath symmetries are
those in @xmath , for appropriate gauge group factors. This raises the
important problem of how to identify the relevant two @xmath symmetries
dual to the Betti multiplets in the QCS theory proposed above. The key
is to recall that the boundary conditions which amount to ungauging
these @xmath s in turn allow for the existence of supersymmetric M5
branes on the gravity side. As discussed in § 2.3 , from an
algebro-geometric point of view the corresponding divisors are easy to
identify. In turn we notice that, for the Abelian theory, the fields
@xmath are also the minimal GLSM coordinates. Setting each to zero
therefore gives one of the six toric divisors that may be wrapped by an
M5 brane. The charges of the resulting M5 brane states under @xmath are
then the same as the charges of these fields under the @xmath we
quotient by in forming the Abelian moduli space – this was shown for the
D3 brane case in [ 107 ] , and the same argument applies here also. This
strongly suggests that the gauge symmetries @xmath , @xmath should in
fact be dual to the Betti multiplets discussed in § 2.3 .

Once we have identified the relevant Abelian symmetries, we can consider
acting with the @xmath and @xmath operations. We schematically write the
action of the @xmath @xmath theory (which we will denote as @xmath ),
separating the @xmath sector from the rest, as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath stands for the remaining terms. We can then consider a
theory without the gauge fields @xmath , @xmath , constructed
schematically as @xmath . By construction, this theory has exactly two
global symmetries satisfying all the properties expected as dual to
Betti multiplets. Following [ 67 ] , we can introduce a background gauge
field for one of them, which we can call @xmath . Then, as reviewed in §
2.3 , the @xmath -operation amounts to regarding this field as
dynamical, while at the same time introducing a coupling to another
background field @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can introduce yet another background gauge field @xmath for the
second global symmetry and perform @xmath -operations on @xmath and
@xmath such that the action becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we define @xmath and @xmath and rewrite ( 3.2.13 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We use the @xmath -operation to make @xmath dynamical and couple it to
@xmath . After integrating by parts the added term one obtains

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that now the path integral is taken with respect to @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath only appears linearly, its
functional integral gives rise to a delta functional setting @xmath and
the action reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Integrating by parts yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The functional integral with respect to @xmath gives rise to a delta
functional setting @xmath , which leads to an action of the precise form
( 3.2.11 ). We have therefore been able to establish a connection
between a theory where the gauge group is @xmath , and whose action is
@xmath , and the original @xmath theory, whose action is given by @xmath
, via repeated action with the @xmath -operation.

More generally, the whole of @xmath will act on the boundary conditions
for the bulk gauge fields, leading in general to an infinite orbit of
CFTs for each @xmath gauge symmetry in AdS @xmath . This is a rich
structure that deserves considerable further investigation. In the
following, however, we will content ourselves to study the particular
choice of boundary conditions described by the @xmath theory. Since the
dual to the @xmath operation is the exchange of the @xmath boundary
conditions, we expect the gravity dual to the @xmath theory to still be
AdS @xmath , but with an appropriate choice of boundary conditions. In
turn, these boundary conditions allow for the existence of the
electrically charged M5 branes which we used to identify the symmetries.
These M5 branes would not be allowed in the quantization @xmath , which
in turn would be dual to a CFT where the corresponding @xmath factors
would remain gauged. In agreement, the dual operators which we will
propose below would not be gauge-invariant in that case.

Let us now consider the effect of the @xmath gauge group on the
construction of the moduli space. The diagonalization of the @xmath
auxiliary fields in the equations defining the moduli space ( 3.1.2 )
relies on the non-Abelian part of the gauge symmetry, and therefore it
applies even if we consider ungauging some of the diagonal @xmath
factors. More crucially, in order to obtain the correct four-fold moduli
space we needed the @xmath piece ( 3.1.3 ) of the CS action so that,
upon dualizing the @xmath field, the dual scalar @xmath is gauge-fixed
via gauge transformations of @xmath . Thus provided we leave @xmath and
@xmath gauged, with the same CS action, all of this discussion is
unaffected if we ungauge the remaining @xmath , @xmath .
Correspondingly, we will still have the 8 gauge-invariants ( 3.2.8 ),
which will give rise to the same 9 equations defining @xmath as a
non-complete intersection “mesonic” moduli space. The remarks on the
non-Abelian chiral ring elements spanned by ( 3.2.10 ) are also
unchanged. However, with only a @xmath gauge symmetry we also have
additional chiral primary operators, charged under the now global @xmath
, @xmath . Indeed, we have the following “baryonic” type operators:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In particular, for the six fields in the quiver there is a canonical set
of six baryonic operators given by determinants of these fields, dressed
by appropriate powers of the disorder operators @xmath to obtain
gauge-invariants under @xmath . These operators are in 1-1
correspondence with the toric divisors in the geometry. This is
precisely the desired mapping between baryonic operators in the field
theory and M5 branes wrapping such toric sub-manifolds, with one M5
brane state for each divisor. Indeed, the charges of these operators
under the two baryonic @xmath s are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These are precisely the charges of M5 branes, wrapped on the
five-manifolds corresponding to the divisors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
under the two @xmath symmetries in @xmath . Indeed, recall that the two
two-cycles in @xmath may be taken to be the anti-diagonal @xmath s in
two factors of @xmath , at @xmath . Let us choose these to be the
anti-diagonal in the first and third factor, and second and first
factor, respectively. The charge of an M5 brane wrapped on a five-cycle
@xmath under each @xmath is then the intersection number of @xmath with
each corresponding two-cycle. Thus with this basis choice, the charges
of the operator associated to an M5 brane wrapped on the base of one of
the six toric divisors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are precisely those
listed in the above table.

Being chiral primary, the conformal dimensions of these operators are
given by @xmath , @xmath being the R-charge of the field @xmath . The
conformal dimension of an M5 brane wrapping a supersymmetric five-cycle
@xmath is given by the general formula [ 77 ] @xmath . These volumes are
easily computed for the @xmath metric ( 2.1.8 ): @xmath , @xmath , where
@xmath is any of the 6 toric five-cycles. From this one obtains @xmath
in each case, giving conformal dimensions @xmath for each field. With
this R-charge assignment we see that the superpotential ( 3.2.6 ) has
R-charge 2, precisely as it must at a superconformal fixed point.
Indeed, the converse argument was applied in [ 14 ] to obtain this
R-charge assignment. We thus regard this as further evidence in support
of our claim in this section, as well as further support for these
theories as candidate SCFT duals to AdS @xmath .

#### 3.3 QCS theories dual to isolated toric Calabi-Yau four-fold
singularities

We would like to apply the preceding discussion to more general @xmath
CS-matter theories dual to M2 branes probing CY four-fold cones. With
the exception of @xmath , the apex of the cone always corresponds to a
singular point @xmath in the toric variety. An important question is
whether this is an isolated singular point, or whether there are other
singular loci that intersect it. In the former case, @xmath where @xmath
is a smooth Sasakian seven-manifold.

As was discussed in § 2.3.2 , an affine toric four-fold variety is
specified by a polyhedral cone @xmath . The condition for the singular
point @xmath to be isolated is precisely the condition that @xmath is
good , in the sense of [ 49 ] . This condition may be stated as follows.
Let @xmath be a face of the cone, and let @xmath be the normals to the
set of supporting hyperplanes meeting at the face @xmath . Then the
singularity is isolated if and only if for every face @xmath the @xmath
may be extended to a @xmath -basis for @xmath . In particular, this
means that necessarily @xmath . This translates into the following
condition on the toric diagram @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These are necessary and sufficient for the “link” @xmath to be a smooth
manifold. It was proven recently in [ 74 ] that all such toric Sasakian
manifolds admit a unique Sasaki-Einstein metric compatible with the
complex structure of the cone.

An additional ingredient is the possible presence of vanishing
six-cycles at the tip of the cone. In terms of the toric data, these
six-cycles are signalled by internal lattice points in the toric
diagram. These codimension two cycles, in very much the same spirit as
their four-cycle Type IIB counterparts (these will be discussed in § II
), represent a further degree of complexity. We postpone the analysis of
geometries with exceptional six-cycles to § 4.5 .

We want to study such isolated CY singularities without vanishing
six-cycles in more detail in this section, in particular classifying the
singularities. In the cases where a Lagrangian description of the M2
brane theory exists, it turns out that for all these cases one can
construct an appropriate toric superpotential, so that there is a toric
gauge theory which realizes at the Abelian level the minimal GLSM. This
toric gauge theory has @xmath gauge group factors, and can be promoted
to have @xmath gauge groups. Such quiver Chern-Simons theories have been
considered in the past in [ 7 , 27 , 1 ] .

We would like to generalize our proposal to this simplest class of
isolated singularities with no vanishing six-cycles. Indeed, we expect
that a similar sequence of @xmath and @xmath operations amounts to
ungauging of precisely @xmath @xmath factors. In very much the same
spirit as in the @xmath example, this should correspond to a particular
choice of boundary conditions in the dual AdS @xmath . Furthermore, we
conjecture the gauge group to be @xmath , the two @xmath factors being
those corresponding to the @xmath and @xmath gauge fields. In this way
we are naturally left with @xmath global @xmath symmetries which exactly
correspond to the @xmath expected @xmath baryonic symmetries.
Furthermore, the M5 branes would be naturally identified with the
corresponding baryonic operators, constructed in a similar manner as in
the @xmath example.

##### 3.3.1 The number of gauge nodes in the dual QCS theories

Recall that, as explained in § 2.3.2 , the @xmath vectors define an
affine toric CY four-fold. This definition is unique up to a unimodular
transformation @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . The vectors @xmath may
be written as @xmath for an appropriate choice of basis, where @xmath
are the vertices of the three-dimensional toric diagram. It is
convenient to define the @xmath matrix that its columns are the @xmath
vectors.

We will be interested in singularities with no vanishing six-cycles. We
therefore demand, in addition to the two conditions in ( 3.3 ), that no
lattice points appear inside the polytope. These toric diagrams are
known as lattice-free polytopes. Such lattice-free polytopes in three
dimensions are characterized by the fact that they have width one (see
for example [ 94 ] and references therein). This is sometimes referred
to as Howe’s theorem, and is translated into the fact that the vertices
of any lattice-free polytope are sitting in adjacent planes, i.e. two
lattice planes with no lattice points inbetween. These planes can be
chosen to be @xmath and @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 If there are more vertices in one
plane we choose it to be the @xmath plane without loss of generality. .

We want to show that for seven-dimensional simply-connected toric
Sasakian manifolds the number of gauge fields of the dual theory can be
read from the toric diagram. To show this, we refer to the results of [
53 ] , from which we learn that the first and second homotopy groups of
a toric Sasakian manifold @xmath can be read straightforwardly from the
toric diagram. The results for CY four-folds are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the span over @xmath of the space of @xmath external
vertices of the toric diagram. According to the Hurewicz Theorem @xmath
whenever @xmath is trivial. Therefore we see from ( 3.3.20 ) that for
simply-connected Sasakian manifolds @xmath , which is also the number of
gauge groups in the minimal GLSM describing this geometry. This
immediately suggests that the number of gauge nodes of the corresponding
field theory, in the case that the latter is identified with the minimal
GLSM, is @xmath . The two additional gauge nodes correspond to the
@xmath s which are not quotiented by in forming the moduli space. The
identification with the minimal GLSM is expected since the moduli are
purely geometric in the type of singularities that we consider. This is
as opposed, for example, to the types of cases that will be considered
in § II , in which additional NS-NS B-field and R-R two-form moduli
should be added.

Note from ( 3.3.20 ) that @xmath is simply-connected if and only if the
external vertices span @xmath . We want to show that any lattice-free
three-dimensional toric diagram with more than four vertices corresponds
to a simply-connected Sasakian manifold. Let us consider

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For polytopes with more than four vertices, three of the vertices must
be co-planar. Thus the matrix that describes four of the vertices is
@xmath in ( 3.3.21 ), where each column corresponds to a vertex (the
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath coordinates correspond to the second, third
and fourth rows, respectively). It is easy to see that by an @xmath
transformation @xmath can be brought into @xmath in ( 3.3.21 ). To see
that the matrices @xmath and @xmath are related by an @xmath
transformation one should show that @xmath is equal to one. The
denominator is just the area of the parallelogram made up of two
identical triangles defined by the first three columns in @xmath . The
area of this triangle is @xmath as this is the condition for a
lattice-free triangle in two dimensions. Thus indeed @xmath .

The four vertices described by @xmath span @xmath . Therefore any
three-dimensional lattice-free polytope with more than four vertices
corresponds to a simply-connected Sasakian seven-manifold. This is not
always true for diagrams with four vertices, since in this case each
plane can contain two points.

##### 3.3.2 Complete classification of the singularities

To start our analysis we note that lattice-free polytopes with four
vertices correspond to a type orbifold singularity that has been
discussed intensively in the literature (see e.g. Section 3.1 in [ 97 ]
). This is a supersymmetric @xmath orbifold corresponding to an isolated
singularity that cannot be resolved, with the orbifold weights in this
case being @xmath with @xmath . As already noted in [ 22 ] , if @xmath ,
for any choice of @xmath isometry to reduce on, one can show that @xmath
reduces in Type IIA to a space with orbifold singularities. It was
suggested in [ 22 ] that smooth AdS @xmath backgrounds that reduce to
singular spaces are dual to field theories with no Lagrangian
description. This suggestion is consistent with the results of [ 60 ]
that show that the matter sector, in the quiver theories that are dual
to the orbifold spaces discussed above, appears to have no Lagrangian
description. Thus we are left with the ABJM orbifolds, obtained by
taking @xmath , for which there are of course already field theory
candidates.

We now continue with the classification of diagrams with five vertices.
Recall that we have shown that the first four vertices are described by
@xmath . Since the fifth vertex should be in the @xmath plane, to
prevent a face with four vertices, it can be written as @xmath with
@xmath without loss of generality ⁵ ⁵ 5 As can be easily seen from (
3.3.24 ), toric diagrams with triangular faces obtained by picking other
values of @xmath and @xmath are related by @xmath transformations. . The
only way to break the lattice-free condition would be if there were
points between @xmath and @xmath . Thus we have to require @xmath . This
concludes the classification of polytopes with five vertices. There are
no additional @xmath transformations that connect between diagrams in
this set; as we show later, the corresponding GLSM charge matrix that
describes this toric diagram is unique for any choice of @xmath and
@xmath .

For toric diagrams with six vertices one needs to add to @xmath two
columns @xmath and @xmath . The triangle in the @xmath plane will be
lattice-free if its area is @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can study first the cases in which there are four co-planar points.
For these diagrams we can always set @xmath by an @xmath transformation.
From ( 3.3.22 ) we get @xmath and thus @xmath to prevent a rectangular
face. One can easily show that @xmath under an @xmath transformation,
thus we can consider just @xmath .

To complete our classification of toric diagrams with six nodes let us
treat the toric diagrams with no four co-planar points. Thus @xmath and
an @xmath transformation can be used to set @xmath . In addition, the
following cases @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are subtracted. From ( 3.3.22
) we see that @xmath and thus @xmath and @xmath . Using an @xmath
transformation one can show that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

thus we can always take @xmath . So to summarize, toric diagrams with no
four co-planar points are described by the left matrix in ( 3.3.23 ),
for @xmath that satisfy ( 3.3.22 ) with @xmath , @xmath and excluding
the cases in which @xmath or @xmath . This concludes our classification
of diagrams with six vertices.

Six vertices is also the maximal number since, otherwise, it is not
possible to arrange the vertices in two adjacent planes with the
constraint that all faces are triangular.

##### 3.3.3 Candidate duals

We continue now with a discussion of the geometries that correspond to
the polytopes obtained above. Recall that, given a toric diagram, one
can recover the corresponding CY four-fold via Delzant’s construction.
In physics terms, this would be called a GLSM description of the
four-fold. Let us discuss the toric diagrams with five vertices
described above. The GLSM charge matrix can be computed by taking the
null-space of the @xmath matrix, obtaining

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since the GLSM charge matrix contains one gauge group, we find that the
corresponding quiver should have three nodes. However, it is not
possible to find a QCS field theory for every value of @xmath and @xmath
. First, note that there are no zero entries in @xmath , therefore there
should be no adjoint fields in the quiver. The most general way to
construct a quiver with three nodes and five fields with no adjoints,
such that there is an equal number of in-going and out-going arrows at
each node, is given in Figure 3.2 (a).

This quiver was also discussed in [ 15 ] . Since we are interested in
field theories which reproduce the minimal GLSM, we must have a toric
superpotential which vanishes in the Abelian case. The natural candidate
is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the usual alternating symbol.

In this theory the only contribution to the GLSM matrix comes from the
D-term, which in this case reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that two of the entries are equal while in general there are no
equal entries in @xmath . Therefore the only hope to reproduce @xmath
(up to an overall minus sign) is to choose @xmath . Substituting this
back into @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Obviously we can reproduce @xmath only for @xmath or @xmath . For other
values, the geometries are not captured by the quiver that we have
written. Indeed, it seems that the AdS @xmath spaces, where @xmath is
the base of the corresponding isolated CY singularity, reduce in Type
IIA to singular spaces, for any choice of @xmath isometry on @xmath .
Thus the corresponding M2 brane theories apparently do not admit a
Lagrangian description, according to [ 22 ] .

The toric diagram with six nodes that contains internal rectangular face
describes the moduli space of the field theory described by the quiver
in Figure 3.2 (b), which was also discussed in [ 15 ] , with the
superpotential given in ( 3.2.6 ) and @xmath . Indeed, the @xmath field
theory that we study is the special case in which @xmath . The other
toric diagrams with six nodes seem not to admit a Lagrangian
description.

### Chapter 4 Gravity duals of baryonic symmetry-breaking

In the rest of this part we study the quantization in AdS @xmath which
is more closely analogous to the case in Type IIB string theory, in
which the @xmath @xmath s in the field theories are ungauged. As we have
argued, in this theory M5 branes wrapped on supersymmetric cycles in
@xmath should appear as chiral primary baryonic-type operators in the
dual SCFT. Indeed, at least for toric theories with appropriate smooth
supergravity horizons @xmath we expect the dual SCFT to be described by
a QCS theory with gauge group @xmath . The M5 brane states are then the
usual gauge-invariant determinant-like operators in these theories, as
we discussed in detail for the @xmath theory in the previous chapter.

We may then study the gravity duals to vacua in which the @xmath global
@xmath s are (spontaneously) broken. On general grounds, these should
correspond to supergravity solutions constructed from resolutions of the
corresponding cone over @xmath . The baryonic operators are charged
under the global baryonic symmetries, and vacua in which these operators
obtain a VEV lead to spontaneous symmetry-breaking. By giving this VEV
we pick a point in the moduli space of the theory, which at the same
time introduces a scale and thus an RG flow, whose endpoint will be a
different SCFT. The supergravity dual of this RG flow was first
discussed in the Type IIB context by Klebanov-Witten [ 43 ] .

More generally, different choices of boundary conditions will imply that
some, or all, of the M5 brane states considered here are absent. It is
then clearly very interesting to ask what is the dual field theory
interpretation of these gravity backgrounds in such situations. Again,
we leave this for future work.

#### 4.1 Baryonic symmetry-breaking in the @xmath theory

In this section we begin by discussing in detail the baryonic
symmetry-breaking for the case of @xmath . In the next section we
describe how to generalize this discussion for general CY four-fold
singularities. In particular, we will obtain a general formula for M5
brane condensates, or indeed more generally still a formula for the
on-shell action of a wrapped brane in a warped CY background.
Essentially this formula appeared in [ 79 ] , where it was checked in
some explicit examples. Here we provide a general proof of this formula.

##### 4.1.1 Resolutions of @xmath

In this section we consider the warped resolved gravity backgrounds for
@xmath . We begin by discussing this in the context of the GLSM, and
then proceed to construct corresponding explicit supergravity solutions.

###### 4.1.1.1 Algebraic analysis

The toric singularity @xmath may be described by a GLSM with six fields,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and gauge group @xmath . This is
also the same as the Abelian QCS theory presented in § 3 , but without
the CS terms. The charge matrix is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The singular cone @xmath is the moduli space of this GLSM where the FI
parameters @xmath are both zero. However, more generally we may allow
@xmath , leading to different (partial) resolutions of the singularity.
In fact since there are no internal points in the toric diagram in
Figure 4.1 , this GLSM in fact describes all possible (partial)
resolutions of the singular cone.

It is straightforward to analyse the various cases. Suppose first that
@xmath are both positive. We may write the two D-terms of the GLSM as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In particular, for @xmath we obtain @xmath where the Kähler class of
each factor is proportional to @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Here
@xmath and @xmath may be thought of as homogeneous coordinates on the
@xmath s. Altogether, this describes the total space of the bundle
@xmath , with @xmath the two fibre coordinates on the @xmath fibres.

Suppose instead that @xmath . We may then rewrite the D-terms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Provided also @xmath , we hence obtain precisely the same geometry as
when @xmath , but with the @xmath zero section now parametrized by
@xmath and @xmath and with Kähler classes proportional to @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. There is a similar situation with @xmath and
@xmath .

Hence in total there are three different resolutions of @xmath ,
corresponding to choosing which of the three @xmath s in @xmath
collapses at the zero section in @xmath . We label these three @xmath s
as @xmath , @xmath , which in @xmath are parametrized by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , respectively. This is shown in Figure 4.1 , which is known
more generally as the Gel fand-Kapranov-Zelevinsky (GKZ) fan . Notice
there is a @xmath permutation symmetry of the three @xmath s in @xmath
and the three different resolutions are permuted by this symmetry.

The boundary edges between the regions correspond to collapsing another
of the @xmath s, leading only to a partial resolution of the
singularity. Thus, for example, take @xmath but @xmath . The D-terms are
now

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The second line describes the conifold singularity, which is then fibred
over a @xmath , parametrized by the @xmath , of Kähler class @xmath .

###### 4.1.1.2 Supergravity analysis

For each of the resolutions of @xmath described above there is a
corresponding Ricci-flat Kähler metric that is asymptotic to the cone
metric over @xmath . More precisely, there is a unique such metric for
each choice of Kähler class, or equivalently FI parameter @xmath . As we
shall discuss later in this section, this is guaranteed by a general
theorem that has only just been proven in the mathematics literature.
However, for @xmath these metrics may in fact be written down
explicitly. Denoting the (partially) resolved CY generically by @xmath ,
the CY metrics are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.5)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath and @xmath are arbitrary constants, and we have also defined

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One easily sees that at large @xmath the metric approaches the cone over
the @xmath metric ( 2.1.8 ). This way of writing the resolved metric
breaks the @xmath symmetry, since it singles out the @xmath parametrized
by @xmath as that collapsing at @xmath . Here we have an exceptional
@xmath , parametrized by @xmath , @xmath , with Kähler classes
proportional to @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Thus setting @xmath ,
or @xmath , leads to a partial resolution with a residual @xmath family
of conifold singularities at @xmath . We shall examine this in more
detail below.

We are interested in studying supergravity backgrounds corresponding to
M2 branes localized on one of these resolutions of @xmath . We thus
consider the following ansatz for the background sourced by such M2
branes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the CY metric ( 4.1.5 ). If we place @xmath
spacetime-filling M2 branes at a point @xmath , we must then also solve
the equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for the warp factor @xmath . Here @xmath is the scalar Laplacian on
@xmath . Having the explicit form of the metric we can compute this
Laplacian and solve for the warp factor to obtain the full supergravity
solution. This is studied in detail in § B .

In the remainder of this subsection let us analyse the simplified case
in which we partially resolve the cone, setting @xmath and @xmath . This
corresponds to one of the boundary lines in the GKZ fan in Figure 4.1 ,
with the point on the boundary @xmath labelled by the metric parameter
@xmath . Here one can solve explicitly for the warp factor in the case
where we put the @xmath M2 branes at the north pole of the exceptional
@xmath parametrized by @xmath ; this is the point with coordinates
@xmath . Notice the choice of north pole is here without loss of
generality, due to the @xmath isometry acting on the third copy of
@xmath . We denote the corresponding warp factor in this case as simply
@xmath . As shown in § B.3 , @xmath is then given explicitly in terms of
hypergeometric functions by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the @xmath th Legendre polynomial,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the normalization factor @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In the field theory this solution corresponds to breaking one
combination of the two global @xmath baryonic symmetries, rather than
both of them. This will become clear in the next section. The resolution
of the cone can be interpreted in terms of giving an expectation value
to a certain operator @xmath in the field theory. This operator is
contained in the same multiplet as the current that generates the broken
baryonic symmetry, and couples to the corresponding @xmath gauge field
in AdS @xmath . Since a conserved current has no anomalous dimension,
the dimension of @xmath is uncorrected in going from the classical
description to supergravity [ 43 ] . According to the general AdS/CFT
prescription [ 43 ] , the VEV of the operator @xmath is dual to the
sub-leading correction to the warp factor. For large @xmath we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Expanding the sum we then have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In terms of the AdS @xmath coordinate @xmath we have that the leading
correction is of order @xmath , which indicates that the dual operator
@xmath is dimension one. This is precisely the expected result, since
this operator sits in the same supermultiplet as the broken baryonic
current, and thus has a protected dimension of one. Furthermore, its VEV
is proportional to @xmath , the metric resolution parameter, which
reflects the fact that in the conical (AdS) limit in which @xmath this
baryonic current is not broken, and as such @xmath .

The moduli space of the field theory in the new IR is equivalent to the
geometry close to the branes. Recall that we placed the @xmath M2 branes
at the north pole @xmath of the exceptional @xmath sphere at @xmath .
Defining @xmath and introducing the new radial variables @xmath , @xmath
, the geometry close to the branes becomes to leading order

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.16)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

which is precisely the Ricci-flat Kähler metric of @xmath , in
accordance with the discussion in the previous subsection.

##### 4.1.2 Higgsing the @xmath field theory

We have argued that the warped resolved supergravity solutions described
in the previous section are dual to spontaneous symmetry-breaking in the
SCFT in which the M5 brane states appear as baryonic-type operators. Let
us study this in more detail in the field theory described in § 3 . In
this SCFT the symmetries @xmath and @xmath in ( 3.2.7 ) are global,
rather than gauge, symmetries, with the corresponding conserved currents
coupling to the baryonic @xmath gauge fields in AdS @xmath . By
inspection of this charge matrix we conclude that it is possible to give
a VEV to the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath fields. These VEVs then break
the corresponding baryonic @xmath symmetries. In particular, by giving a
VEV to any pair of fields ( @xmath s, @xmath s or @xmath s) we break
only one particular @xmath baryonic symmetry, leaving another
combination unbroken. In this section we will examine the resulting
Higgsings of the gauge theory obtained by giving VEVs to different pairs
of fields, and compare with the gravity results of the previous section.

###### 4.1.2.1 Higgsing @xmath

As explained in § 2 , at each of the two poles for each copy of @xmath
in the Kähler-Einstein base of @xmath , there is a supersymmetric
five-cycle that may be wrapped by an M5 brane. Altogether these are six
M5 brane states, corresponding to the toric divisors of @xmath . Each
pair are acted on by one of the @xmath factors in the isometry group
@xmath , rotating one into the other. Quantizing the BPS particles in
AdS @xmath one obtains dual baryonic-type operators given by ( 3.2.18 ).
In particular, consider the M5 branes that sit at a point on the copy of
@xmath with coordinates @xmath . In the next section we will compute the
VEV of these M5 brane operators in the partially resolved gravity
background described by ( 4.1.10 ), showing that the baryonic operator
dual to the M5 brane at @xmath vanishes, while that at the opposite pole
@xmath is non-zero and proportional to the resolution parameter @xmath
(see equation ( 4.1.26 )). Considering the @xmath fields in the field
theory this corresponds to the fact that, after breaking the baryonic
symmetry by giving diagonal VEVs to these fields, it is possible to use
the @xmath flavour symmetry to find one combination of @xmath fields
with zero VEV, and an orthogonal combination with non-vanishing VEV. Let
us assume for example that @xmath and @xmath . Thus only one baryonic
operator in ( 3.2.18 ) has non-vanishing VEV, namely ¹ ¹ 1 As
anticipated in § 3 , at the IR superconformal fixed point the dimensions
of the chiral fields are expected to be different from the free field
fixed point. That is why generically the VEV of the baryonic operator is
@xmath . @xmath . This situation was analyzed in [ 28 ] , where it was
shown that the effective field theory in the IR has CS quiver

[]

with superpotential

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As shown in [ 28 ] , the moduli space of this theory is indeed @xmath .
This is of course expected from the gravity analysis of equation (
4.1.16 ). Any other VEV for the @xmath fields corresponds to placing the
M2 branes on @xmath -equivalent points on the blown-up @xmath , and
therefore results in the same near horizon geometry.

The manifest symmetry exhibited by the Lagrangian of the @xmath field
theory is @xmath , which is only a subgroup of the full @xmath symmetry
which is expected from the isometry of the @xmath manifold. Therefore,
in contrast to the situation with the @xmath fields, we see that
different VEVs for the pairs of @xmath or @xmath fields result in
different theories in the IR. Giving a non-vanishing VEV to @xmath and
@xmath , for example, results in the CS quiver

[]

with superpotential

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while when the VEV of only one field is non-vanishing we instead obtain
the CS quiver

[]

with superpotential

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Of course, both cases correspond geometrically to blowing up the same
@xmath , as can be seen from the explicit construction of the field
theory moduli space. However, recall that the position of the M2 branes
depends on the VEVs of @xmath and @xmath . While in the gravity picture
all locations on the exceptional @xmath are @xmath -equivalent, in the
field theory since only part of the global symmetry is manifest we
obtain different theories for different VEVs. The supergravity analysis
hence suggests that the theories obtained in the IR above are dual.
Indeed, one can check that the moduli spaces of these theories are the
same, the details appearing in [ 19 ] .

The QCS theory for @xmath in ( 4.1.18 ) has zero CS levels, and there is
therefore no tunable coupling parameter in this theory. The reason for
that can be seen from the brane construction. After blowing up the cone
to the partial resolution and placing the stack of M2 branes at a
residual singular point on the exceptional @xmath , the tangent cone
geometry at this point is @xmath . In the field theory the @xmath that
rotates the copy of @xmath corresponds to the M-theory circle. Shrinking
the size of this circle in the M-theory supergravity solution
corresponds to a Type IIA limit describing a black D2 brane solution
with no smooth near horizon. This Type IIA background is not an
appropriate description of the system as the string coupling close to
the branes diverges and therefore one has to use the M-theory
description. The lack of tunable coupling in the field theory is due to
the fact that no such coupling exists in M-theory. On the other hand, in
the remaining two field theories ( 4.1.17 ), ( 4.1.19 ) for @xmath
described in this section the M-theory circle involves a @xmath that
acts also on @xmath ² ² 2 The M-theory circle can be deduced by
computing the @xmath orbifold action on the moduli space in each case.
and a weak coupling limit in the field theory does exist. In this limit
the field theory can be treated classically and therefore a Lagrangian
description can be found. These issues will be discussed in more detail
in § 4.4 .

As a final comment in this section, notice that in general we will have
an infinite set of CFTs dual to the @xmath geometry, with different
boundary conditions on the baryonic gauge fields ( 2.3.10 ) in AdS
@xmath . From our earlier discussion, these will have the same QCS
theories in the @xmath sector, but different @xmath sectors. In
particular, in general different combinations of the diagonal @xmath s
in @xmath may be gauged, and with different @xmath CS levels from the
levels @xmath of the @xmath factors. These @xmath sectors will in
general behave differently under Higgsing. In particular, a global
@xmath can be spontaneously broken, while a gauged @xmath can be
Higgsed. It will be interesting to investigate this general structure in
both the field theory and dual supergravity solutions, although we leave
this for future work, focusing instead on the @xmath theory.

##### 4.1.3 Baryonic condensates and M5 branes in the @xmath solution

In the previous section we discussed the RG flow triggered by giving a
VEV to one of the fields, and hence baryonic operators, in the @xmath
theory with gauge group @xmath . In this section we calculate the VEV of
this baryonic operator in the corresponding gravity solution described
by ( 4.1.10 ). In order to do this we follow the analogous calculation
in the Type IIB context, discussed in [ 66 , 70 ] . In this
prescription, to determine the VEV of a baryonic operator dual to an M5
brane wrapped on a five-submanifold @xmath in the (partially) resolved
supergravity background, we compute the Euclidean action of an M5 brane
which wraps a minimal six-dimensional manifold in @xmath which at large
@xmath asymptotes to the cone over @xmath . In this section we present
an explicit example, although later we will present a general formula
for such VEVs.

Again, we focus on the partially resolved background described by (
4.1.10 ). We are interested in computing the VEV of the operator that
was carrying charge under the baryonic symmetry before it was broken. As
described in § 2 , this symmetry originates on the supergravity side in
a mode ( 2.3.10 ) of the six-form potential @xmath along a five-cycle in
the Sasaki-Einstein manifold @xmath . Consider a Euclidean M5 brane that
is wrapped on the six-manifold at a fixed point in the @xmath copy of
@xmath , and is coordinatized by @xmath in the partial resolution of
@xmath . This six-manifold is a divisor in the partially resolved
background, and hence this wrapped M5 brane world-volume is a calibrated
submanifold. The M5 brane carries charge under the @xmath gauge field in
@xmath that descends from the corresponding harmonic five-form in @xmath
. We calculate the Euclidean action of this wrapped M5 brane up to a
radial cut-off @xmath , identifying @xmath with the classical field dual
to the baryonic operator, as in [ 70 ] . Explicitly, the action is given
by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the M5 brane tension, the warp factor @xmath is given by
( 4.1.10 ), and @xmath is the determinant of the metric induced on the
M5 brane world-volume. This induced metric is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.21)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where recall that @xmath is given by ( 4.1.6 ). A straightforward
calculation hence gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting these results into ( 4.1.20 ) then gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Let us evaluate the integrals separately. The first diverges in the
absence of the cut-off @xmath , since

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The second integral is finite and can be calculated straightforwardly:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Recall here that @xmath is given by ( 4.1.13 ). Substituting these
results into ( 4.1.23 ) then gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The interpretation of this result is along the same lines as the
discussion in the case of the conifold in [ 70 ] . We will therefore
keep our discussion brief and refer the reader to [ 70 ] for further
details. Since the AdS @xmath radial coordinate is related to @xmath as
@xmath , we see that the operator dimension is @xmath , as anticipated
by our field theory discussion. Indeed, this provides a non-trivial
check of the R-charge assignment required for the theory to have an IR
superconformal fixed point, supporting the conjecture that the theory is
indeed dual to M2 branes moving in @xmath .

For the remaining M5 branes, wrapped on Euclidean six-submanifolds at a
point in either the @xmath or @xmath copies of @xmath , we note that
@xmath . This is simply because the M5 brane world-volumes intersect the
M2 brane stack on the exceptional @xmath parametrized by @xmath in these
cases, and hence the world-volume action ( 4.1.20 ) is logarithmically
divergent near to the M2 branes – for further discussion of this in the
D3 brane case, see [ 66 ] . Thus the dual gravity analysis of the
partially resolved supergravity solution is in perfect agreement with
the proposed @xmath field theory, at least with the boundary conditions
we study in this section.

##### 4.1.4 Wrapped branes and the phase of the condensate

In the resolved, or partially resolved, geometry one can consider
various different kinds of stable wrapped branes in the @xmath region.
These shed further light on the physical interpretation of the
supergravity solutions.

In the fully resolved case with @xmath and @xmath one could consider an
M5 brane wrapping the exceptional @xmath at @xmath and filling the
spacetime directions @xmath , @xmath . This is a domain wall in the
Minkowski three-space in ( 4.1.1.2 ). Its tension, given by the energy
of the probe brane, is @xmath . Notice that the warp factor cancels out
in this computation, and the brane remains of finite tension even if the
stack of M2 branes is placed at @xmath .

Of more interest for us is to consider an M2 brane wrapping an
exceptional @xmath , either in the resolved or partially resolved
background. In the former case notice there are homologically two
choices of such @xmath inside @xmath at @xmath . Again, in either case
this is a calibrated cycle. This leads to a point particle in the
Minkowski three-space, moving along the time direction @xmath , whose
mass is @xmath . Again, its energy remains finite even when the M2 brane
stack is at @xmath .

This M2 brane sources three-form fluctuations of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a two-form on the Ricci-flat Kähler manifold @xmath .
Demanding that @xmath is a massless gauge field in the Minkowski
three-space leads to the equations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the Hodge dual on @xmath . In particular @xmath is
closed and hence defines a cohomology class in @xmath ; we shall be
interested in the case where this class is Poincaré dual to the
two-cycle wrapped by the particle-like M2 brane. In three dimensions the
gauge field @xmath is dual to a periodic scalar, which can be identified
as the Goldstone boson of the spontaneous symmetry-breaking. Indeed, the
M2 particle is a magnetic source for this pseudoscalar. The pseudoscalar
modes will therefore have unit monodromy around a circle linking the M2
particle worldline. As in [ 71 ] , this Goldstone boson is expected to
appear as a phase, through the Wess-Zumino action of the Euclidean M5
brane, in the baryonic condensate. We shall see that this is indeed the
case. This wrapped M2 brane is the analogue of the global string that
was discussed in [ 71 ] for the conifold theory in Type IIB.

It thus remains to construct appropriate two-forms @xmath satisfying (
4.1.28 ) in the warped resolved backgrounds for @xmath . This will
occupy us for the remainder of this subsection. It will turn out to be
simpler to use the metric in the form given in [ 2 ] , which we
reproduce here for convenience:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.1.29)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The constants @xmath , @xmath are related to the constants @xmath in (
4.1.5 ) via @xmath , @xmath .

###### 4.1.4.1 Harmonic forms

It is convenient to introduce the following vielbein

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since with the M2 brane stack at @xmath the warp factor is then a
function of @xmath , it is natural to consider the following ansatz for
the two-form @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where now @xmath , and @xmath or @xmath . Since the corresponding @xmath
fluctuation in ( 4.1.27 ) couples to the M2 brane wrapped over the
@xmath at @xmath , @xmath should approach here the volume form of the
finite sized @xmath . On the other hand, as we will see later, in the
large @xmath region @xmath should asymptote to a harmonic two-form
@xmath on the singular cone.

The second equation in ( 4.1.28 ) implies that the @xmath must satisfy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.33)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

for @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.34)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

for @xmath . Note that @xmath and @xmath .

We have three equations for three functions @xmath , so we expect this
system to contain the desired solution for @xmath . We take the boundary
conditions to be @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, these
equations can be seen to arise from minimizing the action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With the boundary conditions above, one can check that @xmath is finite.
We shall give a more general argument for existence of this two-form
later in this section.

Going back to the original physical motivation, the warped harmonic form
@xmath allows one to construct a three-form fluctuation @xmath that
satisfies the linearized supergravity equations. The Hodge dual can be
written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

thus obtaining a local form for the six-form fluctuation. At very large
@xmath , @xmath can be approximated to leading order by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This form of the local potential couples to the baryonic M5 brane
through the Wess-Zumino term, thus reinforcing the identification of the
scalar @xmath as the phase of the baryonic condensate and Goldstone
boson. Furthermore, at large @xmath we can also write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We note the appearance of the volume form of the sub-manifold wrapped by
the baryonic M5 brane. By reducing the corresponding asymptotic @xmath
over the five-cycle one obtains the gauge field in the AdS @xmath space.
From the discussion in § 2.3.1 , and noticing that the AdS @xmath radial
coordinate is related to @xmath as @xmath , we obtain the appropriate
decay for a conserved current in three dimensions, and see that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 4.2 General warped resolved CY backgrounds

Much of our discussion of the resolved @xmath backgrounds can be
extended to general warped resolutions of CY cones. In this section we
describe what is known about such generalizations. In particular we
present a novel method for computing M5 brane condensates in such
backgrounds, or more generally the world-volume actions of branes in
warped CY geometries.

##### 4.2.1 Gravity backgrounds

As for the @xmath case we are interested in M-theory backgrounds of the
form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a Ricci-flat Kähler eight-manifold that is asymptotic to
a cone metric over some Sasaki-Einstein seven-manifold @xmath . Placing
@xmath spacetime-filling M2 branes at a point @xmath leads to the warp
factor equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath is the scalar Laplacian of @xmath acting on @xmath . Thus
@xmath is simply the Green’s function on @xmath . More generally, one
could pick different points @xmath , with @xmath M2 branes at @xmath ,
such that @xmath . Then @xmath will be a sum of Green’s functions,
weighted by @xmath . We shall regard this as an obvious generalization.
There are thus two steps involved in constructing such a solution:
choose a CY metric on @xmath , and then solve for the Green’s function.
If the latter is chosen so that it vanishes at infinity then the
supergravity solution ( 4.2.40 ) will be asymptotically AdS @xmath with
@xmath units of @xmath flux through @xmath .

If @xmath is a Sasaki-Einstein manifold then @xmath defines an isolated
singularity at the tip of the cone @xmath . We may then take a
resolution @xmath , which defines our manifold @xmath as a complex
manifold. The map @xmath is a biholomorphism of complex manifolds on the
complement of the singular point @xmath , so that in @xmath the singular
point is effectively replaced by a higher-dimensional locus, which is
called the exceptional set. We require that the holomorphic @xmath -form
on @xmath extends to a smooth holomorphic @xmath -form on @xmath . Such
resolutions are said to be crepant, and they are not always guaranteed
to exist, even for toric singularities. In the latter case one can
typically only partially resolve so that @xmath has at worst orbifold
singularities. Having chosen such an @xmath we must then find a CY
metric on @xmath that approaches the given cone metric asymptotically.
Fortunately, mathematicians have very recently proved that one can
always find such a metric. Essentially, this is a non-compact version of
Yau’s theorem with a “Dirichlet” boundary condition, where we have a
fixed Sasaki-Einstein metric at infinity on @xmath and ask to fill it in
with a Ricci-flat Kähler metric. There are a number of papers that have
developed this subject in recent years [ 80 , 81 , 82 , 83 , 84 , 85 ] ,
but the most recent [ 86 , 87 ] prove the strongest possible result:
that in each Kähler class in @xmath (see [ 85 ] ) there is a unique CY
metric that is asymptotic to a fixed given Sasaki-Einstein metric on
@xmath . Note this result assumes the existence of the Sasaki-Einstein
metric – it does not prove it.

The crepant (partial) resolutions of toric singularities are well
understood, being described by toric geometry and hence fans of
polyhedral cones. The extended Kähler cone for such resolutions is known
as the GKZ fan, or secondary fan. The fan is a collection of polyhedral
cones living in @xmath , glued together along their boundaries, such
that each cone corresponds to a particular choice of topology for @xmath
. Implicit here is the fact that @xmath is independent of which topology
for @xmath we choose. A point inside the polyhedral cone corresponding
to a given @xmath is a Kähler class on @xmath . The boundaries between
cones correspond to partial resolutions, where there are further
residual singularities, and there is a topology change as one crosses a
boundary from one cone into another. The GKZ fan for @xmath was
described in Figure 4.1 . If we combine this description with the above
existence results, we see that the GKZ fan is in fact classifying the
space of resolved asymptotically conical CY metrics.

Having chosen a particular resolution and Kähler class, hence metric, we
must then find the warp factor @xmath satisfying ( 4.2.41 ). This
amounts to finding the Green’s function on @xmath , and this always
exists and is unique using very general results in Riemannian geometry.
A general discussion in the Type IIB context may be found in [ 117 ] ,
and the comments there apply equally to the M-theory setting.

In the warped metric ( 4.2.40 ) the point @xmath is effectively sent to
infinity, and the geometry has two asymptotically AdS @xmath regions:
one near @xmath that is asymptotically AdS @xmath , and one near to the
point @xmath , which is asymptotically AdS @xmath . Here the tangent
space at @xmath is the cone @xmath . Thus if @xmath is a smooth point,
@xmath . For further discussion, see [ 117 , 66 ] . Denoting the
original Sasaki-Einstein seven-manifold as @xmath , the spacetime is
shown in Figure 4.2 .

The above discussion implies that we expect a supergravity solution to
exist for any choice of Higgsing in the field theory. Conversely, since
for any partial resolution we have a supergravity solution, there should
exist a field theory dual to this given by an appropriate Higgsing
pattern. It is important to notice that this discussion applies for zero
@xmath -flux on @xmath and @xmath . We will discuss the more involved
case in which @xmath -flux is included in the next section.

If one places the @xmath M2 branes at the same position @xmath , the
moduli space is naturally a copy of @xmath . The @xmath Kähler moduli
are naturally complexified by noting that @xmath by Poincaré duality,
and that this group classifies the periods of @xmath through six-cycles
in @xmath , which may either be closed or have a boundary five-cycle on
@xmath . More precisely, taking into account large gauge transformations
leads to the torus @xmath . Altogether this moduli space of supergravity
solutions should be matched to the full moduli space of the dual SCFT.
At least for toric @xmath one can prove quite generally via an exact
sequence that @xmath , where @xmath is also the number of irreducible
exceptional divisors in the resolution. In toric language, this is the
number of internal lattice points in the toric diagram. We shall discuss
such examples in § 4.5 : the presence of calibrated six-cycles is
expected to lead to M5 brane instanton corrections in these backgrounds.

##### 4.2.2 Harmonic two-forms

Recall we are also interested in fluctuations of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath leads to a massless gauge field in the Minkowski
three-space if

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For trivial warp factor @xmath this just says that @xmath is harmonic.
It is a general result that if we also impose that @xmath is @xmath
normalizable, or equivalently that @xmath has finite kinetic energy in
three dimensions, then such forms are guaranteed to exist and are in 1-1
correspondence with @xmath [ 88 ] . Thus there are always @xmath @xmath
normalizable harmonic two-forms @xmath in the unwarped case.

However, this case is not the physical case for applications to AdS/CFT.
Instead we should look for solutions to ( 4.2.43 ) where @xmath is the
Green’s function on @xmath . Again, fortunately there are mathematical
results that we may appeal to to guarantee existence of such forms.
These are again described in the Type IIB context in [ 66 ] . In the
warped case @xmath is harmonic with respect to the metric @xmath . This
manifold has an asymptotically conical end with boundary @xmath (or more
generally @xmath if the M2 brane stack is placed at a singular point
with horizon @xmath ), and an isolated conical singularity with horizon
metric @xmath . The number of @xmath harmonic two-forms on such a space
is in fact known, and is @xmath . To see this requires combining a
number of mathematical results that are described in [ 66 ] . In
particular, since @xmath there is a corresponding harmonic form, and
hence Goldstone mode, for each of the @xmath baryonic @xmath symmetries.
Indeed, these @xmath harmonic forms can be seen to asymptote to the
harmonic two-forms on @xmath at @xmath . Thus the analysis at the end of
§ 4.1.4 carries over in much more general backgrounds. We shall analyse
the asymptotics of the @xmath unwarped @xmath harmonic forms in more
detail in § 4.5 , where they will be given a very different
interpretation.

##### 4.2.3 Baryonic condensates: M5 branes in general warped geometries

As discussed in § 2.3 , M5 branes wrapped on five-manifolds @xmath lead,
with appropriate choice of quantization of the gauge fields in AdS
@xmath , to scalar operators in the dual SCFT that are charged under the
@xmath baryonic symmetry group. We have already described how to compute
the VEV of such an operator in the (partially) resolved @xmath
background. More generally one should compute the action of a Euclidean
M5 brane which is wrapped on a minimal six-submanifold @xmath with
boundary @xmath . Similar computations, in some specific examples, have
been performed in [ 79 ] . In this section we explain how this Euclidean
action may be computed exactly, in general, in the case where @xmath is
a divisor. This is essentially a technical computation that may be
skipped if the reader is not interested in the details: the final
formula is ( 4.2.66 ).

Let suppose that we are given a warped background ( 4.2.40 ), where
@xmath has an asymptotically conical CY metric and the warp factor
satisfying ( 4.2.41 ) is given, with a specific choice of point @xmath
where the stack of @xmath M2 branes are located. We would like to
compute

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath is the M5 brane tension, and the integrand is the
world-volume action (in the absence of a self-dual two-form). Thus
@xmath denotes the pull-back of the unwarped metric to the world-volume
@xmath . We also assume that @xmath is a divisor, in order to preserve
supersymmetry. Then @xmath is also minimal and the integral is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the Kähler form of the unwarped metric, pulled back
to @xmath .

Before beginning our computation, we note that on a Kähler manifold the
scalar Laplacian @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath , where @xmath is the complex structure tensor. The
contraction @xmath is then in local complex coordinates

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For simplicity we shall study the case in which @xmath is described
globally by the equation @xmath , where @xmath is a global holomorphic
function on @xmath . This means that the homology class of @xmath is
trivial, and hence in fact the wrapped M5 brane carries zero charge
under @xmath . The cases studied in [ 79 ] are of this form. More
generally, since @xmath is a complex divisor it defines an associated
holomorphic line bundle @xmath over @xmath . Then we may take @xmath to
be the zero set of a holomorphic section of @xmath , with a simple zero
along @xmath . To extend the computation below to this case would
require combining the argument we give here with the arguments in § 4.5
.

Thus, suppose that @xmath is a holomorphic function with a simple zero
along @xmath , and introduce the two-form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This shows that away from the locus @xmath , which is the divisor @xmath
, in fact @xmath . On the other hand, locally along @xmath we can write
@xmath where @xmath is a local coordinate normal to @xmath , and @xmath
, where @xmath are local complex coordinates along @xmath and @xmath has
no zero in this local chart. We may then write @xmath , and note that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is just the elementary statement that @xmath is the unit Green’s
function in dimension two (the local transverse space to @xmath ). Thus
we have shown that @xmath is zero away from @xmath , and is a unit delta
function supported along @xmath .

Using these properties of @xmath we may hence write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note in particular that @xmath is @xmath times the unit Green’s function
(with unit delta function source), i.e.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We then integrate by parts

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will deal with the boundary terms later, focusing for now on the
integrals over @xmath . First note that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

holds for any one-form @xmath . Using this we may write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2.54)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We then again integrate by parts

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where explicitly now

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In fact this boundary integral is divergent – a key physical point in
interpreting it holographically. For now let us deal with the integral
over @xmath in ( 4.2.55 ). Using ( 4.2.46 ) we may write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us turn now to the boundary terms. In order to render this finite,
we cut off the integral at some large @xmath , and write the boundary
integral as

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.2.59)
  -- -- -- ----------

We require that @xmath is asymptotically conical, so that at large
@xmath it approaches a cone over a compact five-manifold @xmath . In the
cone geometry, a conical divisor with trivial homology class is
specified as the zero set of a homogeneous function under @xmath . Thus
we take @xmath , where @xmath is homogeneous degree zero ( i.e. a
function on @xmath ) and the @xmath are terms that go to zero as @xmath
. Thus @xmath has asymptotic homogeneous degree @xmath . Now, the volume
form on @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath is the Kähler form on the cone over @xmath .
Asymptotically, @xmath . The @xmath follows since the leading correction
to the cone metric is a harmonic two-form on @xmath , which is down by a
factor of @xmath relative to the cone metric. We also have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Cf. ( 2.1.6 ). Thus the first term in ( 4.2.59 ) is convergent and gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note here that the function @xmath does not contribute to the integral
as it is independent of @xmath , and thus @xmath . On the other hand,
the second term in ( 4.2.59 ) is divergent, the leading divergent piece
being @xmath Provided the @xmath terms in @xmath and @xmath fall off as
@xmath , for some @xmath , then in fact this is the only divergence
(since any positive power of @xmath grows faster than @xmath ). There is
also a finite part, namely @xmath . However, the important point is that
this depends only on asymptotic data.

Let us interpret this divergence. Suppose that the Sasaki-Einstein
manifold @xmath is quasi-regular, meaning that it is a @xmath bundle
over a Kähler-Einstein orbifold @xmath . ³ ³ 3 In fact the irregular
case can be approximated arbitrarily closely by the quasi-regular case.
Then asymptotically @xmath is, in its dependence on @xmath , a
holomorphic section of @xmath for some integer @xmath , where @xmath
with @xmath being the orbifold Fano index of @xmath . Here @xmath
denotes the orbifold canonical bundle of @xmath , and @xmath is by
definition the largest integer so that the root @xmath is defined. It
follows that @xmath , where @xmath . The five-manifold @xmath is then
the total space of a @xmath bundle over an orbifold surface @xmath ,
with the Poincaré dual to @xmath being represented by @xmath . The
Kähler-Einstein condition on @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the Kähler form of @xmath .

Now, the conformal dimension of the operator dual to an M5 brane wrapped
on @xmath is given by the general formula @xmath . In the quasi-regular
case at hand, the length of the @xmath circle cancels in the numerator
and denominator and we can write this as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here in the last step we used the Kähler-Einstein condition ( 4.2.63 ).
Thus we have the general result that the divergent part of the integral
is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have changed to the usual AdS @xmath coordinate @xmath . Thus
we see that the divergent part of the integral is precisely such that we
can interpret its coefficient as the VEV of the operator @xmath in this
background. This coefficient is, from the above computations,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is an exact result for the VEV, or regularized exponential of the
M5 brane action, in terms of the defining function @xmath of the divisor
@xmath . The integral is understood in the limit @xmath as @xmath ,
which is convergent as the integrand is independent of @xmath in this
limit. Notice, in particular, that if one multiplies @xmath by a
constant, this constant drops out of the formula, as it should.

#### 4.3 Torsion @xmath-flux in warped resolved Calabi-Yau backgrounds

In this section we discuss the effect of adding torsion @xmath -flux to
the AdS background AdS @xmath , where @xmath is a Sasaki-Einstein
seven-manifold. We show that this has important implications on the
existence of warped resolved CY backgrounds.

##### 4.3.1 @xmath-flux and the supergravity dual of Higgsing

As was discussed in § 2.2 , for seven-dimensional Sasaki-Einstein
manifolds with non-trivial @xmath a flat torsion @xmath -flux can be
turned on without affecting the supergravity equations of motion, or the
supersymmetry of the background. This was first discussed in the context
of QCS theories for the ABJM theory in [ 10 ] , although here the
torsion in @xmath is due to the @xmath quotient, giving @xmath . More
generally there are examples in which the torsion @xmath -flux is not
associated to the CS level quotient by @xmath – for example, the @xmath
geometries discussed in detail in [ 29 ] .

Consider adding @xmath -flux to this background. As we discussed, to
preserve the AdS @xmath symmetry @xmath and supersymmetry, @xmath has to
be flat, and thus the different choices of @xmath -flux in the AdS
background are classified by the torsion cohomology class @xmath .

We wish to discuss the implications of turning on such torsion @xmath
-flux on the Higgsing of the field theory. As was explained in the
previous section, the dual supergravity solution to the RG flow induced
by the Higgsing has two boundaries: AdS @xmath and AdS @xmath . For zero
@xmath -flux on @xmath we expect a supergravity solution to exist for
any choice of Higgsing in the field theory. However, when we turn on
torsion @xmath -flux on @xmath the existence of such solution is not
guaranteed. For such solutions to exist we must be able to extend @xmath
over the (partial) resolution @xmath of the original cone @xmath in a
way that satisfies the appropriate supersymmetric equations of motion.

The key point here is that when @xmath on @xmath , we may obviously
extend this as @xmath on the partial resolution, while for non-trivial
torsion @xmath the process of completing the supergravity solution is
much more involved. There are two steps: first, it must be possible to
extend the cohomology class @xmath to a cohomology class ⁴ ⁴ 4 We assume
here that the membrane anomaly on @xmath is zero. This will be true in
the example that we shall study. The membrane anomaly on @xmath is
automatically zero, as it is zero on any oriented spin seven-manifold.
in @xmath , where we have defined @xmath , and @xmath is the isolated
singular point – a priori there might be topological obstructions to
this; second, if this is possible, we must choose a flux in this
cohomology class to satisfy the supersymmetry conditions [ 54 ] , which
require that @xmath must be primitive, so @xmath where @xmath is the
Kähler form, and have Hodge type @xmath with respect to the complex
structure (which implies it is self-dual).

This leads to two issues: (i) if the choice of @xmath -flux on @xmath
cannot be so extended then the supergravity solution does not exist ,
and therefore the SCFT dual to @xmath with this @xmath -flux cannot be
Higgsed to the partial resolution corresponding to @xmath , (ii) the
choice of @xmath -flux may not be unique, meaning that the SCFT should
be Higgsable to the partial resolution but with potentially more than
one choice of torsion @xmath -flux in @xmath . Indeed, notice that
choosing an extension of @xmath over @xmath immediately leads by
restriction to a choice of @xmath -flux in @xmath , and thus a torsion
@xmath -flux in the IR theory dual to AdS @xmath .

To conclude, one expects M2 brane QCS theories dual to torsion @xmath
-flux backgrounds to display different behaviour to those without @xmath
-flux – namely, one should see obstructions to Higgsings to certain
partial resolutions in theories with @xmath -flux. We shall investigate
this in detail in the remainder of this section for a particular
example, and show that this behaviour is indeed realized.

##### 4.3.2 @xmath: Gravity results

We now investigate the above discussion in detail in a particular
example: the toric CY cone @xmath [ 29 ] , the toric diagram of which is
presented in Figure 4.3 . Here the Sasaki-Einstein metric on @xmath is
known explicitly, and was constructed in [ 55 ] . The complex structure
of the cone singularity @xmath may be described as the affine
holomorphic quotient of @xmath by @xmath with charges @xmath . This is
of course the same complex structure induced by the Kähler quotient, at
moment map level zero, of @xmath by @xmath with the same charges. There
are precisely two (partial) CY resolutions of this singularity, given by
taking the moment map level @xmath or @xmath .

To describe these partial resolutions, let @xmath denote coordinates on
@xmath . The moment map/GLSM D-term equation is then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath this describes the smooth CY four-fold @xmath total space of
@xmath . The zero-section, which is a copy of @xmath , is at @xmath ,
while the boundary @xmath . In fact, note that an explicit Ricci-flat
Kähler metric on this manifold was constructed in [ 56 ] . Since @xmath
is contractible to @xmath , it follows that @xmath , with all other
cohomology vanishing. Moreover, since @xmath is the total space of a
rank four real vector bundle over @xmath , the Thom isomorphism implies
that @xmath , where the generator of @xmath is the Thom class. It
follows that the image of the generator in the map @xmath is the Euler
class of the bundle @xmath . Denoting @xmath the hyperplane class that
generates @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.68)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Recall here that @xmath generates @xmath . Thus the long exact sequence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

implies, since the first “forgetful” map @xmath is multiplication by the
Euler number @xmath , that @xmath . Thus we may turn on precisely one
non-trivial torsion @xmath -flux on @xmath . It is similarly
straightforward to show that the only other non-trivial cohomology
groups of @xmath are @xmath . Notice this agrees with [ 29 ] , where the
cohomology groups of @xmath were computed via a completely different
method.

Now consider the other partial resolution, with @xmath in ( 4.3.67 ).
This may be described as @xmath total space of @xmath , where the
zero-section weighted projective space @xmath is now at @xmath . @xmath
has a single, isolated singular point at @xmath , which has tangent cone
@xmath where the @xmath generator acts with equal charge on each
coordinate of @xmath ; thus this is the ABJM @xmath quotient. If we
remove @xmath from @xmath , we obtain a smooth eight-manifold @xmath
with boundaries @xmath and @xmath , as in Figure 4.2 .

From our general discussion in § 4.3.1 , one thus expects to be able to
Higgs the field theory dual to AdS @xmath with zero @xmath -flux to
field theories dual to AdS @xmath and AdS @xmath with zero @xmath -flux.
Here the latter corresponds to putting the @xmath M2 branes at the
singular point @xmath of @xmath , while putting the M2 branes anywhere
else on @xmath , or at any point on @xmath , should have near horizon
limit given by the AdS @xmath theory. To investigate what happens with
@xmath -flux, we must extend the non-zero @xmath over either @xmath ,
satisfying the appropriate supersymmetry equations for the flux.
Analysing this is in fact quite technical, although for this relatively
simple example we will be able to provide a complete answer to the
problem.

##### The geometry @xmath

To see whether or not we can extend the non-zero torsion flux in @xmath
, we need to know something about the cohomology of the smooth
eight-manifold @xmath . This has boundary @xmath with two connected
components @xmath , and @xmath . To extend the non-trivial element of
@xmath over @xmath we need to examine the exact sequence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This says we may extend an element of @xmath over @xmath if and only if
it maps to zero in @xmath . Thus we need to compute the latter group,
and also the map. By Poincaré-Lefschetz duality, notice that @xmath .

We compute by covering @xmath with two open sets, and then using the
resulting Mayer-Vietoris sequence. We first define @xmath , with @xmath
having coordinates @xmath . The invariants under the @xmath action on
@xmath with charges @xmath are spanned by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Thus @xmath , with coordinate functions @xmath . We similarly
define @xmath . The invariants are now spanned by the 10 functions
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . These satisfy the 6 relations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.3.71)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This precisely defines the affine variety @xmath , and thus @xmath .
Indeed, if @xmath denote standard coordinates on @xmath , with the
@xmath action multiplication by @xmath on all coordinates, then the
invariants are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We may identify @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The two coordinate patches @xmath , @xmath in fact now cover @xmath ,
since one cannot have both @xmath and @xmath – such points violate the
moment map equation ( 4.3.67 ) for @xmath . Hence @xmath is covered by
@xmath and @xmath . The coordinate patch @xmath overlaps @xmath where
@xmath . In @xmath , this is the subset @xmath . Thus @xmath , where the
first @xmath coordinate is @xmath .

Consider now the Mayer-Vietoris sequence:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.3.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since @xmath , it thus follows that @xmath , which is the homology group
of interest. Moreover, @xmath is the tangent cone to the singular point
@xmath , whose link is thus @xmath . The generator of @xmath thus
trivially maps to the generator of @xmath , whose image via inclusion we
have shown generates @xmath . The Poincaré-Lefschetz dual of this is
thus that we have shown that the map

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

takes @xmath to @xmath . To determine the map completely, we need to
also know the image of @xmath . This is the image of @xmath in @xmath
under inclusion. We may compute this with a slight modification of the
above argument.

Let @xmath . This is @xmath minus the @xmath zero-section, which recall
is @xmath . We would like to remove these points from @xmath to obtain
@xmath . In terms of the coordinate patches, this gives @xmath and
@xmath , where the @xmath acts as @xmath on @xmath , and is the @xmath
in the Hopf @xmath action on @xmath (and thus acts freely of course).
Now @xmath is still @xmath , which gives @xmath . The Mayer-Vietoris
sequence for @xmath is hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Again, @xmath . If we coordinatize @xmath with the coordinates @xmath ,
the generator may be taken to be @xmath , @xmath , which is a copy of
@xmath . The above sequence thus proves that @xmath , which of course we
already knew. However, the key point is that this shows that the
generator of @xmath is represented by the above copy of @xmath . But
this is also contained in @xmath , and similarly generates @xmath , and
the Mayer-Vietoris sequence ( 4.3 ) thus proves that the generator of
@xmath maps to the generator of @xmath under inclusion. Hence @xmath in
( 4.3.73 ) also maps to @xmath , and thus the map ( 4.3.73 ) is simply
addition of the two factors.

All this rather abstract algebraic topology thus shows that zero @xmath
-flux on the UV boundary @xmath lifts to a (necessarily torsion) @xmath
-flux on the RG flow manifold @xmath only if there is zero @xmath -flux
on the IR boundary @xmath . On the other hand, non-trivial torsion
@xmath -flux on the UV boundary, where @xmath , lifts to a @xmath -flux
on the RG flow manifold only if there is non-trivial @xmath -flux on the
IR boundary @xmath , where @xmath . In the field theory, it follows that
the dual to @xmath with/without torsion @xmath -flux can be Higgsed to
the field theory dual to @xmath with/without torsion @xmath -flux,
respectively .

##### The geometry @xmath

Finally, we consider the resolution @xmath . In this case zero @xmath
-flux on @xmath clearly extends as zero @xmath -flux over @xmath , but
for non-zero flux we must necessarily turn on a non-torsion @xmath -flux
in @xmath . More precisely, we should pick a point @xmath and extend
@xmath in @xmath where @xmath , although the difference between @xmath
and @xmath will not affect our discussion of flux, since removing @xmath
does not affect the cohomology of interest. The flux in turn must be
primitive and type @xmath in order to satisfy the supersymmetry
equations (and hence equations of motion).

To see the existence of such a flux, we may appeal to the results of [
88 ] . The latter reference proves that for a complete asymptotically
conical manifold @xmath of real dimension @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the “forgetful” map, forgetting that a class is
relative. Thus the space of @xmath harmonic forms @xmath is topological.
In particular, we showed earlier that @xmath under the forgetful map
(which is multiplication by 2), and we thus learn that there is a unique
@xmath harmonic four-form @xmath on @xmath , up to scale. If we
normalize @xmath to be odd, then this maps under reduction modulo 2 to
the generator of @xmath , for any @xmath . Next note that @xmath , where
@xmath is the Kähler form on @xmath , follows since if @xmath were not
zero it would be an @xmath normalizable harmonic six-form on @xmath ,
and there are not any of these by ( 4.3.74 ). Thus the @xmath harmonic
four-form on @xmath is necessarily primitive. Next, all of the
cohomology on a toric CY four-fold is of Hodge type @xmath . Each Hodge
type is separately harmonic, and thus again we see that @xmath has to be
purely type @xmath (any other type would be topologically trivial and
harmonic, and thus zero by ( 4.3.74 )). Recall that the explicit
asymptotically conical Ricci-flat Kähler metric on @xmath is known [ 56
] , and so in principle one should be able to construct this harmonic
four-form @xmath explicitly.

##### 4.3.3 @xmath: Field theory results

The expectations from the supergravity analysis derived above have been
shown to match the field theory analysis in the original paper that this
manuscript is based on [ 1 ] . Such Higgsings were later studied with
the aid of Hanany-Witten brane constructions, and generalized to other
geometries, in [ 24 ] .

#### 4.4 Exotic renormalization group flows

In the previous section we studied the warped resolved backgrounds dual
to RG flows induced by Higgsing of the @xmath theory. The examples that
were discussed in the end of that section were field theories for which
the RG flows can be described by a Lagrangian. However, in general, the
reduction to Type IIA over the M-theory circle, that is encoded by the
field theory CS levels, suggests that a Lagrangian description of the RG
flow cannot always be obtained. In this section we want to show how such
exotic RG flows can occur.

##### 4.4.1 M-theory circle and Higgsing

In this subsection we want to pay closer attention to the importance of
the choice of the M-theory circle in gravity solutions dual to RG flows.
We consider the cone over @xmath , the toric diagram of which is
presented in Figure 4.3 and plotted in such a way that the z-axis
corresponds to the M-theory circle. This M-theory circle, as we explain
later on, is different from the one that is picked by the field theory
mentioned in § 4.3.3 . Theories that differ by the choice of M-theory
circle should be connected by duality. It will be interesting to see
that due to the different reduction to Type IIA the description of the
dual theories changes drastically. As will become clear later, the
generalization of our discussion to other geometries is straightforward.

To start, note that the choice of M-theory circle can be added to the
GLSM that describes the geometry, as discussed in the previous section.
It will be useful to follow the notations of [ 25 ] , as then our
discussion can be easily applied to the theories discussed there. For
the cones over @xmath , the GLSM charge matrix can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the last line was added to define the @xmath symmetry acting on
the M-theory circle (the role of @xmath will be explained later on). As
should be clear from the discussion in the previous section, the first
and second lines denote the GLSM fields and their charges under the
@xmath gauge group respectively. The FI parameter, @xmath , controls
resolutions of the geometry.

One can consider the seven-manifold @xmath which is obtained after KK
reduction to Type IIA along the isometry circle @xmath . Using the GLSM
description, the charges of the combinations of fields that parametrize
the seven-manifold carry zero charge under @xmath [ 50 , 51 ] . As
opposed to the Kähler quotient @xmath , that is diagrammatically
described by the projection of the three-dimensional toric diagram on
the @xmath plane, the moment map @xmath in our quotient is not fixed. In
Type IIA we then get @xmath D2 branes probing a fibration of @xmath over
the real line, parametrized by the moment map @xmath [ 50 , 51 ] .

To obtain the exact form of this fibration notice that, depending on the
sign of @xmath , one of the @xmath fields can be eliminated. More
specifically, we can define

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.76)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and then rewrite the CY @xmath GLSM as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.77)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The FI parameter is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Heaviside step function.

Whenever @xmath this describes a resolved @xmath with a blown-up @xmath
of size @xmath . This is always the case when @xmath , which is the
@xmath resolution that we studied in the last section. The Kähler
parameter @xmath is continuous in @xmath , while its first derivative
jumps by 3 at @xmath . This is due to the presence of a @xmath brane
wrapping the toric divisor @xmath in @xmath [ 25 ] .

However, considering the second resolution @xmath by taking @xmath , one
can see that for some region of @xmath the Kähler parameter @xmath is
negative and the interpretation of the reduction as @xmath fibered over
the real line is not valid anymore. Moreover, the @xmath is rotating the
exceptional @xmath , so it fixes its north pole @xmath and south pole
@xmath . So in M-theory there are two co-dimension 8 fixed points. In
addition, we see that @xmath fixes the @xmath locus. There is no simple
interpretation of the resulting singularity in the dilaton in Type IIA
string theory. Thus, we expect the baryonic branch that describes the
@xmath resolution in the field theory to be described by a strongly
coupled sector.

We can also consider the RG flow that is dual to the near-horizon of the
@xmath M2 branes probing the residual singularity in the @xmath
resolution. We are interested in warped resolved CY backgrounds in which
the IR and UV boundaries are isolated four-fold singularities. The case
we just analysed is one concrete example, as the tangent cones to the
stack of @xmath M2 branes in the UV and IR are @xmath and @xmath
respectively. The reduction on the M-theory circle results in a Type IIA
background with two boundaries as well. The discussion above suggests
that a Lagrangian description of the RG flow exists only when this Type
IIA background is smooth. One should of course reduce the two boundaries
on the same M-theory circle. This can be inferred from the toric diagram
after deleting the corresponding points that give the desired
resolution.

In the @xmath example the resolution of interest corresponds to deleting
@xmath from the toric diagram. The tangent cone at the residual singular
point is simply @xmath , and the M-theory circle still corresponds to
the z-axis. Notice that this is a different M-theory circle from the one
that is described by the ABJM theory with @xmath . The corresponding
reduction of the near-horizon geometry to Type IIA is singular, and
thus, following the discussion in [ 22 ] , we do not expect to find a
field theory with Lagrangian description of this RG flow. To see
explicitly that the reduction is singular we use the coordinate patch
defined in the last section around ( 4.3 ). In the notations of the last
section, @xmath and @xmath are the coordinates that are charged under
@xmath . Thus, for the @xmath that is parametrized by @xmath with the
identification @xmath , the @xmath action on the coordinates is @xmath ,
where @xmath . The quotient by @xmath preserves the holomorphic @xmath
-form (hence Killing spinors), but introduces @xmath orbifold
singularities that correspond to the fixed @xmath locus.

Notice that similar considerations show that deleting @xmath results in
@xmath as a tangent cone with singular reduction over @xmath . Although
a VEV for @xmath corresponds to the @xmath resolution, the branes are
not sitting on the singular point this time, and thus the tangent cone
is flat space. The same remarks from the last paragraph apply also here.

As an aside, notice that different VEVs that result in @xmath as tangent
cone may be given. Especially interesting is the @xmath resolution that
is obtained by giving VEVs to the @xmath fields. In fact, using the
@xmath symmetry, we may without loss of generality give the only
non-vanishing VEV to @xmath . To obtain the tangent cone we delete
@xmath from the toric diagram. We then see that the tangent cone is just
@xmath and the @xmath fibre degenerates over a non-compact four-cycle in
@xmath . The latter is the base of the fibration, as can be seen from
the projection of the toric diagram after the deletion. Thus, the Type
IIA reduction contains a D6 brane wrapping this cycle. The field theory
which is dual to such a background was studied in [ 23 , 22 ] , and a
candidate Lagrangian description was proposed there. Recall that the
@xmath resolution involves a @xmath brane, which is wrapped over the
@xmath in the Type IIA reduction. It is interesting to see that this
@xmath brane is connected to the one in the tangent cone. After giving a
VEV to @xmath the stack of D2 branes sits on the blown-up @xmath at
@xmath . Thus, close to the D2 branes, the @xmath brane that was wrapped
on the @xmath is now wrapped on the non-compact four-cycles in the
tangent cone.

We want now to study in more detail the M5 branes that are dual to the
exotic baryonic operators. A better understanding of such M5 branes and
the identification of the dual baryonic operators in the field theory
might shed light on the exotic field theories in the far IR. This can be
done by studying the RG flows induced by giving VEVs to such operators.
We will consider the Euclidean M5 instantons wrapped on holomorphic
six-cycles of the CY in the presence of the stack of M2 branes. In the
spirit of [ 59 ] the M5 brane instantons lead to insertions of baryonic
operators in the stack of M2 branes. The mapping of the M5 branes
wrapping the different non-compact divisors to branes in Type IIA after
the reduction can be obtained from the GLSM equations ( 4.4.75 ). We
want to start with the @xmath six-cycle. The VEV of the corresponding
operator parametrizes the @xmath resolution. From the third line in (
4.4.75 ) we can see that @xmath , so that @xmath can be eliminated. We
hence find that the six-cycle is mapped to a five-manifold spanned by
@xmath with the constraint in ( 4.4.77 ) and @xmath . Thus, the M5 brane
wrapping the @xmath six-cycle maps to D4 brane wrapping the @xmath with
@xmath as the Kähler modulus fibered over @xmath . Similar
considerations show that the @xmath six-cycle maps to the @xmath with
@xmath as the Kähler modulus fibered over @xmath . The reduction of the
@xmath , where @xmath , six-cycles can be read more easily from ( 4.4.77
). We see that these are mapped to the non-compact divisors in @xmath
fibred over the unconstrained @xmath coordinate. By T-dualizing to Type
IIB along the real line (after compactification), one can see that the
M5 wrapping the @xmath six-cycles are mapped to D3 branes wrapping the
non-compact divisors of the @xmath cone. These are the familiar
instantons that correspond to the insertions of baryonic operators in
@xmath d theories. It is immediately obvious that the two other M5
branes, wrapping @xmath , will not map to familiar objects in Type IIB.
This is partly due to the fact that the wrapped cycles in @xmath are
compact. Moreover, it is not clear how this object should be T-dualized.
More work should be done in order to understand what type of insertions
those D4 instantons correspond to.

Having addressed field theories with exotic M-theory circles, we want
now to make additional comments on the @xmath field theory that was
mentioned in the last section. The field theory discussed in § 4.3.3
corresponds to a choice of M-theory circle for which the reduction to
Type IIA of the resolved CY four-folds, and the corresponding warped
resolved backgrounds, are always smooth. The resolutions can be
described by blowing-up vanishing cycles and moving the D2 branes along
the @xmath coordinate, in the Type IIA picture. Moreover, in this case
the UV and IR boundaries of the warped resolved solutions always admit
smooth reductions to Type IIA. This explains why, in this example, we
have a full Lagrangian description of the resolutions in the field
theory, and of the RG flow of the corresponding Higgsings.

The above discussion can easily be applied to more general geometries,
especially the @xmath examples discussed recently in [ 25 ] . In the
latter case, if we restrict ourselves to isolated singularities for
which @xmath , it is easy to see that whenever @xmath , @xmath in (3.15)
of [ 25 ] can take negative values in a certain range of the @xmath
coordinate, for some choices of the FI parameters. For negative values
of @xmath the corresponding resolutions of the CY @xmath singularity
cannot be described by resolutions of the CY @xmath , together with
displacement of the D2 and D6 branes along the @xmath coordinate, in the
Type IIA picture. Therefore a similar discussion to that above shows
that the corresponding baryonic operators and RG flows are expected to
be exotic.

#### 4.5 Six-cycles and non-perturbative superpotentials

An isolated toric CY four-fold singularity will typically have
exceptional divisors when it is resolved. The irreducible components of
these divisors are in 1-1 correspondence with the internal lattice
points in the toric diagram, and a simple homology calculation (see (
4.5.97 )) shows that these generate the group @xmath of six-cycles. This
immediately raises the question of what is the AdS/CFT interpretation of
such six-cycles, as we mentioned briefly at the end of § 4.2 . Again, in
order to make our discussion concrete we will begin by focusing on a
simple example, namely the cone over @xmath .

Inspection of the @xmath toric diagram in Figure 4.4

shows an interior lattice point, signalling the possibility of blowing
up a six-cycle. We shall discuss the geometry of such resolutions in
more detail later in this section. For more details on the notations
that will be used we refer the reader to appendix C of [ 2 ] . As we
discuss in the next subsection, such six-cycles have been shown to be
responsible for non-perturbative superpotentials in CY compactifications
via wrapped Euclidean M5 branes. We are interested in such contributions
to a non-perturbative superpotential in warped CY backgrounds. The
warping here is induced by the back-reaction of point-like M2 brane
sources on the CY ⁵ ⁵ 5 It might be possible to generalize this to the
case with SUSY @xmath -flux, in which the flux also sources the warp
factor. .

##### 4.5.1 Non-perturbative superpotentials

The toric geometries under consideration do not have three-cycles,
either in the boundary Sasaki-Einstein manifold @xmath , or in the CY
resolution @xmath of @xmath . Thus there are no cycles on which to wrap
Euclidean M2 branes. However, EM5 branes may be wrapped on the
irreducible components of the exceptional divisor in the CY resolution.
Such cycles, being complex sub-manifolds, are automatically
supersymmetric.

A very similar situation was considered in [ 72 ] , where
compactifications of M-theory to three dimensions on a CY four-fold were
discussed. In that reference the role of Euclidean instantonic M5
branes, and their possible contribution to non-perturbative
superpotentials, was studied in detail. In order to generate such
contributions, the number of zero modes, which includes the Goldstinos
of the SUSYs broken by the brane, must be appropriate to saturate the
superspace measure. In particular, such instantons must wrap cycles
without infinitesimal holomorphic deformations, since the superpartners
of the deformation moduli would provide additional fermionic zero modes.
In [ 72 ] it was shown that the appropriate zero mode counting in the
case of an M5 brane wrapping a divisor @xmath in this set-up requires
the necessary condition that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.79)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is the arithmetic genus of @xmath . Assuming this necessary
condition is satisfied, the structure of the non-perturbative
superpotential generated by an EM5 brane also requires one to understand
its dependence on the Kähler moduli. As explained in [ 72 ] , the
dependence on these Kähler moduli is known exactly, being encoded
entirely in the semi-classical term @xmath . Here @xmath denotes the
volume of the six-cycle, while @xmath is the expected linear multiplet
superpartner to @xmath and is given by the period of @xmath through
@xmath . This latter structure is determined from holomorphy of the
superpotential.

It is well-known that for any smooth compact toric manifold the
arithmetic genus in ( 4.5.79 ) is indeed equal to 1. However, at this
point we should recall that the situation in [ 72 ] is slightly
different from the one at hand. Firstly, our CY four-fold is
non-compact, so that gravity is decoupled from the point of view of
reduction to Minkowski three-space. Secondly, our set-up contains also
point-like M2 branes, and moreover in the warped solutions the
back-reaction of these M2 branes is also included. This leads to the
asymptotically AdS @xmath backgrounds discussed in § 2.1 . It should
however be possible to extend the analysis of [ 72 ] to such warped
cases.

Let us first briefly discuss a similar situation in the more controlled
Type IIB scenario. In that case one can consider a CY three-fold
singularity with colour and fractional D branes wrapping the collapsed
cycles at the singularity, leading to a four-dimensional @xmath SUSY
field theory at the singularity. In addition one can consider
instantonic Euclidean Ep branes. The various types of strings stretching
between these branes can give rise to non-perturbative contributions to
the superpotential of the field theory at the CY singularity. Exactly as
for the M-theory case, in order for this non-perturbative superpotential
to be generated at all the right number of zero modes must be present.
An important remark here is that the Ep-Ep sector sees the full @xmath
CY three-fold background, thus generically leading to too many zero
modes to saturate the @xmath superspace measure. Therefore in order for
a non-perturbative superpotential to be generated, some method of
eliminating these extra zero modes is required. On the other hand, the
situation in M-theory is very different since the colour M2 branes do
not break any further the SUSYs of the CY four-fold background. From
this point of view, we then expect EM5 instantons to generically
contribute to non-perturbative corrections to the superpotential in
three dimensions.

Nevertheless, the structure and interpretation of such corrections is
far from clear. We can think of the gravitational background as a warped
CY four-fold compactification, albeit one which is asymptotically an AdS
@xmath background. As such, we expect to be able to promote all moduli,
both Kähler and those related to the positions of the M2 branes in the
colour stack, to spacetime fields in the Minkowski three-space. These
will be dynamical fields provided the fluctuations are normalizable in
the warped metric; at least for the Kähler moduli this is expected to be
the case, as discussed in the Type IIB context in [ 66 ] . However,
finding an ansatz for such a reduction is far from trivial, and at the
time of writing there is no complete proposal for such an ansatz which
would allow one to compute the precise form of the non-pertubative
superpotential for these modes. The most recent paper on this subject is
[ 90 ] , where the authors consider only the universal Kähler modulus in
a warped compactification. On the other hand, following the more
controlled Type IIB case, one might expect that computing the warped
volume of the Euclidean brane is the dual “closed membrane channel” of
the picture above, described in terms of M2 branes in the blown up CY
four-fold in the presence of the EM5 branes. In the IIB case it has been
explicitly checked [ 79 ] in some simple situations how the computation
of open string diagrams in the relevant sector [ 91 , 92 ] can be
reproduced though the computation of warped volumes, which are then
interpreted as a resummation of such open string diagrams. Of course, it
should be stressed that in the M-theory scenario at hand this can be
taken only as a heuristic picture. In any case, one would expect that a
general holographic interpretation of the superpotential should also be
available, since the warped background is asymptotically AdS @xmath .
One natural suggestion is that this might come from considering the
boundary behaviour of the six-form fluctuation sourced by the EM5
branes. We leave a more complete investigation of these issues for
further work. Instead in this thesis we focus on computing the warped
volumes of the EM5 branes as a function of the moduli. Understanding
precisely how this is related to non-perturbative corrections in these
warped resolved geometries will require further work.

##### 4.5.2 Instantons in the resolved @xmath background

There is a unique resolution of @xmath where one blows up the six-cycle
corresponding to the internal lattice point in Figure 4.4 . This gives a
CY four-fold @xmath which is the total space of the canonical bundle
@xmath . There is a Kähler class for each factor in the zero section
exceptional divisor @xmath , leading to a GKZ fan which is @xmath , as
shown in Figure 4.4 .

By the general theorem mentioned earlier we know that there will be a
unique Ricci-flat Kähler metric, which is asymptotic to the cone metric
over @xmath , for each choice of Kähler class. Again, in this case one
can write these metrics explicitly:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5.80)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where now

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary constants, and correspond
to the choice of Kähler classes @xmath , @xmath . In particular, setting
@xmath implies that all three @xmath s have the same volume, and the
metric simplifies considerably. In this case it is convenient to define
@xmath , so that the exceptional divisor is at the radial position
@xmath . For further details about these metrics we refer the reader to
§ B .

Again, it is also possible to solve explicitly for the warp factor for
these metrics. In the simplified case with @xmath , one can place the
stack of @xmath M2 branes at an arbitrary radial position @xmath and
solve for the Green’s function. Again, we refer the reader to § B for
details of this warp factor. From now on we focus exclusively on the
case @xmath , where @xmath is parametrized by the radius @xmath .

###### 4.5.2.1 Warped volumes

We are interested in computing the warped volume of the compact
exceptional divisor @xmath at @xmath , with the stack of @xmath M2
branes at the position @xmath . Here @xmath denotes the point in the
copy of @xmath at radius @xmath . Thus we define

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the exceptional divisor and @xmath is the (pull back of
the) warp factor. Here the latter is given by the expression ( B.0.8 )
in terms of the mode expansion discussed in § B . The determinant of the
metric pulled back to the divisor is simply

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.83)
  -- -------- -- ----------

After substituting these results into the world-volume action one
obtains

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.84)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Explicitly, the integral reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is a normalization constant that ensures the mode @xmath has
unit norm. The @xmath integrals vanish unless @xmath . Then @xmath
reduces to a Legendre polynomial @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.87)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting this back into the expression for @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From ( B.4.30 ) and ( B.4.31 ) we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.89)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Finally, substituting the explicit M5 brane tension results in the
warped volume

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that for @xmath we get @xmath .

###### 4.5.2.2 The @xmath harmonic two-form

The key observation in this subsection is that the warped volume (
4.5.90 ) of the exceptional divisor is closely related to the @xmath
normalizable two-form @xmath which is Poincaré dual to the six-cycle.
The claim is that the precise relation between the two is (for @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here the derivatives are regarded as acting on the coordinates of the
point @xmath , which recall is the location of the stack of M2 branes.
We shall prove this claim in full generality in § 4.5.3 . Here we first
prove it in the current explicit example, where it is convenient to use
the coordinate system in section B.1 of [ 2 ] . Setting @xmath and after
some algebra it can be shown that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore ( 4.5.91 ) reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is a harmonic two-form with respect to the unwarped metric, and
also @xmath with respect to this metric. To see that @xmath is indeed
Poincaré dual to the six-cycle, we choose the following closed form on
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.94)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence @xmath is @xmath normalizable and Poincaré dual to the divisor, as
claimed.

###### 4.5.2.3 Critical points

Formally, the superpotential that is induced by the instanton action
that we have calculated in the previous subsections is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is given in ( 4.5.90 ). This is something of a formal
statement, since in reality what we have computed is the on-shell
Euclidean action of the wrapped M5 brane as a function of the moduli of
the supergravity background. Here essentially @xmath is a Kähler
modulus, while @xmath is a modulus associated to the position of the
stack of M2 branes. On the other hand, the superpotential should be a
function of the corresponding spacetime fields in Minkowski space,
obtained by promoting these moduli to dynamical fields. In the unwarped
case there is essentially no distinction between the two, but in the
warped case it is not known how to do this at present, and the situation
is much less clear. Note also that we have only computed the real part
of @xmath , and hence absolute value of @xmath . Thus the best we can do
is to examine the critical points of @xmath interpreted directly as a
superpotential on the supergravity moduli space. It is straightforward
to compute

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.96)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath there are no critical points of @xmath . In order for @xmath
we must then necessarily have @xmath , which gives @xmath and @xmath on
this locus. In this case the branes move only on the six-cycle. Clearly,
this is always a solution since the “superpotential” ( 4.5.95 ) is
identically zero if the branes are moving on the divisor @xmath . For
@xmath there are formally no contributions of instantons to the
superpotential. However, notice this is a singular limit of the
supergravity solution in which the six-cycle is blown down. In the
absence of instantons of course the M2 branes are free to propagate on
the cone @xmath in which the six-cycle is blown down.

##### 4.5.3 EM5 brane instantons: general discussion

In this section we describe how the above calculations for @xmath
generalize to more general CYs.

###### 4.5.3.1 Geometric set-up

Throughout this section we assume we are given an asymptotically conical
Kähler manifold @xmath of complex dimension @xmath , with metric @xmath
and Kähler two-form @xmath . This means that the manifold @xmath is
non-compact, and that the metric @xmath asymptotically approaches the
cone metric @xmath , where @xmath is the compact base of the cone. The
metric @xmath is then Sasakian, by definition. In fact this is slightly
too general for the situation we are interested in. More precisely, we
want @xmath to be a resolution of the singularity at @xmath of the cone
@xmath . This means that there is a proper birational map @xmath which
is a biholomorphism on the restriction @xmath . Less formally, the
resolution @xmath replaces the singular point @xmath of the cone by the
exceptional set @xmath . For physical applications we require the metric
@xmath on @xmath to be Ricci-flat and hence CY. Then by definition
@xmath above is a crepant resolution of the cone singularity. In fact
this won’t really affect the computations that follow.

Of particular interest for us in this section are the exceptional
divisors in @xmath . These are the irreducible (prime) divisors of
@xmath . Call these irreducible components @xmath . Since @xmath is
contractable onto @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that @xmath . Thus the exceptional divisors @xmath generate the
homology of @xmath in codimension two. Notice that if @xmath then the
resolution has no exceptional divisors and the resolution is said to be
small . For example, the resolved conifold is a small resolution of the
cone over @xmath , since the exceptional set is @xmath ; similarly, the
resolutions of the geometries that were classified in § 3.3 are small.

###### 4.5.3.2 @xmath harmonic two-forms

Another key result for us is that in the above situation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for @xmath . Here @xmath denotes the @xmath normalizable harmonic
two-forms on @xmath (which thus depends on the metric @xmath ). That is,
the codimension two cycles in @xmath are 1-1 with the prime exceptional
divisors, and these are also 1-1 with the @xmath normalizable harmonic
two-forms on @xmath , as long as @xmath . This result about @xmath
harmonic forms holds in general for complete asymptotically conical
manifolds, and was proven in [ 88 ] . In dimension @xmath , instead
@xmath . For example, for the Eguchi-Hanson manifold the map @xmath is
multiplication by 2, so that there is a unique @xmath harmonic two-form,
up to scale.

We shall need some more information about these harmonic forms. First,
we note that the harmonic two-forms are of Hodge type @xmath . This is
because they are Poincaré dual to divisors in @xmath , so if there was a
@xmath part of the harmonic form it would be cohomologically trivial and
hence ⁶ ⁶ 6 Notice this result definitely fails for spaces that are not
asymptotically conical. A good example is the Taub-NUT space, which has
no two-cycles but does have an @xmath harmonic two-form. identically
zero by the result of [ 88 ] .

Pick a particular @xmath and normalize the associated @xmath harmonic
two-form so that it is Poincaré dual to @xmath . We may then think of
the harmonic form as the curvature of a Hermitian line bundle @xmath –
the divisor bundle for @xmath . If @xmath is a local nowhere zero
holomorphic section of @xmath over an open set @xmath , and @xmath is
the Hermitian metric on @xmath , then we may write the harmonic form as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is a standard result. Notice that @xmath here does not depend on
the choice of local holomorphic section @xmath . We will be interested
in the special case where we take @xmath as large as possible, which is
@xmath . By construction, the line bundle @xmath is trivial over @xmath
, with trivializing nowhere zero holomorphic section @xmath . We pick an
@xmath , and write @xmath for the corresponding real function on @xmath
.

We next note that @xmath is itself a harmonic function on @xmath . To
see this, suppose generally we have a harmonic @xmath -form @xmath .
Because @xmath is complete, this means @xmath is both closed and
co-closed. The co-closed condition involves computing the Hodge dual of
@xmath , which is @xmath . Here we have simply used that @xmath and that
@xmath is type @xmath . Thus @xmath . By definition, @xmath . Thus if
@xmath is closed, then @xmath is co-closed if and only if @xmath is
closed, i.e. constant.

Thus we learn that for a harmonic @xmath -form @xmath , @xmath is in
fact constant. Now, for an @xmath form on an asymptotically conical
manifold this constant is in fact necessarily zero. To see why, we must
look at the asymptotics of @xmath . This was studied in appendix A of [
66 ] . Here we have a two-form, so @xmath in Table 4 of that reference,
and we are interested in @xmath , so that the form is normalizable at
infinity. For @xmath , @xmath so the normalizable modes are of type II
and type III @xmath . However, the type II modes are constructed from
harmonic one-forms on the base @xmath , and there are not any of these
as @xmath is a positive curvature Einstein manifold so @xmath by Myers’
theorem [ 52 ] . Thus asymptotically, the two-form @xmath is to leading
order of the form @xmath , where @xmath is a massive co-closed one-form
along @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Consider now @xmath . Since
asymptotically @xmath , where @xmath is the contact one-form of the
Sasakian manifold @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.100)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Since @xmath it follows that @xmath at infinity. Since we have also
shown that @xmath is constant, it follows that this constant is zero. If
we write @xmath as in ( 4.5.99 ) on @xmath , then @xmath is equivalent
to saying that @xmath is harmonic. This just follows from the form of
the scalar Laplacian on a Kähler manifold: @xmath .

As an aside comment that will be important below, the first non-zero
eigenvalue @xmath is bounded below by @xmath . In fact, this is
saturated precisely by Killing one-forms – see, for example, [ 89 ] .
Thus @xmath and correspondingly @xmath .

We thus conclude that @xmath is a harmonic function. It will be crucial
in what follows that @xmath is not in fact defined everywhere on @xmath
. By construction, it is defined only on @xmath . Along @xmath in fact
@xmath is singular. This is simply because @xmath is the zero set of
@xmath , which has a simple zero along @xmath by assumption. Thus if
@xmath is a local complex coordinate normal to @xmath , with @xmath at
@xmath , then @xmath blows up near to @xmath like @xmath .

###### 4.5.3.3 The instanton action

An instantonic brane wrapped on an exceptional divisor @xmath is
calibrated and supersymmetric – for example, a D3 brane for @xmath in
Type IIB string theory or an M5 brane for @xmath in M-theory. These are
in 1-1 correspondence with the homology classes @xmath , and moreover
there is a unique @xmath harmonic two-form associated to each
irreducible exceptional divisor, which is Poincaré dual to the divisor,
as discussed above.

Let @xmath denote the Green’s function on @xmath , with a fixed
(Ricci-flat) Kähler metric, normalized so that

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.101)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Consider the on-shell action of an instantonic brane, given by the
following Green’s function weighted volume of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.102)
  -- -------- -- -----------

This is the relevant formula both for D3 branes and M5 branes, where the
warp factor is @xmath , with @xmath the number of spacetime filling
branes and @xmath the tension of the wrapped instanton brane. The warped
volume @xmath depends on the source point @xmath , so @xmath . Of
course, it also depends on the choice of Kähler metric. If we consider
the CY case, we know that there is a unique metric in each Kähler class,
so we may think of @xmath also as a function of the Kähler class: @xmath
. Then we claim that

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Of course, @xmath depends implicitly on the Kähler metric since the
associated harmonic form does also. Notice this result actually provides
a formula for the @xmath harmonic two-forms on an asymptotically conical
Kähler manifold, in terms of the Green’s function on @xmath . This is a
new mathematical result, as far as we are aware ⁷ ⁷ 7 We thank Tamas
Hausel for discussions on this. .

The strategy for proving this claim involves three steps: (i) show that
@xmath is a harmonic function on @xmath , (ii) show that @xmath diverges
as @xmath along @xmath , (iii) show that the two-form @xmath is @xmath .
These steps show that the latter two-form is an @xmath harmonic form
that is Poincaré dual to @xmath . We may then appeal to the uniqueness
of such a form.

Step (i). This is straightforward. We want to compute @xmath acting on
@xmath . Using that the Green’s function @xmath is symmetric in its
arguments, so @xmath , then provided @xmath

  -- -- -- -----------
           (4.5.104)
  -- -- -- -----------

The last step follows since @xmath . This shows that @xmath ,
interpreted as a function on @xmath , is indeed harmonic.

Step (ii). Near to the source point @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.105)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath denotes geodesic distance from @xmath , where we regard the
latter as fixed. Here @xmath is the volume of a unit @xmath -sphere,
which appears in this computation as a small sphere around the point
@xmath . The divergence is a local question, so this is really a
question in Euclidean space. Let us take the local model @xmath , with
complex coordinate @xmath on @xmath . We suppose that the divisor @xmath
is locally @xmath in this patch, and that the point @xmath is @xmath in
this coordinate system. The integral over @xmath is finite outside a
ball @xmath of fixed radius @xmath in @xmath , so we would like to
analyse the divergence in the integral

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.106)
  -- -------- -- -----------

as @xmath . This is easily seen to be

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.107)
  -- -------- -- -----------

This shows that @xmath diverges as @xmath near to @xmath , as claimed.

Step (iii). We consider the two-form @xmath as the point @xmath tends to
infinity. Since we have already shown this two-form is harmonic, it will
have an asymptotic expansion as in Appendix A of [ 66 ] . There are
three types of modes, I, II and III. As already mentioned, there are in
fact no modes of type II since @xmath has no harmonic one-forms. The
modes of type I are pull-backs of harmonic two-forms on @xmath , which
are not @xmath . The modes of type III @xmath are of the form @xmath ,
with @xmath as above. The III @xmath modes are @xmath , while III @xmath
are not. Thus we must show that @xmath has leading term of type III
@xmath , so that it is normalizable at infinity and hence normalizable.

Since @xmath is globally defined on @xmath , we immediately see that
there can be no mode of type I since near infinity @xmath is exact. Thus
we are reduced to analysing the asymptotic @xmath -dependence of the
one-form @xmath .

If we regard the point @xmath as fixed, then as @xmath tends to infinity
we have

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.108)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.109)
  -- -------- -- -----------

gives to leading order

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.110)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We thus conclude that @xmath . From the comment above, this means that
we indeed have a normalizable mode III @xmath , and moveover that @xmath
and hence @xmath saturates the lower bound on the eigenvalue. The
Killing one-form @xmath is of course dual to the R-symmetry. This
completes our proof.

###### 4.5.3.4 The superpotential

To conclude our results thus far, we have proven in general that @xmath
, where @xmath is the unique @xmath harmonic two-form that is Poincaré
dual to the divisor @xmath wrapped by the instanton. The on-shell action
of this instanton is @xmath . Notice that @xmath has a simple zero along
@xmath , as expected on general grounds. In fact locally @xmath , where
@xmath is function and @xmath is a holomorphic section of the divisor
bundle @xmath . Again, this was expected from arguments in [ 93 ] ,
where the phase that pairs with @xmath , coming from the Wess-Zumino
term in the action, was studied. Thus the result presented here is
rather complimentary to the discussion in reference [ 93 ] . Restoring
the factor of @xmath , our computation hence shows that, formally at
least, we have the superpotential

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.5.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

This is interpreted as a function of both the Kähler class, and also the
position of the stack of M2 branes @xmath , and generalizes the result (
4.5.95 ) we derived explicitly for @xmath . A critical point of this
@xmath requires either a critical point of @xmath , or else @xmath .
Since @xmath , the first case requires a critical point of the harmonic
function @xmath . By the maximum principle, notice that such a critical
point cannot be either a local maximum or a local minimum of @xmath .

### Chapter 5 Conclusions

We set out to study Abelian symmetries in the context of the AdS @xmath
/CFT @xmath correspondence. In particular, we considered gauge fields in
AdS @xmath arising from KK reduction of the supergravity potentials over
the @xmath topologically non-trivial two-cycles. In contrast to its
better-understood AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath relative, the case at hand
displays many more subtleties. The key difference resides in the fact
that gauge fields in AdS @xmath admit, in a consistent manner,
quantizations with either of two possible fall-offs at the boundary,
implying that the gauge field can be dual to either a global symmetry or
to a dynamical gauge field in the boundary CFT. From the bulk
perspective, electric-magnetic duality in the four-dimensional
electromagnetic theory in AdS @xmath amounts to exchanging these two
boundary fall-offs. In addition, from the bulk perspective one can shift
the @xmath -angle by @xmath . Following [ 67 ] , these two actions
translate into particular operations on the boundary theory, the @xmath
and @xmath operations reviewed in § 2.3 , which then generate the group
@xmath . As stressed in the main text, these actions exchange different
boundary conditions for the gauge field in AdS @xmath . Correspondingly,
the dual boundary CFTs are different. Indeed, the whole of @xmath acts
on the boundary conditions for the bulk gauge fields, leading in general
to an infinite orbit of CFTs for each @xmath gauge symmetry in AdS
@xmath . Understanding the structure of such orbits is a very
interesting problem which we set aside for further work.

We have contented ourselves with studying these issues in the particular
case of M2 branes moving in @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Although as described in § 3.3
we expect similar results to hold for other toric isolated four-fold
singularities with no exceptional six-cycles. . In [ 27 , 28 ] a @xmath
dual theory was proposed and further studied. In § 3.2 we proposed a
choice of quantization for the Abelian vector fields in the Betti
multiplets such that precisely two @xmath s are ungauged, leading to the
gauge group @xmath . This leaves precisely two global symmetries that
may be identified with the two gauge fields coming from KK reduction of
the supergravity six-form potential over five-cycles in @xmath . A key
point in that identification is that the corresponding boundary
conditions in the bulk AdS @xmath allow for electric wrapped M5 brane
states. These M5 branes can be easily identified in terms of the toric
geometry of the variety. Since the field theory realizes the minimal
GLSM, it is then straightforward to identify the relevant @xmath
symmetries in the QCS theory. In turn, this allows one to construct dual
baryonic operators to such M5 branes. It is then natural to consider the
spontaneous breaking of such symmetries, where the operator dual to such
an M5 brane acquires a VEV. We analyzed in detail such SSB in § 4 . In
particular, we have been able to compute the VEV of the baryonic
condensate, with precise agreement with field theory expectations. We
stress that this is a non-trivial check of the dual theory, as this
suggests that it does admit an IR superconformal fixed point with the
correct properties (specifically, R-charges) to be dual to M2 branes
moving in @xmath . Along the lines of [ 70 , 71 ] , we have also been
able to identify the Goldstone boson of this SSB. However, a
comprehensive understanding of these resolutions in the context of the
actions on the boundary conditions is still lacking. We postpone this
for further work. An interesting by-product of our computation is the
finding of general expressions for warped volumes in CY backgrounds,
which are potentially of interest for other, similar computations.

In AdS @xmath , as opposed to AdS @xmath backgrounds, it is possible to
turn on different torsion @xmath -flux, classified by @xmath , and each
such background corresponds to a physically distinct SCFT. We focused
attention on the singularity @xmath , which has two toric (partial)
resolutions. A key ingredient in our analysis was a careful
consideration of the effect of torsion @xmath -flux in the dual AdS
backgrounds, which we described for general four-fold singularities. In
the case at hand, the AdS solution AdS @xmath has two choices of torsion
@xmath -flux, labelled by @xmath . This analysis can in principle be
used for other theories, and should serve as a further constraint on M2
brane theories at CY four-fold singularities. In general, we expect from
the existence of a supergravity dual, and also from the examples
studied, that theories with no @xmath -flux should be Higgsable to all
toric sub-diagrams . In [ 1 ] we checked this statment for two
non-trivial orbifold theories. First we studied the @xmath orbifold ,
whose field theory may be obtained via a @xmath projection of the ABJM
theory. We proved there that by Higgsing this theory one can indeed
produce QCS theories for all toric sub-diagrams. We then proceeded to
study another example, namely the orbifold @xmath . This has 18
inequivalent toric sub-diagrams, corresponding to 18 toric partial
resolutions, including, of course, the space @xmath . Since a direct
Douglas-Moore projection of the ABJM theory does not produce this
theory, we constructed instead the dual theory using the Un-Higgsing
algorithm which is derived in § A . This is a general algorithm for
toric quiver-Chern-Simons theories. Sequential un-Higgsing starting from
the ABJM theory for @xmath then leads to the @xmath field theory. We
have demonstrated in [ 1 ] that this theory can be Higgsed to theories
for all 18 toric partial resolutions.

In § 4.4 we studied yet another subtlety that does not arise in the
better-understood AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath relative. We showed that, in
general, certain resolutions of the CY four-fold singularities do not
admit a smooth reduction over the @xmath isometry that acts on the
M-theory circle. This observation suggests that the baryonic operators
in the dual field theory that correspond to such resolutions cannot be
described as usual as determinants of bifundamental fields. We expect
such operators to reside in sectors of the field theory that do not
admit a Lagrangian description. More work should be done in order to
understand the nature of these operators. When considering the RG flow
induced by giving VEVs to such operators one can see that in general the
IR geometry does not admit a smooth reduction to Type IIA. When such a
geometry corresponds to an isolated CY four-fold it is expected, as
explained in the main text, that a Lagrangian description of the field
theory at the IR fixed point does not exist, and thus a Lagrangian
description of the RG flow should not exist either. A better
understanding of such RG flows could lead to new insights on the field
theories in the far IR. We plan to continue with the study of these
issues in the future.

It is natural to extend our analysis and consider backgrounds with
exceptional six-cycles, as we briefly considered in § 4.5 . Upon
resolution, Euclidean M5 branes can be wrapped on these exceptional
divisors. As opposed to the Type IIB counterpart case for four-cycles,
the M2 branes sourcing the background do not break SUSY any further than
that preserved by the Euclidean brane in the resolution of the cone.
Thus, in very much the same spirit as in [ 72 ] , it is natural to
expect that these Euclidean branes contribute as non-perturbative
effects to the superpotential, even in the warped case. Nevertheless, a
comprehensive understanding of these issues is lacking. We have however
taken some first steps towards understanding this by computing the
warped volume of such branes. In particular we studied in detail the
example @xmath , which is a certain @xmath orbifold of @xmath . In
extending our findings to more general geometries we have found
expressions which might be of relevance in other contexts. It will be
interesting to see how our findings can be realized in the dual field
theory candidates that were proposed recently in [ 25 , 26 ] .

## Part II Symmetry Breaking in AdS@xmath/Cft@xmath

### Chapter 6 Overview

Having addressed symmetry-breaking in AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath , we now
move on to some new results in the more traditional AdS @xmath /CFT
@xmath story. We will be interested in the richest examples of the AdS
@xmath /CFT @xmath correspondence which are both tractable and also
non-trivial. These are given by the @xmath d @xmath gauge theories that
arise on a stack of D3 branes probing singular toric CY three-folds. In
the case of interest for us the CY singularity is a cone over a
five-dimensional Sasaki-Einstein manifold @xmath , and as a result the
gravity dual is of the form AdS @xmath [ 95 , 96 , 97 ] . For example,
one may take @xmath [ 95 ] , or the more recently discovered infinite
families of Sasaki-Einstein manifolds, @xmath [ 98 , 99 ] and @xmath [
100 , 101 ] . In all these cases, the dual field theories [ 102 , 103 ,
104 , 105 , 107 , 106 ] are conjectured to be supersymmetric gauge
theories, at an IR conformal fixed point. Over the past few years very
powerful techniques have been developed [ 108 , 109 , 107 , 110 , 111 ]
to describe these models in terms of quiver and dimer diagrams, that
provide the relevant information concerning the spectrum and couplings
of the corresponding gauge theory (for a review we refer the reader to [
112 ] ).

Similar to the QCS theories discussed in the previous part, the moduli
space of the field theory should at least contain a branch which is dual
to the position of the @xmath D3 branes on the geometry. This
corresponds to VEVs of mesonic operators in the field theory, which are
just traces of product of fields that form closed loops in the quiver.
In addition, the moduli space captures all the resolutions of the cone
that the branes probe. The supergravity backgrounds constructed from
these resolved cones allow, in general, for turning on flat NS-NS
B-field and R-R forms. Those that vanish at the boundaries are part of
the moduli space of the supergravity background. The supergravity moduli
just discussed correspond, in the moduli space of the field theory, to
VEVs of baryonic operators. Similar to the QCS theories studied in § I ,
these are gauge-invariant determinant-like operators. The moduli space
of such theories was studied recently in [ 48 , 66 ] and a remarkable
match was shown with the supergravity expectations [ 66 ] . One aim in
this part of the thesis is to resolve a puzzle that has been raised in
this paper. We aim to show that the directions in the moduli space of
the field theory that correspond to the NS-NS B-field moduli in the
supergravity are periodic . This is obviously expected as the NS-NS
B-field is periodic in string theory due to large gauge transformations.

Quiver gauge theories have in general both anomalous and non-anomalous
baryonic symmetries. The non-anomalous symmetries are dual to massless
gauge fields in the bulk. Such gauge fields originate from KK reduction
of the R-R four-form over three-cycles in the Sasaki-Einstein manifold.
Thus, the number of non-anomalous symmetries is the same as the number
of three-cycles in the Sasaki-Einstein manifold. Breaking of
non-anomalous baryonic symmetries in field theory results in the
appearance of massless Goldstone bosons and global strings in the IR [
119 ] . In the AdS/CFT context, this has been studied in the conifold
case in [ 71 ] and was generalized in [ 66 ] to general toric CY
backgrounds. It was shown that in the supergravity, R-R four-form
fluctuations that are sourced by wrapped D3 branes contain these
Goldstone bosons. These branes wrap blown-up two-cycles in the bottom of
the resolved cone @xmath and form global strings in the Minkowski space
directions around which the Goldstone boson has a monodromy. In
addition, there are @xmath anomalous baryonic symmetries in the
classical theory that are broken by quantum effects.

As was shown in [ 66 ] , for fully resolved geometries, the number of
massless modes coming from R-R four-form fluctuations is @xmath . Thus,
it exceeds the number of broken non-anomalous symmetries in the field
theory. Moreover, there are massless modes that originate from
fluctuations in the R-R two-form; these correspond to an additional
@xmath massless modes ¹ ¹ 1 The scalar partners of the R-R four-form and
two-form fluctuations come from metric and B-field fluctuations,
respectively. . Hence, the number of extra massless pseudo-scalars is
equal to the number of broken anomalous baryonic symmetries. However,
the breaking of anomalous baryonic symmetries should not result in
Goldstone bosons as these are not true symmetries of the quantum theory.
Therefore, the interpretation of the additional massless modes just
described in the field theory side is not clear. In [ 66 ] it was
suggested that such modes should be lifted by non-perturbative
corrections. In this thesis we want to show that the additional massless
modes coming from R-R four-form fluctuations can in fact be interpreted
as Goldstone bosons in some special cases.

As a start we study the moduli space of the field theory living on D3
branes probing the @xmath orbifold. We examine the appearance of
non-conformal theories for specific Higgsings. Such phases, we claim,
appear whenever the resolved geometry contains four-cycles. Such
Higgsings were observed before in the brane tilling context [ 108 ] ,
where the non-conformality translates to inconsistent tillings. This was
also studied in [ 113 ] for the @xmath orbifold. In this thesis, we
identify systematically which VEVs lead to such non-conformal theories
and suggest gravity interpretations of these RG flows. More
specifically, we show that these VEVs correspond in the supergravity to
specific values of the background compactly-supported B-field modes.
These B-field values allow for D3 branes to wrap two-cycles in the
resolved background. We suggest that these D3 branes are dual to global
strings that appear in the field theory due to the breaking of the
non-anomalous baryonic symmetry that emerges along the RG flow. This
allows us to interpret the additional massless modes originating from
R-R four-form fluctuations, which were discussed above, as Goldstone
bosons.

The organization of this part is as follows. In § 7 we review the quiver
field theories and the dual AdS @xmath supergravity backgrounds of
interest. In § 8 we discuss in detail the @xmath orbifold. We compare
its moduli space with that expected from supergravity. Then we turn to
discuss the non-conformal theory and the VEVs that lead to it. We end
this section with a supergravity analysis of the corresponding RG flow.
A summary and concluding comments are given in § 8 .

### Chapter 7 AdS@xmath backgrounds and field theories

In this chapter we briefly review the @xmath supersymmetric quiver field
theories of interest, focusing in particular on their vacuum moduli
spaces. For further details the reader is referred to [ 66 ] and
references therein.

#### 7.1 Quiver gauge theories

Our starting point is an @xmath gauge theory in @xmath d with product
gauge group @xmath , an arbitrary number of bifundamental @xmath in the
representation @xmath under the @xmath -th gauge groups, and a
superpotential @xmath .

We want to show now that the @xmath central @xmath s in @xmath become
global symmetries in the IR. It is easy to see that the diagonal @xmath
does not couple to any matter field. The rest of the @xmath s, due to
triangle anomalies in the quiver, are divided into anomalous and
non-anomalous symmetries ¹ ¹ 1 Such anomalies were not discussed in § I
because they can occur only in even spacetime dimensions. . The gauge
coupling of the non-anomalous @xmath s vanishes in the IR and the
anomalous @xmath gauge fields become massive by mixing with closed
string fields (due to the cancellation of the anomaly via the
Green-Schwarz mechanism). To see which symmetries are anomalous consider
the @xmath generated by @xmath where @xmath are the generators of the
central @xmath . The condition for the cancellation of such triangle
anomalies @xmath is just

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Modding out by the global symmetries we see that in the IR the gauge
group becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### 7.1.1 Classical vacuum moduli space

The classical VMS @xmath is determined by the following equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which are the F-term and D-term equations respectively.

In the Abelian case the moduli space @xmath is straightforward to
describe. The first equation describes the space of F-term solutions,
which is by construction an affine algebraic set. For the theories we
study in this thesis, this is itself a toric variety, of dimension
@xmath . This is the same master space @xmath that was mentioned in § 3
and studied in detail in [ 48 ] .

Finally, the combination of imposing the second equation in ( 7.1.1 )
and identifying by the gauge symmetries may be described as a Kähler
quotient of @xmath by a subgroup ² ² 2 Notice that the subgroup by which
we mod is the crucial difference between the computations of the moduli
spaces of the @xmath d quivers, studied in § I , and the @xmath d
quivers that we discuss here. @xmath . This subgroup does not include
the diagonal @xmath that does not couple to the bifundamental fields. In
particular, this Kähler quotient precisely sets the @xmath in ( 7.1.1 )
equal to zero. To summarize,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the Kähler quotient is taken at level zero, implying that @xmath
is a Kähler cone. We will refer to this space as the Abelian mesonic
moduli space. For a stack of @xmath coincident D3 branes transverse to a
CY three-fold singularity, one expects the moduli space to be the @xmath
th symmetric product of the three-fold.

The moment maps associated to the @xmath global @xmath s can take any
non-vanishing values. In the physics literature this is often associated
with turning on FI parameters @xmath that contribute to the D-terms ³ ³
3 Strictly speaking, since the @xmath s are not gauged no FI parameters
can be turned on. The FI-like contributions to the D-terms come from
VEVs for fields. . We will use this terminology throughout this thesis.
The Kähler quotient in ( 7.1.4 ) should then be taken with respect to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Setting the values of the FI parameters picks a point in @xmath that
solves ( 7.1.5 ). On the gravity side, as we explain in § 7.2 , these FI
parameters correspond to the Kähler class of the resolved CY geometry
and the compactly-supported B-field periods.

As opposed to the @xmath d QCS theories discussed in § I , the field
theories that are dual to isolated CY three-fold singularities with
vanishing four-cycles are not identified with the minimal GLSM. This is
due to the fact that the moduli space in Type IIB is not completely
geometrical and contains also directions coming from flat form-fields.
Therefore, the matching between the field theory and the gravity moduli
space is not as obvious as before. It is then convenient to present the
@xmath moduli space of a field theory with the aid of a FI space. Since
@xmath , as may be seen by summing over the moment maps in ( 7.1.5 ),
this space is just @xmath . The additional phases, corresponding to the
non-vanishing moment maps, survive the Kähler quotient and are fibered
over the FI space to form @xmath . The structure of @xmath corresponds
(very loosely) to @xmath fibered over @xmath , where @xmath is obtained
from ( 7.1.4 ) with the corresponding moment map levels. As we will see
later on, in the corresponding resolved CY three-fold @xmath , @xmath of
the @xmath directions ⁴ ⁴ 4 Recall from [ 66 ] that @xmath . in the FI
space correspond to Kähler moduli, while the other @xmath are dual to
the compactly-supported B-field moduli. The fact that the latter are
periodic, as expected from the periodicity of the B-field in string
theory, is not obvious and we will show it later on in an example.

The FI space is expected to be divided into chambers , where each one of
them corresponds to the fully resolved geometry. These chambers are
separated by walls . Part of the walls correspond to singular @xmath
spaces. When crossing such a wall the @xmath moduli space undergoes a
form of small birational transformation called a flip [ 127 ] . Inside
each such chamber the Kähler classes vary linearly with respect to the
FI parameters and the @xmath spaces are isomorphic. These chambers,
however, are further divided, as we will show later on in this thesis,
by additional walls that correspond to critical values of the
compactly-supported B-field periods.

#### 7.2 Gravity backgrounds

##### 7.2.1 AdS@xmath backgrounds

In this subsection we want to discuss the Type IIB supergravity solution
obtained by placing @xmath D3 branes at the tip of CY three-fold @xmath
, which is a cone over a Sasaki-Einstein space @xmath . The
corresponding metric and five-form are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the warp factor @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath is four-dimensional Minkowski space, with volume form @xmath
, and @xmath is a constant given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The near-horizon limit corresponds to the small @xmath limit; thus, the
metric ( 7.2.6 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is just the AdS @xmath metric. To fix the background one needs to
specify the flat NS-NS and R-R background fields. Turning on such fields
corresponds to exactly marginal deformations in the @xmath
superconformal field theories living on the boundary. For a
comprehensive discussion on such deformations we refer the reader to [
66 ] .

In the next subsection we want to review the supergravity backgrounds
that are obtained by resolving the CY cones. These backgrounds
correspond to non-vanishing VEVs of the scalar operators, which Higgses
the field theory.

##### 7.2.2 Symmetry-breaking backgrounds

The symmetry-breaking backgrounds of interest for us are analogous to
the backgrounds that were discussed in § 4.2 , thus we keep our
discussion in this subsection brief. The main emphasis will be placed on
the important differences that arise in the analysis of the form-field
moduli.

The crepant (partial) resolutions of the toric three-fold singularities
are described by the GKZ fan that lives in @xmath . A point inside each
of the polyhedral cones constructing the GKZ fan is a Kähler class on
the resolved CY @xmath . A CY metric on @xmath that approaches the given
cone metric asymptotically can always be found [ 83 , 84 , 85 ] . The
ten-dimensional metric in the resolved background is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath -flux still given by ( 7.2.6 ). Placing @xmath
spacetime-filling D3 branes at a point @xmath leads to the warp factor
equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath is the scalar Laplacian of @xmath acting on @xmath . Having
chosen a particular resolution and Kähler class, hence metric, we must
then find the warp factor @xmath satisfying ( 7.2.12 ) and this always
exists and is unique. A general discussion in the Type IIB context may
be found in [ 117 ] . The warped metric ( 7.2.11 ) describe a geometry
with two asymptotically AdS @xmath regions: one near @xmath that is
asymptotically AdS @xmath , where @xmath is the base of the unresolved
cone, and one near to the point @xmath , which is asymptotically AdS
@xmath , where @xmath is the base of the tangent cone at the stack of D3
branes.

Generally, the topology of @xmath allows one to turn on various
topologically non-trivial flat form-fields. The forms of interest sit in
compactly supported cohomology classes, and thus correspond to fixed
marginal couplings in the field theory in the UV. These form-field
moduli are discussed in [ 66 ] . In particular, we have the NS-NS
B-field, as well as the R-R two-form @xmath , which are harmonic
two-forms that are @xmath normalizable with respect to the unwarped
metric, and the four-form @xmath which is a harmonic @xmath normalizable
four-form with respect to the warped metric. The B-field modes, which
live in @xmath , are identified with @xmath FI parameters in the field
theory. The other @xmath FI parameters correspond to @xmath Kähler
moduli. The GKZ fan, which was discussed above, should match the @xmath
sub-space that is obtained by projecting the FI space on the Kähler
directions. Moreover, the Kähler moduli are naturally complexified by
noting that @xmath by Poincaré duality, and that this group classifies
the periods of @xmath through four-cycles in @xmath , which may either
be closed or have a boundary three-cycle on @xmath . More precisely,
taking into account large gauge transformations leads to the torus
@xmath . The pairing of the Kähler class with @xmath , and the B-field
with @xmath , is reflected by the complexification @xmath of the global
baryonic symmetry group in the field theory.

This supergravity background may be interpreted as a renormalization
group flow from the initial @xmath superconformal field theory to a new
SCFT in the IR as was first shown in [ 43 ] . There may be additional
light particles in the IR, namely Goldstone bosons associated to the
spontaneous breaking of non-anomalous baryonic symmetries.

### Chapter 8 The @xmath orbifold

We wish to discuss field theories dual to toric CY three-folds with
four-cycles in their resolutions. The simplest example of such a theory
is the @xmath orbifold theory. The space @xmath is defined as the
three-dimensional complex space @xmath under the identification

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The only fixed point under this identification is the origin, therefore
the near horizon geometry close to the point-like @xmath D3 branes is
smooth. More specifically, from ( 7.2.10 ) one sees that this is just
the AdS @xmath space.

#### 8.1 Field theory description

A stack of @xmath D3 branes propagating on the @xmath orbifold is dual
to a @xmath d SCFT described by the quiver in Figure 8.1 .

The field theory has a superpotential that reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This theory was studied in detail in [ 118 ] . In the UV the gauge group
is just @xmath containing a central @xmath which become global
symmetries in the IR. The diagonal @xmath decouples as no matter field
carries charge under it. In addition, any other combination of @xmath s
is anomalous as can be seen from ( 7.1.1 ). One may choose the following
orthogonal generators for these @xmath s

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the generators of the corresponding @xmath s in the
quiver.

##### 8.1.1 The GLSM description

We can compute the moduli space in the usual way. At a generic point, by
making use of gauge rotations, we can set all the fields to be diagonal.
Then, the effective theory reduces to @xmath copies of the @xmath
theory. To compute the moduli space of the Abelian theory one can use
the forward algorithm of [ 115 , 116 ] . The key point is that the
algorithm takes the data of the matter content and the superpotential,
and produces the GLSM charge matrix @xmath . The kernel of this is the
@xmath matrix that encodes the toric diagram of the CY three-fold. We
refer the reader to [ 116 ] for more details.

Working in the GLSM description we may write the relations between the
@xmath fields and the GLSM fields, which are usually named @xmath
-fields, as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the forward algorithm one can show that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now it is clear that, using the second and third rows in ( 8.1.5 ), one
can derive an expression for @xmath and @xmath , which corresponds to
internal points, in terms of the other @xmath -fields. Explicitly one
may write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the singular cone, for which @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are fixed by
@xmath . Moreover, each row @xmath in ( 8.1.5 ) encodes the charges of
the @xmath -fields under the GLSM @xmath gauge transformation. One can
use @xmath and @xmath to fix the phases of @xmath and @xmath . We are
then left with four degrees of freedom, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , and the constraint coming from the first row in the charge
matrix is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which after the corresponding gauge identification gives @xmath .
Indeed, taking the FI parameters to zero one can compute the @xmath
matrix by taking the null-space of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The columns of the @xmath matrix are the coordinates in the toric
diagram, which is presented in Figure 8.2 . This is indeed the toric
diagram that describes the @xmath orbifold. Notice that the GLSM
description is non-minimal, and this results in multiplicities of the
lattice points in the toric diagram.

Note that each spacetime field is the product of an inner and an outer
@xmath -field.

##### 8.1.2 The non-conformal theory

In [ 113 ] the Higgsing of the @xmath field theory was studied, and two
possible RG flows that end at @xmath @xmath SYM theory were proposed. In
the first scenario, the RG flow is induced by giving diagonal VEVs to
two fields that connect different nodes in the quiver. In the second
case, the RG flow is composed of two steps. In the first step, an
interesting non-conformal theory appears after giving a VEV to one of
the fields and RG flowing to the VEV scale. This corresponds in the GLSM
language to giving a VEV to one external and one internal @xmath -field
as may be seen from ( 8.1.1 ). One of the gauge nodes in this theory
confines and by giving a VEV to a mesonic operator the theory seems to
flow to the @xmath @xmath SYM theory in the deep IR.

We want now to review how the non-conformal theory appears. For the sake
of simplicity we will discuss just diagonal VEVs that correspond to
keeping the D3 branes in one stack. Let us concentrate for the time
being on the VEV @xmath . This VEV breaks the anomalous global symmetry
@xmath and leaves @xmath untouched. After giving such a VEV we see from
the following part in the superpotential

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath become massive. At scales below
@xmath , these fields should be integrated out. The resulting quiver of
the effective theory is presented in Figure 8.3 .

The new effective superpotential reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We may look, for example, at node 2. Since it has @xmath , this theory
cannot be in a conformal fixed point. In [ 113 ] it was argued that node
2 in this theory confines. This is indeed expected if the dynamical
scale of node 2 is dominating. This will be consistent with the
supergravity analysis that will be presented later on in this thesis. In
the IR one can treat the field theory effectively as a copy of @xmath
SQCD coupled to a pair of singlets @xmath with the superpotential of the
non-conformal theory. The IR of the SQCD theory is described in terms of
mesons and baryons

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where Latin indices stand for @xmath while Greek indices stand for
@xmath . Note that the superpotential is then written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The baryons carry charge under the baryonic symmetry under which the
fields transform as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This, we claim, is a non-anomalous symmetry that was evolved from @xmath
during the RG flow.

As argued by Seiberg [ 114 ] , the theory has a quantum mechanically
modified moduli space given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the dynamically generated scale of the SQCD theory. In
addition, we have to impose the F-terms coming from the superpotential.
Thus, finally, the moduli space is given by the solutions to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that, since node 2 is confined, in the IR the relevant degrees of
freedom are mesons and baryons. As such, the superpotential appears
written in terms of the meson @xmath , and thus automatically generates
an F-term ensuring that the @xmath fields commute. Let us introduce a
Lagrange multiplier chiral field @xmath , so that we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Vanishing VEVs for the entire set of fields is not a point on the moduli
space of this theory. As we explain now, a conformal fixed point can be
reached by considering non-vanishing VEVs that induce continuation of
the RG flow. In [ 113 ] the authors discussed the RG flow resulting from
a non-vanishing VEV for the mesonic operator @xmath only. This RG flow
ends at the @xmath @xmath SYM theory in the IR. It was then speculated
there that such RG flows might be dual to RG flows that are induced by
giving VEVs to two fields that connect different nodes in the quiver.
This was justified by the fact that these flows also end at @xmath
@xmath SYM theory in the IR. This speculation will be falsified later on
as it will be shown that the first RG flow corresponds to a choice of
critical value for the compactly supported B-field in the dual
supergravity background.

In this thesis, however, we will be interested in the flow that results
from giving VEVs to the baryons. After setting the only non-vanishing
VEV as @xmath and flowing to the new IR, the superpotential reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We see that the theory in the IR is just @xmath @xmath SYM. We expect to
see a Goldstone boson and global string due to the fact that the
non-anomalous baryonic symmetry was broken.

It is interesting to notice, as was argued in [ 113 ] , that in the
gravity there is just one scale, the size of the four-cycle. Thus, as
expected, in the large @xmath limit in the field theory the scale in
which the massive fields are integrated out is also the scale in which
node 2 in the non-conformal theory confines. The strong coupling scale
for the confining is related to the energy scale @xmath set by the VEV
@xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . For large t’Hooft coupling @xmath the scale @xmath and
@xmath are of the same order and we cannot distinguish between them.
Therefore, we cannot expect to see the moduli space of the non-conformal
theory and the emerging baryonic symmetry in the dual supergravity. But
in the far IR we can expect to see the Goldstone mode and global string
that correspond to the broken global baryonic symmetry. In the next
subsections we want to show that indeed these can be observed in the
dual supergravity background.

We want to start by describing the full moduli space of the @xmath
theory. It will prove useful to understand what are the moduli in the
supergravity that correspond to the VEVs that lead to the non-conformal
theory.

##### 8.1.3 @xmath theory - moduli space

From ( 8.1.5 ), the VMS equations are just

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where one needs to mod out by the corresponding @xmath transformations.
We now show that these equations can be written in three different
forms, in which two different internal @xmath -fields can be eliminated.
These correspond to three different chambers in the FI parameter space
of the field theory.

##### Chamber one

We rearrange ( 8.1.3 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

such that it is obvious that @xmath and @xmath can be eliminated with
respect to the other @xmath -fields, and their corresponding phases can
be fixed. We have to take @xmath and @xmath to guarantee that solutions
to these fields always exist. We are left with the first line that
describes branes on the resolved @xmath where the Kähler class is
proportional to @xmath . In every case we must necessarily find this
geometry since the only CY resolution of the @xmath singularity is
@xmath . This can be easily seen from the pq-web in Figure 8.2 that
represents the resolution of the CY.

To obtain the pq-web one first needs to choose a triangulation of the
toric diagram. This corresponds to a specific resolution of the CY
space. For @xmath there is just one choice, as can be seen from Figure
8.2 , which also describes the fully resolved space. The pq-web is
obtained by replacing faces by vertices, lines by orthogonal lines, and
vertices by faces in the triangulation of the toric diagram. This allows
one to map the topology of the resolved space into a two-dimensional
diagram [ 125 , 126 ] . Indeed, the triangle in the pq-web represents
the compact divisor @xmath , which is in agreement with the GLSM
picture. The @xmath zero section is at @xmath in this chamber of the
gauge theory FI space.

If we take @xmath we see from ( 8.1 ) that some of the external @xmath
-fields and all the internal @xmath -fields obtain a non-vanishing VEV.
This corresponds to putting the D3 branes away from the four-cycle and
in the field theory to a VEV of a closed loop of fields in the quiver
that corresponds to a mesonic operator. This Higgses the @xmath gauge
group to @xmath and the theory flows to @xmath @xmath SYM in the IR.
Notice that in order to obtain the non-conformal theory we were
discussing, we need to blow-up the four-cycle by taking @xmath , put the
D3 branes on the blown-up four-cycle by setting @xmath , and take @xmath
or @xmath . The latter condition guarantees that just one internal point
has a non-vanishing VEV. On the other hand, setting @xmath and @xmath
results in an RG flow that ends at the @xmath @xmath SYM in the IR.

The position of the branes on the four-cycle is determined by @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , which are constrained by the first row in ( 8.1.3 ).
This is just a point on @xmath and all such points are equivalent, since
@xmath is homogeneous. Thus, these directions can be suppressed when
discussing the moduli space of the field theory. Therefore, the
interesting information on the moduli space of the field theory is just
the FI parameter space.

##### Chamber two

A straightforward manipulation of ( 8.1.3 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can see that @xmath and @xmath may be eliminated and their phases
fixed. This can be achived if we restrict @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
The discussion is then along the same lines as in the previous
paragraph. This time, to obtain the non-conformal theory, we take @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath or @xmath . Again, since @xmath , the branes sit on
the blown-up cycle with the resolved geometry being the same as before.

##### Chamber three

A straightforward manipulation of ( 8.1.3 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can see that @xmath and @xmath may be eliminated and their phases
fixed. This can be achived if we restrict @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
We see similar behaviour as for the other chambers that we just
described. To obtain the non-conformal theory we have to take @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath or @xmath , such that the branes again sit on the
blown-up cycle of the resolved geometry.

To conclude, giving VEVs to fields, such that no closed loop of fields
in the quiver has a non-vanishing VEV, results in a blown-up four-cycle,
and the D3 branes sit on the exceptional cycle @xmath in @xmath . Figure
8.4 (a) describes this part of the moduli space. The blue lines, which
are the borderlines of the different regions, correspond to the values
of the FI parameters @xmath and @xmath that bring us to the
non-conformal theory after RG flow to the VEV scale. Any other point in
the diagram corresponds to VEVs that induce RG flows that end at @xmath
@xmath SYM in the IR. In Figure 8.4 (b) we show the path that
corresponds to a constant Kähler class. Following this path it is easy
to see that the FI parameter that is “orthogonal” to the one that
represents the size of the cycle is periodic . This will be consistent
with interpreting this on the gravity side with the period of the
B-field through the @xmath fibre of @xmath . We will also see that the
non-conformal theory corresponds in the supergravity to a resolved
background with one of the three critical values of the B-field period,
as the diagram suggests.

#### 8.2 Gravity description

The gravity background corresponding to the resolved orbifold @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This is the usual Calabi ansatz, which works for the canonical line
bundle over any Kähler-Einstein manifold. It is natural to introduce the
vielbein

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The metric then becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting @xmath in ( 7.2.11 ) one obtains the metric of the
ten-dimensional Type IIB background. The warp factor @xmath is given by
( 7.2.12 ). As usual, we may solve ( 7.2.12 ) by writing

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath are the relevant harmonics, @xmath denotes collectively
the angular coordinates in the internal manifold, and @xmath stands for
the particular point where the stack of D3 branes sits. We refer the
reader to [ 113 ] for the explicit solution for this warp factor.

##### 8.2.1 Gravity moduli: B-field and @xmath

As discussed in § 7.2 , the classical gauge theory has a large VMS. One
thus expects to find massless scalar fields associated with these flat
directions in field space. We are now interested in discussing the
form-field moduli in the resolved background. As we reviewed, it is
possible to turn on flat form-fields in the resolved background that
restrict to trivial classes on the UV boundary. In this subsection we
want to discuss the B-field and @xmath R-R two-form. The B-field moduli
will become an important factor in the following discussion. The @xmath
R-R four-form will not be discussed here; however fluctuations in this
direction will become important later on in this section.

The B-field and @xmath moduli correspond to harmonic two-forms that are
@xmath normalizable with respect to the unwarped metric. For the
resolved @xmath , @xmath , thus we are looking for one such two-form.
Let us define @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.2.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We may consider the following closed four-form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The condition @xmath boils down to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solution to this equation which vanishes at infinity is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

@xmath being an integration constant.

We may now compute the square @xmath norm of the form, which is finite

  -- -- -- ----------
           (8.2.32)
  -- -- -- ----------

In turn, we have that @xmath may be written, as expected, as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We may now consider the following ansatz for the supergravity zero modes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the supergravity equations of motion one can see that the scalar
fields @xmath and @xmath are decoupled [ 66 ] . Given the properties of
@xmath , it is straightforward to see that the @xmath and @xmath fields
satisfy free field equations of motion in the Minkowski space
directions.

It is convenient to choose the normalization factor to be @xmath . With
this choice the above calculations show that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since @xmath , this shows that @xmath is then an @xmath harmonic form
representing the generator of this group. Here @xmath is the total space
of @xmath . An exact sequence shows that @xmath maps to @xmath times the
generator of @xmath , where the @xmath is the same as in @xmath .
Indeed, a simple calculation shows that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

##### 8.2.2 The periodicity of @xmath and @xmath

Consider a Euclidean fundamental string running along @xmath . Its
(Euclidean) action is

  -- -- -- ----------
           (8.2.37)
  -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath is some UV cut-off and @xmath is the string tension. In
fact, this cut-off is not required since the integral is convergent.

Under a shift

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the partition function will not change. Thus, we have that @xmath is a
periodic variable of period @xmath (and so is @xmath , had we considered
a D1 string, upon changing @xmath ).

We identify this B-field period, up to a constant factor, with the FI
parameter in the field theory that corresponds to the closed path in
Figure 8.4 . Recall that supersymmetry pairs the B-field with @xmath ,
and the latter corresponds to a fibre over the FI parameter space in the
field theory.

##### 8.2.3 D3 branes on the resolved cone and global strings

A spontaneously broken global symmetry in a field theory generally leads
to Goldstone bosons and global strings. The first corresponds to the
flat directions given by acting with a broken symmetry generator. In
supergravity the Goldstones are fluctuations of R-R fields, and are
hence pseudo-scalars. Their scalar supersymmetric partners come from
metric and B-field fluctuations.

In [ 66 ] the authors have shown the existence of massless scalar fields
on @xmath associated with linearized deformations of the B-field and R-R
field moduli, and argued that such modes can be obtained also from
fluctuations of the metric. In general @xmath such modes are coming from
B-field and @xmath fluctuations and @xmath from @xmath and metric
fluctuations. Thus, it was argued that the dual field theory then
includes corresponding massless particles.

The linearized fluctuations just discussed may be associated with the
Goldstone bosons and their supersymmetric partners. However, as
discussed in [ 66 ] , these modes cannot be interpreted as Goldstone
bosons when the corresponding broken symmetries are anomalous, since
these symmetries do not survive in the quantum theory.

In the @xmath field theory all the baryonic global symmetries are
anomalous. The supergravity backgrounds constructed from resolved cones
are dual to field theories in which these symmetries are ‘‘broken’’ ¹ ¹
1 They are really already broken by quantum effects. . However, for
three values of the B-field there is an emerging non-anomalous baryonic
symmetry during the RG flow as we argued in the previous section. We
claimed that the supergravity solution is dual to a field theory in
which this symmetry is broken. We want to argue that the corresponding
Goldstone boson and its supersymmetric partner originate from specific
fluctuations in the R-R four-form and metric respectively. Since the
fluctuations in the metric are somewhat involved, as explained in [ 66 ]
, we will discuss just the fluctuations for the R-R four-form in detail
in the next subsection.

As discussed in [ 119 ] , the breaking of a global @xmath symmetry
results in global strings around which the Goldstone boson has a
monodromy. Global strings in the Minkowski space associated with the
broken global symmetry were discussed in the AdS/CFT context for the
conifold case in [ 71 ] . It was shown that a D3 brane wrapping the
two-cycle in the bottom of the resolved cone sources fluctuations that
contain the Goldstone boson. Furthermore, this boson has a monodromy
around the string-like wrapped D3 brane in the Minkowski space.

Coming back to the @xmath theory, we will show that a global string,
obtained by wrapping a D3 brane on a two-cycle, appears in supergravity
just for three critical values of the B-field, as expected from the
field theory analysis. For other values of the B-field the massless
fields are still there but the wrapped D3 brane is not SUSY, and this
suggests that indeed these fields cannot be interpreted as Goldstone
bosons in these cases. This is expected since for non-critical values of
the B-field the only “broken” baryonic symmetries are anomalous.

We now wish to discuss the wrapped D3 brane in greater detail. Notice
that the blown-up four-cycle, being a @xmath , contains a topologically
non-trivial @xmath . So we may consider a D3 brane wrapping this
two-cycle by taking the world-volume of the brane to be @xmath . This
brane, having half of its world-volume on the Minkowski space and half
in the internal space, is not sensitive to the warp factor. Thus, its
energy at @xmath is a constant, proportional to @xmath . From the
Minkowski space point of view, it looks like a string.

Notice that if we were considering a D5 brane wrapping the four-cycle,
similar arguments show that the tension of this brane blows up in the
IR. This shows that in the IR of the field theory the corresponding
string is infinitely massive and therefore completely decoupled. It is
interesting that such D5 branes source @xmath fluctuations. Such a
fluctuation that solves the supergravity equations, and corresponds to a
massless field in @xmath , should have an interpretation in the field
theory. One might consider this as the fluctuation that contains the
Goldstone boson coming from the broken emerging baryonic symmetry.
However, since in this case the global string, namely a D5 brane wrapped
on four-cycle, is not part of the field theory spectrum, we do not want
to interpret it as such. Similarly, if we consider the R-R four-form
fluctuation for non-critical B-field period discussed above, since in
such a background the D3 brane wrapping the two-cycle is not SUSY the
global string is absent, and the interpretation of the corresponding
massless field is not clear to us.

To determine the criteria under which the D3 brane wrapping the
two-cycle in the resolved cone is SUSY we follow [ 120 ] . In their
notations, the two supersymmetry parameters @xmath are Majorana-Weyl
spinors of positive ten-dimensional chirality, and may be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the spinors in the internal four-dimensional
and external six-dimensional space, respectively.

The conditions for the D3 brane to preserve the supersymmetry of the
background are given in (3.6) and (3.7) of [ 120 ] , which are
reproduced here for convenience

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The four-dimensional gamma matrices @xmath are real, the six-dimensional
ones @xmath are antisymmetric and purely imaginary, and underlined
indices represent an orthonormal frame. @xmath here stands for the
gauge-invariant two-form that lives on the D3 brane. The D3 brane
wrapped over a two-cycle corresponds to @xmath and @xmath . In addition,
from the discussion after (3.7) in [ 120 ] , @xmath in our case.

We want to rephrase the conditions in terms of the geometrical objects
@xmath and @xmath introduced in [ 120 ] . For the branes which are
strings in the @xmath d Minkowski space the second equation in ( 8.2.40
) reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath is the pull back to the two-cycle and @xmath denotes that
just the two-forms inside the brackets should be considered. The warped
background of interest is a special case with @xmath structure ² ² 2
Read section 5 in [ 120 ] for more details in which, from (5.2) in [ 120
] , @xmath and @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath phase parametrizes the embedding of a @xmath family of @xmath
algebras inside the bulk @xmath superalgebra. Following for example [
121 ] , it is easy to see that in the presence of a non-trivial warp
factor, @xmath takes a fixed value such that @xmath is purely imaginary
³ ³ 3 Note that in [ 121 ] @xmath . However, there the authors are
working in Euclidean signature in which @xmath , while here we have
@xmath . . Therefore the equations in ( 8.2.42 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

respectively. Here @xmath is the almost complex structure with respect
to which the six-dimensional metric @xmath is Hermitian and @xmath is a
@xmath -form constructed from the spinor as explained in [ 120 ] . The
two equations in ( 8.2.44 ) are easily translated to the SUSY conditions
that read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The second condition is equivalent to demanding that the two-cycle is
holomorphically embedded. In addition, we see that we have to set @xmath
to have a supersymmetric brane wrapped over the two-cycle. Going back to
the first equation in ( 8.2.40 ), this condition is satisfied for half
of the background spinors, so our strings are one-half BPS.

The @xmath condition reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we used ( 8.2.36 ) and denoted the quantized period of @xmath as
@xmath . From ( 8.2.38 ) and using the fundamental string tension @xmath
, we see that @xmath . Thus, we find that @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . We would like to identify these three special @xmath -field
values with the three values of the @xmath -field implied by the gauge
theory analysis.

Before we turn our attention to the R-R four-form fluctuations that are
sourced by this wrapped brane, we want to point out that an E4 brane
wrapping the blown-up four-cycle is another interesting brane that one
might consider. We studied in [ 3 ] the SUSY conditions for such a brane
and concluded that the brane is SUSY for three values of the B-field
period. As we explained in § 4.5 this instanton does not generate a
non-perturbative superpotential due to the wrong number of zero modes.
However, this brane might contribute to higher F-terms. As discussed in
[ 122 , 123 ] , instantons with four zero modes generate quantum
deformations to the moduli space that correspond to the @xmath
corrections in the corresponding gauge field theories. In our case we
indeed observe such corrections in the field theory; however, these
corrections are relevant in the middle of the RG flow. More precisely,
these corrections are relevant at the scale of the given VEV and not in
the far IR, which is what we argued our supergravity solution
corresponds to. This seems consistent as the volume of the E4 brane
blows-up due to the warp factor. Since the contribution of the E4 brane
to the F-term is proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the warped
volume of the four-cycle, one expects such contributions to indeed
vanish.

##### 8.2.4 The fluctuation containing the Goldstone mode

We now intend to examine further the global string we have found.
Specifically, we want to study the linearized backreaction in the
background due to the presence of this probe D3 brane. To linearized
order this probe sources fluctuations in the R-R four-form potential
containing the term @xmath , where @xmath is a two-form in @xmath and
@xmath is a closed two-form in the resolved cone. The latter is
proportional to the volume form of the two-cycle in the bottom of the
resolved cone wrapped by the D3 brane. The linearized equations of
motion that should be satisfied are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The self-duality condition is satisfied by taking

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, the equations of motion reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Hodge duals with respect to the unwarped
Minkowski and resolved orbifold metrics, respectively.

##### Solving for @xmath

From [ 113 ] we learn that the warp factor is a function of @xmath and
@xmath when the @xmath D3 branes sit at the bottom of the resolved cone.
We start with the ansatz

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath condition reduces to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.2.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have two equations and two functions, and together with the right
boundary conditions these equations are expected to have a solution. We
take the boundary conditions to be @xmath and @xmath with @xmath when
@xmath goes to infinity. Since the warp factor behaves as @xmath when
@xmath goes to infinity, the equations ( 8.2 ) and ( 8.2 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 (8.2.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.2.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These equations have decaying solutions when @xmath and @xmath is a
constant. Therefore for large @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand, when taking @xmath it is straightforward to see that
the equations are solved for constant @xmath and @xmath , and thus the
corresponding two-form is proportional to that in ( 8.2.33 ).

These are indeed the boundary conditions that one expects from the
discussion in [ 66 ] . From the discussion there we learn that @xmath .
The following exact sequence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.2.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

together with the fact that @xmath shows that the two-forms in @xmath
restrict to trivial two-form classes in @xmath . Recall that the pull
back of the Thom class ⁴ ⁴ 4 The Thom class is represented by a form in
@xmath that gives 1 when integrated over the fibre. to the zero section
@xmath is the Euler class, which in our case is just @xmath , where
@xmath is the two-cycle inside @xmath . Thus, the pull back of the
@xmath normalizable two-form with respect to the warped metric on @xmath
is also a two-form in this class. This then shows that the @xmath part
in this fluctuation is sourced electrically by a D3 brane wrapping the
@xmath .

Following [ 71 ] we want to show that the R-R four-form fluctuations
just discussed contain the Goldstone boson. We start by introducing the
field @xmath by dualizing the two-form @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting this back into ( 8.2.48 ), the fluctuation in the five-form
field strength reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus the fluctuation of the four-form potential is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (8.2.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For the conifold [ 71 ] it was argued that @xmath in ( 8.2.59 ) is the
Goldstone boson for the broken baryonic @xmath . To show that, the
authors demonstrated that the fluctuation couples through the
Wess-Zumino term to the E4 condensate that corresponds to the VEV of the
baryonic operator. Moreover, it was shown that the asymptotic behaviour
of ( 8.2.59 ) in the UV corresponds to a VEV for the baryonic current in
the field theory.

For the broken emerging baryonic symmetry these checks cannot be
repeated due to the fact that the gravity solution does not capture the
intermediate non-conformal theory. Nevertheless, we want to interpret
the @xmath massless field as the Goldstone boson coming from the broken
emerging baryonic symmetry. This is strongly suggested by the presence
of a global string for critical B-field values. The massless field
@xmath has a monodromy around this global string ⁵ ⁵ 5 For a more
elaborate discussion on this type of global string we refer the reader
to [ 71 ] . since the wrapped D3 brane electrically sources @xmath .
This is exactly the sector that is expected to appear whenever a global
symmetry is broken.

The global string we have found is crucial for the interpretation of the
massless field as a Goldstone boson. For generic B-field VEV this global
string is not supersymmetric and thus the massless field cannot be
interpreted as a Goldstone boson. This is of course expected from the
field theory analysis as for generic B-field no non-anomalous baryonic
symmetries emerge during the RG flow. Adding this to the fact that the
baryonic symmetries in the UV are anomalous, it is clear that the
discussed symmetry-breaking sector should not be observed. We summarize
our findings in the next chapter and comment on similar results that
were obtained by studying other examples in our original paper.

### Chapter 9 Final comments and summary

In this part of the thesis we studied the moduli space of field theories
that are dual to D3 branes probing toric CY three-folds that contain
four-cycles in their resolution. We have shown that there is a
remarkable agreement between the moduli space in the field theory and
supergravity in the orbifold example. One new result is the fact that
the directions in the moduli space of the field theory which are dual to
the B-field moduli are indeed periodic. This was demonstrated for the
orbifold in this manuscript and for two more examples in the original
paper that this thesis is based on [ 3 ] . For a general resolved CY
space @xmath , one expects @xmath such directions.

The main aim of this part of the thesis was to show that there is extra
information in the field theory moduli space that singles out critical
values of the compactly-supported background B-field. In the @xmath
example, these critical values of the B-field were identified with the
blue lines in the FI parameter space in Figure 8.4 . In the field theory
these critical values correspond to RG flows that result in intermediate
non-conformal phases. This seems to falsify the speculation in [ 113 ] ,
made for the @xmath orbifold, arguing that such RG flows are induced by
giving different VEVs that also end with @xmath @xmath SYM theory in the
deep IR.

We claimed that some of the surviving anomalous baryonic symmetries in
the UV become non-anomalous during the RG flow, depending on the B-field
in the background. To make our claim more rigorous it will be very
important to understand what is the exact mechanism that explains this
result. Here and in [ 3 ] we focused on the fully resolved geometries.
However, there are non-conformal phases that appear when the geometry is
just partly resolved. The identifications of the corresponding VEVs with
critical values of the B-field seems to generalize to those cases too.
It will be interesting to study this in more detail.

One can consider giving non-vanishing VEVs to mesonic operators in the
confined theories. This was done in [ 113 ] for the @xmath orbifold. It
seems to us that such VEVs correspond to moving the branes from the
bottom of the resolved cone. However, this should be studied more
carefully. More interesting scenarios seem to appear when one keeps the
branes at the bottom of the cone by choosing vanishing VEVs for mesonic
operators and non-vanishing VEVs for baryonic operators in the confined
theory. In this case the emerging baryonic symmetry is broken, and the
existence of the confined theory leaves a trace in the IR in the form of
a Goldstone boson and global string.

The next thing we did was to look to see if we could find critical
values of the B-field from the supergravity analysis. Indeed we have
shown that just for three critical values of the B-field in the
supergravity background one can wrap D3 branes on the blown-up @xmath .
Those D3 branes source fluctuations in the R-R four-form that we suggest
contain the Goldstone boson from the broken emergent symmetry. These D3
branes are also global strings, and the Goldstone has monodromy around
them as expected for a broken global symmetry. For generic B-field VEV
we do not see those global strings and thus the zero mode for generic
B-field value cannot be interpreted as a Goldstone boson. This is an
important difference, and is a strongly supportive argument in favour of
interpreting the mode coming from the four-form at critical B-field
values as a Goldstone boson. With these results we completed a field
theory and a supergravity analysis that showed that three B-field VEVs
are special and generate different RG flows in the @xmath case.

We repeated this analysis in [ 3 ] for the Sasaki-Einstein five-manifold
@xmath , which is a @xmath fibration over @xmath . There we made a
distinction between two different types of D3 branes that wrap
two-cycles and form global strings in the Minkowski space. The first
type corresponds to D3 branes that source fluctuations that contain the
Goldstone bosons coming from the broken non-anomalous baryonic
symmetries in the UV. There are @xmath such branes corresponding with
the @xmath baryonic symmetries in the field theory [ 66 ] . The second
type of D3 branes, we suggest, source fluctuations that contain the
Goldstone bosons coming from broken emerging non-anomalous baryonic
symmetries. In general, one expects to see @xmath such D3 branes. These
branes can be wrapped just for critical values of the @xmath B-field
moduli, as explained.

There are several interesting directions for future work. As we have
mentioned in the main text, one should go beyond the supergravity
analysis to study the intermediate non-conformal theory, which is not
captured by the supergravity solution. In fact, this is a general issue
that repeats itself in other known non-conformal theories with gravity
duals. Another direction that was not discussed in this thesis is the
computation of condensates of the baryonic operators. Such condensates,
which correspond to Euclidean D3 branes in string theory, were studied
in general CY backgrounds in [ 66 ] . The formula that they derive
implies that indeed the world-volume action of the Euclidean D3 brane
depends on the B-field moduli. This is of course expected from the field
theory since the spectrum of the operators that obtain VEVs, for
critical and non-critical B-field periods, is different. However, more
work should be done to make this map precise. An additional interesting
research avenue concerns the generalization of our findings to more
complicated geometries. In this thesis and in [ 3 ] we confined
ourselves to the @xmath orbifold and @xmath examples in which the moduli
space, together with the critical B-field VEVs, seem to match nicely
with the supergravity results. As we have shown in [ 3 ] , when there
are more four-cycles in the resolved geometry the structure of the
moduli space becomes much richer. This was demonstrated in [ 3 ] for the
@xmath orbifold. In this example the resolved supergravity background is
not known and the interpretation of the structure of the critical walls
in the moduli space cannot be easily understood. It will be important to
develop methods with which the string theory dual can be investigated
without dependence on the explicit supergravity solution. As a final
remark, besides being of great theoretical interest, Calabi-Yau cones
with vanishing four-cycles are interesting for model building. This was
recently investigated in [ 129 ] . We hope that our study will
contribute to the exploration of such constructions in the future.

### Appendix A Un-Higgsing in QCS theories

At present there is no known general method for constructing QCS
theories for orbifolds @xmath as a projection of the ABJM theory (For
recent work on orbifolds of the ABJM theory, see [ 40 ] ). This leads us
to construct an un-Higgsing algorithm where one starts with a QCS theory
for a singularity @xmath , and then enlarges the quiver in a specific
way, corresponding to “blowing up” @xmath . We begin with a discussion
of the known constraints on QCS theories, and then describe a general
un-Higgsing algorithm.

##### a.0.1 Calabi-Yau, toric and tiling conditions

We begin by reviewing the conditions which should be satisfied by a QCS
theory on M2 branes probing a non-compact toric Calabi-Yau four-fold. In
order that the VMS is Calabi-Yau, we require that for each node in the
quiver the number of arrows entering and leaving the node should be
equal. Notice this is the same condition as gauge anomaly cancellation
in the @xmath d YM parent. The superpotential satisfies the toric
condition if each chiral multiplet appears precisely twice in @xmath :
once with a positive sign and once with a negative sign. This ensures
that the solution to the F-term equations is a toric variety. The last
condition that we want to impose is the so-called tiling condition . All
known quiver theories related to toric Calabi-Yaus, in both @xmath and
@xmath dimensions, obey this condition due to their brane-tiling/dimer
model description [ 42 , 12 , 14 ] . This leads to the elegant condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of nodes, @xmath is the number of fields and
@xmath is the number of terms in the superpotential. Whenever the rule
is broken in the resulting theory the dimension of its VMS is no longer
four.

##### a.0.2 The un-Higgsing algorithm

The un-Higgsing procedure for quiver gauge theories was studied in [ 41
] in the context of D3 branes probing complex cones over del Pezzo
surfaces. Here we wish to systematize this method and use it as a guide
for constructing QCS theories living on M2 brane world-volumes. As we
will explain shortly, the un-Higgsing process for theories with toric
Calabi-Yau four-folds as VMS is quite restrictive. The basic idea is
that by adding one gauge node at a time we can obtain theories whose
VMSs contain the original toric diagram as a sub-diagram; thus this will
be a QCS form of “blow-up”.

Let us begin with the simplest case: un-Higgsing by adding one field to
the quiver. This step is shown schematically in Figure A.1 (a). The
gauge nodes which sit on the circumference of the dotted circle are
those in the original theory which is being un-Higgsed. The gauge node
sitting inside the circle is that being added to the theory. We have
indicated the original node in red, indexed by @xmath , and the new node
in blue, indexed by @xmath . We shall say that @xmath participates in
the un-Higgsing process, because it will be attached to @xmath , while
all other nodes in the original theory are non-participatory.

Next, we add to the original quiver a bifundamental field @xmath charged
under @xmath ; this is an arrow connecting node @xmath to node @xmath .
The key point in un-Higgsing is that we must be able to Higgs the new
theory to the original one by letting @xmath acquire a non-zero VEV. To
continue to satisfy the toric condition, the field @xmath must be added
simultaneously to a positive and a negative term which already appears
in the superpotential, and no extra terms should be introduced. In order
to exhaust all possiblities for constructing new consistent theories the
@xmath index should run over all values between @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath is the number of gauge nodes in the original quiver.
Moreover, the field @xmath must be inserted to all possible pairs of
negative and positive terms in the superpotential.

However, notice that after adding @xmath to the quiver, the Calabi-Yau
condition mentioned in the previous subsection is broken: the number of
arrows that enter node @xmath or node @xmath is not equal to the number
of those that leave. To remedy this we need to relocate the heads and
tails of arrows in the original quiver between node @xmath and node
@xmath . For example, for a three-noded quiver with nodes @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath we can do this by changing the tail of @xmath to
@xmath . Finally, we assign CS levels to nodes @xmath and @xmath such
that their sum is equal to the original CS level ¹ ¹ 1 We refer the
reader to [ 1 , 27 ] for a discussion on the Higgsing of QCS theories.
of node @xmath .

Next we turn to more complicated un-Higgsing possibilities. Adding more
than one field forces us to add terms to the superpotential, instead of
simply adjoining the fields to existing terms, as was the case above;
otherwise, it would be impossible to obtain the original quiver by
Higgsing. The only possibility is that after introducing such new terms
to the superpotential, some of the fields will become massive after the
Higgsing and will be integrated out. Therefore, we see immediately that
it is not possible to un-Higgs the theory by adding only two fields:
insertion of a term that contains two fields is not a valid un-Higgsing
step as these fields would be integrated out even before Higgsing
because we would be adding a quadratic mass term.

Hence, let us move on to consider introducing three new fields. In
accordance with the labelling in Figure A.1 (b), the three fields are
denoted @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the field which we
wish to Higgs in order to reproduce the original theory in the IR. Since
the three fields should disappear from the IR theory after Higgsing,
there must be a cubic term in the superpotenital which contains all
three. This new cubic term should be gauge invariant, and thus the
fields which we add must form a closed loop. Notice that after Higgsing
@xmath we are left with a term that contains two fields: @xmath and
@xmath . Those fields should be integrated out in the IR as they give
rise to a quadratic mass term.

To satisfy the toric condition, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath should also
appear in other terms in the superpotential and have opposite sign with
respect to the cubic term. Furthermore, we must satisfy ² ² 2 A priori ,
violating this condition is not a problem. However, in all cases that we
have studied the resulting theory will then have a five
complex-dimensional VMS. the tiling condition ( A.0.1 ). Now, since we
have added one node and three fields, we must add two terms to the
superpotential. The cubic term mentioned above is one of them. What
about the other? There are two options: to add a new term or to split
one of the existing terms into two. The first option would just be the
cubic term with opposite sign, which would simply cancel in the Abelian
theory and hence is ineffective. We must therefore take the second
option and split an existing term, inserting @xmath and @xmath
separately into the two split terms. This guarantees that after
integrating out these fields the split terms are united. To see this in
more detail, suppose the original superpotential contains a term @xmath
, where @xmath and @xmath are monomials in bifundamental fields; that
is: @xmath . Then our procedure would change this superpotential to
@xmath . When @xmath acquires a VEV (say @xmath for convenience), the
equation of motion for @xmath becomes @xmath , and the first and third
terms cancel while the middle term becomes @xmath , as required.
Finally, @xmath can be added to an arbitrary term with the opposite sign
to the cubic term.

In order to exhaust all possibilities we split terms, insert fields,
assign CS levels and vary @xmath and @xmath in all possible combinations
(notice that @xmath could equal @xmath for the case of adjoint fields).
Furthermore, we insert the cubic term both with positive and negative
signs and allow relocation of heads or tails of arrows involving nodes
@xmath and @xmath in ways that satisfy the Calabi-Yau condition, as in
the case of adding one field.

The next possibility is un-Higgsing by introducing four new fields. As
shown in Figure A.1 (d) and (e), this can be done in two different ways.
Let us discuss (d) first. Notice that the only way this can be achieved
is by insertion of two new cubic terms into the superpotential: @xmath .
However, this violates the Calabi-Yau condition on both nodes @xmath and
@xmath . Since the field to be Higgsed is @xmath , we can transform
heads and tails of arrows between nodes @xmath and @xmath only and
cannot fix the Calabi-Yau condition on node @xmath . Therefore this
un-Higgsing step is allowed only when @xmath is equal to @xmath . The
same analysis can be applied for (e), and the result is the same. With
this constraint, since we have introduced four new fields, one gauge
node, and two new terms to the superpotential, the tiling condition is
violated. In the theories that we have checked this results in
five-dimensional VMSs. We hence cannot introduce four fields.

The final un-Higgsing process involves the insertion of five new fields.
Careful examination implies that this can be done by introducing two
cubic terms into the superpotential with opposite signs. If we use the
notation of Figure A.1 (c), we can write the terms as follows: @xmath (
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be equal). Notice that by Higgsing @xmath
we obtain two terms in the superpotential that contain two fields each,
and therefore four fields should be integrated out. By a similiar
analysis to the above, after satisfying the tiling condition by
splitting terms in the superpotential it can be seen that @xmath and
@xmath should appear in different split negative terms. Similarly,
@xmath and @xmath should appear in different split positive terms.

Finally, note that five fields is the maximum number of fields that can
be introduced if one wants to obtain the original theory by Higgsing
only one field. This concludes the discussion of our un-Higgsing
algorithm.

### Appendix B The warp factor for resolutions of @xmath and @xmath

We are interested in studying supergravity backgrounds corresponding to
M2 branes localized on the space @xmath , which will be the resolution
of either @xmath or @xmath . After placing @xmath spacetime-filling M2
branes at a point @xmath in the resolved space @xmath we must solve the
Green’s equation ( 4.2.41 ) for the warp factor @xmath . Using the
explicit form of the Laplacian we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since we can choose coordinates such that the metrics we are considering
are formally identical and given by ( 4.1.5 ), the Laplacian in both
cases can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the angular Laplacian @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As we show in ( B.1.21 ) in the next subsection, we can expand the delta
function in terms of eigenfunctions of the Laplacian such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we denote collectively the angular coordinates as @xmath , and
define @xmath and @xmath . Then, the equation for the warp factor reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have defined for simplicity

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can now expand @xmath in eigenfunctions of the angular Laplacian.
Since @xmath is just a fixed point (not a variable), we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then the radial equation we have to solve reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.0.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the angular eigenvalue of @xmath , to which we now turn.

#### b.1 Angular eigenfunctions in @xmath

We want to consider ( B.0.3 ) with fixed @xmath and construct
eigenfunctions of such an operator. For this we first concentrate on
each of the @xmath operators. For each @xmath , these look like

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that these angular Laplacians are the same as those for the
conifold. As such, many technical details and results can be borrowed
from [ 70 ] .

We consider the following function @xmath . It is obvious that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (B.1.11)
  -- -- -- ----------

Therefore it is interesting to consider the following eigenfunctions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This equation has two solutions, given in terms of hypergeometric
functions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have introduced a labelling for the quantum numbers
distinguishing the eigenfunctions. If @xmath solution ( B.1.13 ) is
non-singular while if @xmath it is ( B.1.14 ) that is the non-singular
solution. Both have eigenvalue under each @xmath operator given by
@xmath . Given these results, we can consider the functions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the multi-index @xmath stands for @xmath and where @xmath is just
a normalization factor such that the norm of @xmath is one. It is now
clear that @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now note that the @xmath are also eigenfunctions of the singular
cone. Indeed, we can consider the Laplacian on the unit @xmath , namely
@xmath . Then @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the @xmath are also normalized eigenfunctions for the @xmath
operator. Being eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator, these satisfy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we use @xmath to generically parametrize the angular coordinates
and @xmath stands for the angular part of the metric. One can check very
easily that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, if we denote @xmath and @xmath and use the completeness
relation we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### b.2 Angular eigenfunctions in @xmath

Since @xmath is a @xmath orbifold of @xmath along @xmath it is clear
that the local computation of the previous subsection will not be
changed. Thus, we just have to take care of global issues. Recall that
the wavefunctions in @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since now @xmath , it is clear that the well-behaved @xmath will be
those for which @xmath is even; that is, @xmath . Therefore, dropping
the tilde, the angular wavefunctions in @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

such that @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### b.3 The warp factor for @xmath

We now want to use the results derived so far to compute explicitly the
warp factor for the resolution of the @xmath space. We will consider the
stack of branes to be sitting on the exceptional locus, where both the
@xmath fibre and the @xmath sphere shrink to zero size. This means that
@xmath , which in turn implies that @xmath and @xmath in ( B.1.15 )
vanish. Then, under these assumptions, the multi-index @xmath takes the
values @xmath . Indeed, we will assume the branes are located at the
north pole of each of the two two-spheres. As such, we should consider
also @xmath . Therefore, for such cases the angular eigenfunctions
@xmath and @xmath coincide and reduce, for each sphere, to Legendre
polynomials @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, from ( B.0.9 ) we see that the equation to solve reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We are interested in the simplified case in which, say, only @xmath .
Under such assumption, also the @xmath sphere shrinks to zero, so that
we can also consider @xmath . Then the corresponding angular
wavefunctions are @xmath . Also from ( 4.1.6 ) and ( B.0.7 ) we see that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

After substituting these back to ( B.3.25 ) the two solutions read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath . Since @xmath , for large @xmath only the @xmath solutions
decay at infinity, and these are therefore the solutions of interest.

We can now state the result for the warp factor, which turns out to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we collect all normalization factors in @xmath .

#### b.4 The warp factor for @xmath

We will compute the warp factor for @xmath M2 branes in arbitrary
location. As was shown above, the equation to solve is ( B.0.9 ) where
now we should use ( 4.5.81 ) for @xmath . We will be interested in the
simpler case in which @xmath . Moreover, as we explain in the main text,
the interesting contribution is that coming from @xmath . Under this
simplification, the equation to solve now reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.4.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Solving for @xmath and @xmath we obtain

  -- -- -- ----------
           (B.4.30)
  -- -- -- ----------

Indeed, the leading term for large @xmath corresponds to @xmath , and in
this limit

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.4.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------
