Magnetic fields play an important role in star formation by regulating
the removal of angular momentum from collapsing molecular cloud cores.
Hall diffusion is known to be important to the magnetic field behaviour
at many of the intermediate densities and field strengths encountered
during the gravitational collapse of molecular cloud cores into
protostars, and yet its role in the star formation process is not
well-studied. This thesis describes a semianalytic self-similar model of
the collapse of rotating isothermal molecular cloud cores with both Hall
and ambipolar diffusion, presenting similarity solutions that
demonstrate that the Hall effect has a profound influence on the
dynamics of collapse.

Two asymptotic power law similarity solutions to the collapse equations
on the inner boundary are derived. The first of these represents a
Keplerian disc in which accretion is regulated by the magnetic
diffusion; with an appropriate value of the Hall diffusion parameter a
stable rotationally-supported disc forms, but when the Hall parameter
has the opposite sign disc formation is suppressed by the strong
diffusion. The second solution describes the infall when the magnetic
braking is so efficient at removing angular momentum from the core that
no disc forms and the matter free falls onto the protostar.

The full similarity solutions show that the size and sign of the Hall
parameter can change the size of the protostellar disc by up to an order
of magnitude and the accretion rate onto the protostar by @xmath M
@xmath yr @xmath when the ratio of the Hall to ambipolar diffusion
parameters moves between the extremes of @xmath . These variations (and
their dependence upon the orientation of the magnetic field with respect
to the axis of rotation) create a preferred handedness to the solutions
that could be observed in protostellar cores using next-generation
instruments such as ALMA.

Hall diffusion also determines the strength of the magnetic diffusion
and centrifugal shocks that bound the pseudo and rotationally-supported
discs, and can introduce subshocks that further slow accretion onto the
protostar. In cores that are not initially rotating Hall diffusion can
even induce rotation, which could give rise to disc formation and
resolve the magnetic braking catastrophe. The Hall effect clearly
influences the dynamics of gravitational collapse and its role in
controlling the magnetic braking and radial diffusion of the field would
be worth exploring in future numerical simulations of star formation.
