###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Supergravity
    -    1.2 Quantum Anomalies
    -    1.3 M-Theory
    -    1.4 Hořava-Witten Theory
        -    1.4.1 Phenomenology
    -    1.5 Gravity with Boundaries
    -    1.6 Improved Heterotic M-Theory
    -    1.7 Dimensional Reduction of the Improved Theory
    -    1.8 Braneworlds
    -    1.9 Reduction Ansatz
        -    1.9.1 The Metric
        -    1.9.2 The Three-Form @xmath
        -    1.9.3 The Gravitino
        -    1.9.4 The @xmath Boundary
        -    1.9.5 The @xmath Boundary
    -    1.10 Five Dimensional Multiplets
    -    1.11 The Bulk
        -    1.11.1 Einstein-Hilbert Term
        -    1.11.2 The Five Dimensional Gravitino
        -    1.11.3 Three-Form Terms
    -    1.12 Conclusions
-    2 Braneworlds and Galileons
    -    2.1 Galileons in Codimension One
    -    2.2 Perturbative Formalism
    -    2.3 Possible Actions
        -    2.3.1 Volume Term @xmath
        -    2.3.2 Einstein-Hilbert Term @xmath
        -    2.3.3 Tadpole Term @xmath
    -    2.4 Conclusions
-    A Heterotic M-Theory Conventions
    -    Calabi-Yau Manifold

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Supergravity

The story of particle physics in the 20th century was one of finding
symmetries and exploiting them to construct quantum field theories,
culminating in the construction of the standard model of particle
physics with (exact) colour gauge symmetry and (broken) electroweak
gauge symmetry. However, the theory of spacetime symmetry, that is the
other great pillar of 20th century physics, general relativity,
stubbornly refuses formulation as a quantum theory, which our experience
of particle physics teaches us that it would have to be at short enough
distances or high enough energies.

In the spirit of the search in particle physics for ever more symmetries
to exploit, it is natural to ask whether there can be further symmetries
of spacetime, in the hope that they might help to reconcile the
incompatibility of gravity and quantum theory. The initial answer to
this question is that there can be no further symmetries due to the
theorem of Coleman and Mandula [ 1 ] which states that, under reasonable
assumptions, the most general Lie algebra of symmetry operators consists
of the Poincaré algebra plus internal symmetry algebras. However, this
is not the end of the story as the Coleman-Mandula theorem can be evaded
by relaxing its restrictions.

In particular, supersymmetry is a spacetime symmetry which circumvents
the theorem by including anti-commutators as well as commutators in its
algebra: it has a graded Lie algebra rather than just a Lie algebra. In
addition to the bosonic generators of Poincaré symmetry there are
fermionic generators of the supersymmetry. These fermionic generators
transform bosonic fields to fermionic ones and vice versa. We can then
group particles into ‘supermultiplets’ of ‘superpartners’ which form a
closed cycle under the supersymmetry. If supersymmetry were unbroken,
particles in a supermultiplet would all have the same mass and so it is
clear that if the world is supersymmetric then that supersymmetry is
broken somehow. Nevertheless, supersymmetry as a theory of physics
beyond the standard model predicts that the observed particles have
superpartners, albeit ones made heavy enough by the breaking of
supersymmetry that they are unobservable. Indeed it is possible to
construct phenomenological extensions to the standard model such as the
‘minimal supersymmetric standard model’ (MSSM) which reproduce the same
results for experiments to date but predict superpartners observable by
the Large Hadron Collider at CERN. One motivation for such models is
that they may solve the hierarchy problem, which is the puzzle of why
the scale of the electroweak theory (i.e. the mass of the Higgs boson)
is so much less than the natural scale of some more fundamental theory:
@xmath GeV as opposed to @xmath GeV for a grand unified theory or
perhaps even @xmath GeV (the Planck scale). Spontaneously broken
supersymmetry provides a mechanism for a Higgs mass (which would be zero
with unbroken supersymmetry) which is exponentially suppressed, thus
solving the problem (if one has such a supersymmetry breaking mechanism
in hand).

As local Poincaré symmetry gives us general relativity, so local
supersymmetry gives us supergravity. It is an interesting fact that
there is an upper limit to the number of supersymmetries in a given
number of spacetime dimensions, and this limit decreases as the number
of dimensions increases. Indeed there is a maximum number of spacetime
dimensions in which it is possible to construct supersymmetric theories.
The reason is as follows: For the graviton to be the unique spin two
particle, it must be the highest spin member of some supermultiplet. The
supersymmetry generators are the components of @xmath spinors, where
@xmath is the number of supersymmetries. In @xmath or @xmath dimensions
a spinor has @xmath components, so there are @xmath supersymmetry
generators. Consider their actions on a single particle state. For a
massless particle we cannot choose the zero momentum state, but for a
single particle state it suffices to consider only states with momentum
in a particular direction, call it the 1 direction. States then have
@xmath and we can choose the basis of the supersymmetry generators so
that half annihilate the states with @xmath and the other half
annihilate the states with @xmath . Furthermore, when a generator acts
on a state with some helicity @xmath , it changes @xmath by @xmath with
half of the generators raising, and the other half lowering, @xmath .
Since the generators are fermionic and anti-commute with themselves, if
we act twice with any one generator we destroy the state. So for states
with say @xmath we have @xmath generators which do not annihilate the
states. The lowest helicity state of a supermultiplet is given by acting
once on the highest helicity state with each of the @xmath of these
generators which also lower helicity. If the graviton, which has spin
two, is the highest spin state then we start from helicity @xmath and we
can only have at most 8 generators, each taking us down by @xmath , or
the lowest helicity state would be below @xmath (which would contradict
our assertion that the graviton is the highest spin state). Thus we have
a limit on the number of spacetime dimensions in which we can have a
supergravity, for we must have @xmath in order for there to be a
supermultiplet without any state having spin higher than the graviton.
The highest dimension possible is eleven, with also @xmath . This
maximal eleven dimensional supergravity, which was first described by
Cremmer, Julia and Scherk [ 2 ] , is unique because if there is only one
graviton then there can be only one supermultiplet, whose structure is
entirely dictated by supersymmetry.

### 1.2 Quantum Anomalies

It may happen that a theory which is classically invariant under some
symmetry is not invariant quantum mechanically, for instance it may be
that it is impossible to construct a regularization scheme for divergent
Feynman diagrams which respects that symmetry. This quantum variation is
called the anomaly. In the case of a global symmetry this may simply
indicate that certain processes which are forbidden classically are
allowed quantum mechanically, which is not a problem. For a local
symmetry however, states related by a gauge transformation are supposed
to be identified with each other and the presence of a quantum anomaly
would render the theory inconsistent. Therefore one must ensure that if
there are sources of such local anomalies, then their contributions
cancel each other exactly.

The quantum anomaly is the variation under gauge transformations or
diffeomorphisms of the effective action describing the gauge fields or
the metric which is given by integrating out the fermions in the path
integral. Anomalies in @xmath dimensions are associated to certain
@xmath -forms. The anomaly must obey what is known as the Wess-Zumino
consistency condition. Let us call the effective action @xmath . Then
the anomaly, @xmath , is the variation by an amount @xmath of @xmath :
@xmath . If we consider another variation, this time by @xmath , then
@xmath , but this is just the Lie bracket acting on @xmath , giving
@xmath , so we have the consistency condition @xmath . This condition
can be fulfilled straightforwardly if we can describe the anomaly, in a
@xmath -dimensional theory, by starting from a (formal) @xmath -form
@xmath which is an invariant polynomial of the 2-form (gauge or
gravitational) curvature. We only need even rank forms because quantum
anomalies only occur in even dimensions. According to the Chern-Weil
theorem invariant polynomials of the curvature are closed so @xmath .
Therefore it can be written as the derivative of a @xmath -form, @xmath
, at least locally. Since @xmath is gauge invariant, the variation of
@xmath must be a total derivative @xmath . Now if the quantum anomaly is
given by the integral of such a @xmath -form, @xmath and if we regard
@xmath (formally) as the boundary of @xmath then @xmath and so it is
easy to see that the Wess-Zumino consistency condition is obeyed: @xmath
. This illustrates why @xmath -form polynomials might be useful for
calculating quantum anomalies. In fact the connection is deeper, all the
gauge and gravitational anomalies can be so calculated and the
coefficients of the polynomial can be determined. The reason is that the
anomaly can be related to the index of the Dirac operator in @xmath
dimensions, which can in turn be calculated using the Atiyah-Singer
index theorem [ 3 ] . A careful discussion useful to our purposes later
is [ 4 ] . We can ensure anomaly cancellation just by requiring that the
sum of the polynomials from all the sources of variation cancel; this is
helpful because there is an ambiguity in the definition of the anomalies
themselves since their explicit form depends upon a choice of gauge.
Anomalies can occur where we have chiral fermions (the index of the
Dirac operator is the difference in the number of zero modes with
positive and negative chirality): in particular Yang-Mills gauge theory
has an anomaly in any even dimension and gravity has an anomaly in
dimension @xmath . In ten dimensions, where there are both gauge and
gravitational anomalies, enforcing anomaly cancellation is a strong
constraint on the possible theories, such as those discussed below,
which are formulated either in ten dimensions (superstring theories) or
in spaces with ten dimensional boundaries (Heterotic M-Theory).

### 1.3 M-Theory

String theory promises to be a quantum theory of gravity. Since the
fundamental objects have a finite size, the traditional problem for
quantum gravity of how to deal with ultraviolet divergences is
ameliorated since the fundamental objects have finite size rather than
being point particles. The questions are how to formulate string theory
without inconsistencies such as tachyons and quantum anomalies and, that
being accomplished, whether and how such a theory can describe the real
world. Tachyons can be banished by incorporating supersymmetry and it is
possible to construct such superstring theories which are free of
anomalies. However, this puts rather stringent constraints on the
theories, in particular they are all ten dimensional, but still there
are five consistent superstring theories known.

From the point of view of discovering the correct description of quantum
gravity for the real world, this might be viewed as an embarrassment of
riches, for how are we to decide which of these theories ought to apply
to us? However, it seems that the various superstring theories are not
in fact independent. They are related by duality transformations which
imply that they are merely different limits of a single underlying
theory, which is known as M-Theory. Though the complete structure of
M-Theory remains unknown, still we can say some things about it: in
particular its low energy limit is eleven dimensional. This was first
observed [ 5 , 6 ] in the type IIA superstring theory, which in the
limit of large string coupling ‘decompactifies’: its spacetime is seen
to be @xmath rather than @xmath and the size of the circle is set by the
string coupling, so that both tend to infinity in this limit. We have
then, in the low energy limit of M-Theory, an eleven dimensional,
supersymmetric theory of gravity, so in light of the uniqueness of the
eleven dimensional supergravity mentioned above it should not be
surprising that this is, in fact, eleven dimensional supergravity. The
strong coupling limit of the @xmath heterotic superstring is also eleven
dimensional supergravity, as discussed below. The other superstring
theories, the type IIB, @xmath heterotic and the type I do not have
clear eleven dimensional limits themselves but are continuously related
to the type IIA and @xmath heterotic theories and so must be part of the
same picture.

With the unification of the various superstring theories into M-Theory,
we then have progress of a sort towards contact with the real world.
Though we have lost (at least for now) a complete description of our
theory of the world, at least there is only the one and we know its low
energy limit; which limit would seem to be necessarily an important part
of any phenomenological model, even if not absolutely the whole story.
Clearly however further effort is needed to describe the real world. We
have an eleven dimensional theory (or ten dimensional in some limits)
and a four dimensional world. One way to progress is to adopt a
Kaluza-Klein picture: we compactify the extra dimensions so that we have
four visible, extended dimensions and a tower of massive excited states
which are too massive for us to have yet observed due to the small size
of the extra dimensions. A particularly attractive option for a
supersymmetric theory is to compactify on a Calabi-Yau manifold. This is
a six dimensional space (though they can also be defined in other even
dimensions) whose essential property for this purpose is that it has a
single covariantly constant spinor. This means that the single
supersymmetry parameter of the eleven (or ten) dimensional theory gives
only a single supersymmetry parameter in five (or four) dimensions and
so we are left after compactification with an @xmath supersymmetric
theory. If we started in eleven dimensions we still have one yet to
compactify in order to describe the real world, which might be useful
phenomenologically; alternatively we could compactify the eleven
dimensional model directly over a @xmath manifold, which is a seven
dimensional analogue of a Calabi-Yau manifold sharing the property of
having a single covariantly constant spinor. The demand of supersymmetry
after compactification allows us to make contact with the phenomenology
of supersymmetric field theory and thus gives us a route to physically
plausible scenarios, which with no such restriction on the possible
compactifications would be a challenge of daunting complexity. It also
allows us to retain attractive features of supersymmetric extensions to
the standard model such as resolving the hierarchy problem with
spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry.

### 1.4 Hořava-Witten Theory

Heterotic M-Theory, which was invented by Hořava and Witten [ 7 , 8 ] ,
is eleven dimensional supergravity with two boundaries, one at each end
of the eleventh dimension. It represents the limit of the heterotic
@xmath string theory which is both low energy and strongly coupled;
dimensional reduction of the interval gives the supergravity which is
the low energy limit of that theory. The construction of the theory
depends intimately on anomaly cancellation. The supergravity in the bulk
induces gravity on the boundaries and the bulk gravitino becomes chiral
on the boundaries. Thus the boundaries are ten dimensional spacetimes
with gravity and chiral fermions, and so they have a gravitational
quantum anomaly. In order to cancel this anomaly, one is forced to
introduce further chiral fermions on the boundary (as well as some
Green-Schwarz terms in the bulk). This can be done by adding an @xmath
Yang-Mills supermultiplet (which in ten dimensions is the maximal
supersymmetric theory that is not a supergravity) with the gauge group
chosen to give the right number of fermions to cancel the gravity
anomaly. This requirement dictates that the gauge group be @xmath , and
so we have two independent @xmath gauge theories, one on each boundary,
which gives us the @xmath gauge group of the string theory on
compactification of the eleventh dimension. The Yang-Mills theory also
has a gauge anomaly in ten dimensions which must be cancelled by
coupling the three-form of the bulk supergravity to the boundary so that
a classical variation of the three-form can cancel the gauge quantum
anomaly on the boundary. This structure rigidly determines the theory
since we have the maximal supersymmetric theory in the bulk and the
maximal (non-gravitational) supersymmetric theory on the boundary with
the gauge group and couplings between the two dictated by anomaly
cancellation.

#### 1.4.1 Phenomenology

The heterotic theory is an attractive corner of M-Theory for
phenomenological model building. Since it contains @xmath gauge theory
as an intrinsic part, it is a natural place to build particle physics
models by breaking the @xmath gauge symmetry to give a grand unified
theory or even a theory with the gauge group of the standard model
itself. This is of course true of both ( @xmath ) heterotic string
theory and Heterotic M-Theory and much phenomenological work was done on
the string theory before the advent of M-Theory (as well as after).
Since models of the real world (at least the real world today) are
necessarily low energy ones though, the limit taken in Heterotic
M-Theory is more or less forced upon us and so this is the natural place
to build particle physics models as we do not need then to assume weak
string coupling. On the other hand in cosmological contexts it might
well prove not to be the case that the low energy limit is sufficient,
and since the full M-Theory is not known the string theory is the only
way to relax this limit and gain insight into such situations.

To turn an eleven dimensional theory into a model of the real world, we
need to hide seven dimensions somehow. As mentioned above one way of
doing this is to take those seven dimensions to be small, and to get an
@xmath supersymmetric theory in four dimensions the extra dimensions
must be a @xmath manifold. In the context of Heterotic M-Theory one of
those seven must be the interval since the standard model particles are
supposed to come from the Yang-Mills fields on one of the boundaries,
meaning that the boundaries must span the extended dimensions. The other
six dimensions are curled up into some small manifold, for which an
attractive choice is a Calabi-Yau manifold. For a given topology of the
Calabi-Yau manifold, we can describe the geometry of the compact space
by some (geometrical) ‘moduli’ which measure the size of the eleventh
dimension (the interval), the overall volume of the Calabi-Yau and the
size of any topologically non-trivial cycles of the Calabi-Yau. A
particular model will be given by specifying a background with a
particular compactification manifold having some values of these moduli
and possibly also non-zero configurations of the fields (which might
give some additional moduli) which solve the eleven dimensional
equations of motion. The effective four dimensional theory is then the
theory of the fluctuations around this background. For a realistic model
we obviously need ultimately to have an effective theory which resembles
the standard model; models close to the MSSM are a useful intermediate
step in string or M-Theory phenomenology. We also need a stable
background, which means that we need some mechanism for making sure that
the moduli which specify the particular model we are looking at are
fixed.

A substantial amount of work has been done building particle physics
models with increasing degrees of similarity to the standard model. For
example, fairly soon after the invention of Heterotic M-Theory, models
were constructed with the @xmath on the visible brane broken to the
standard model gauge group [ 9 ] by choosing a particular
compactification background. Recently techniques have been developed for
computational searches of heterotic models [ 10 , 11 ] and a large class
of ‘heterotic standard models’ with ‘the precise matter spectrum of the
MSSM, at least one pair of Higgs doublets, the standard model gauge
group and no exotics charged under the standard model of any kind’ have
been identified [ 12 ] . There has also been recent progress on the
problem of moduli stabilization in the context of particle physics model
building where [ 13 , 14 ] it has been shown that it is possible to
stabilize all the geometric moduli using the gauge bundle plus
non-perturbative effects, for some choices of gauge bundle.

Given the successes of Heterotic M-Theory for particle physics model
building, it is desirable also to have cosmological models constructed
in the same framework. This motivated the first cosmological solutions [
15 ] and continues to motivate, for example, models of assisted
inflation driven by M5-brane dynamics [ 16 , 17 ] . Heterotic M-Theory
is also a natural home for braneworld cosmological models, about which
more below, the famous example being the ekpyrotic model [ 18 ] in which
the big bang is generated by a collision of branes in a five dimensional
bulk, which is of continued interest [ 19 , 20 ] as an alternative to
inflation.

### 1.5 Gravity with Boundaries

The question of how to construct consistently a theory of gravity which
includes boundaries is one of direct relevance for Heterotic M-Theory
and for braneworld models in general. For a theory of gravity without
boundaries, the variation of the Einstein-Hilbert action vanishes for
metrics that solve the Einstein equations. However in the presence of a
boundary this is no longer true. Even when the variation of the metric
is constrained to vanish on the boundary, there is still a non-vanishing
boundary term involving the normal derivative of the variation. In order
to make the variational principle consistent, it is necessary to
introduce boundary terms into the action. The Einstein-Hilbert action in
the bulk is made consistent by the inclusion of the Gibbons-Hawking
action on the boundary [ 21 ] . More complex gravity theories in the
bulk also require additional surface terms. Of relevance for us will be
supergravity, where a gravitino boundary contribution is required by
similar considerations [ 22 ] , and Lovelock gravity, where the higher
curvature terms require corresponding Myers terms on the boundary [ 23 ]
.

### 1.6 Improved Heterotic M-Theory

The original Hořava-Witten formulation of Heterotic M-Theory has a
serious problem. It is only entirely well defined up to first order in
the eleven-dimensional gravitational coupling, @xmath . It was described
as an orbifold @xmath , which is equivalent to an interval with
boundaries at the fixed points of the @xmath symmetry and which was
considered to be technically convenient. In this description the
coupling of the bulk three-form to the boundary is accomplished with
@xmath -function sources in the Bianchi identity of its field strength.
Imposition of supersymmetry of the action at the orbifold fixed points
then brought terms proportional to @xmath into the action at @xmath . As
Heterotic M-Theory is only supposed to be an effective theory of a
particular low-energy limit of a complete (albeit still unknown) quantum
M-Theory this inconsistency need not necessarily be considered
problematic as long as one is content to work within the approximations
it entails. In practice however, this may in fact cause difficulties:
taking reasonable values for the GUT scale and Newton’s constant, it has
been found [ 24 ] that the expansion parameter of the theory, @xmath is
of order one (where @xmath is the size of @xmath and @xmath is the
volume of the Calabi-Yau manifold used in the compactification to a four
dimensional theory). This calls into question the validity of the first
order expansion in @xmath . More recently, terms second order in @xmath
have been found to be important in calculating the back-reaction of
anti-branes [ 25 ] and the contribution of gaugino condensation in the
presence of anti-branes [ 26 ] , using such @xmath terms involving gauge
matter fields as were considered able to be computed reliably [ 27 ] .

These phenomenological considerations give one motivation for relaxing
the restriction of Heterotic M-Theory to first order in @xmath . On the
other hand, if one considers Heterotic M-Theory as supergravity on a
manifold with boundary it is an attractive theory: eleven-dimensional
supergravity is the maximal supergravity and is unique, and Heterotic
M-Theory is the only way to include boundaries without introducing
gravitational anomalies. However, considered just as a supergravity
theory it is highly unsatisfactory that it should be well-defined only
up to first order in the gravitational coupling, providing another
motivation for improvement.

The problem has been addressed by Ian Moss who has constructed an
improved version of Heterotic M-Theory [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 ] which is
consistent and supersymmetric to all orders in @xmath . This
construction is performed taking the view of the eleventh dimension as
an interval with boundaries, with careful attention paid to the boundary
conditions which must be satisfied by the bulk fields. The structure of
the eleven-dimensional improved theory is described in Section
LABEL:cha:The-11d-Theory . It is constructed as an expansion in the
curvature up to @xmath terms and at each order is rigidly constrained by
the requirements of anomaly cancellation at the boundaries and
supersymmetry, leaving only one free parameter: the gravitational
coupling, @xmath .

The problems in the Hořava-Witten version of the theory seem to arise
principally from its failure to fully account for the effect of the
energy-momentum density localized on the orbifold fixed planes. Its
effect as a source for the flux @xmath was carefully taken into account
by modifying the Bianchi identity for @xmath , but it must also be
considered as a source for the spacetime curvature of the bulk, and
possibly also for the gravitino, modifying the junction conditions
across the brane. In particular, given some energy-momentum localized on
a codimension one surface, the Israel junction conditions [ 32 ] , which
relate the extrinsic curvature of the surface to its energy-momentum,
must apply. In order for these to be imposed by the action, the
Gibbons-Hawking term must be included on the boundary. One might wonder
whether it could be possible to impose the junction conditions in the
upstairs picture by modifying the Bianchi identity for the Riemann
curvature to @xmath in analogy with the modification of the Bianchi
identity for @xmath . However, the boundary action approach seems more
natural to us and we work here in the manifold with boundary picture
everywhere. This picture also does not require carrying around a
redundant, and physically irrelevant, copy of the bulk as the orbifold
picture does. As for the gravitino, it will turn out (Section
LABEL:sec:11d-Boundary-Conditions ) that supersymmetry of the boundary
forces us to include the Yang-Mills fields in its boundary condition as
well.

### 1.7 Dimensional Reduction of the Improved Theory

We will describe in Chapter LABEL:cha:Heterotic-Reduction the reduction
to five dimensions of the improved Heterotic M-Theory over a Calabi-Yau
manifold, to find the model analogous to that found in [ 33 ] for the
original Hořava-Witten theory but with the inclusion here of terms with
up to two fermions, which have not been presented either for the
original or for the improved theory before our work [ 34 ] . The five
dimensional reduction is a natural intermediate step to phenomenological
models since the scales in the problem suggest [ 24 ] that the size of
interval (the eleventh dimension) is about ten times the length scale of
the Calabi-Yau, and the latter can therefore be integrated out before
the former. It is also a useful starting point for the introduction of
five-branes [ 35 ] , which seem to be vital for many phenomenological
applications, and anti-five-branes [ 25 ] , and also for the study of
gaugino condensation [ 26 ] . The five dimensional reduction of the
improved version of Heterotic M-Theory is then a first step in assessing
the impact on phenomenology of a theory consistent to all orders in
@xmath .

The topic of gaugino condensation has received some attention already,
as discussed in Section LABEL:sec:Gaugino-Condensation . It was
considered in [ 36 , 37 ] in a much simpler reduction, in which
attention was focused on the gravitino and the Calabi-Yau volume
modulus. It was found there that the condensate gives a contribution to
the flux through the boundary condition on the supergravity three-form
and also induces a twist in the chirality condition on the gravitino
between the two boundaries. The latter is a particular effect of the
improved theory where the gauginos appear in the boundary condition of
the gravitino. The twisted boundary conditions break supersymmetry and
give a Casimir contribution to the vacuum energy which can lift the
cosmological constant to give de Sitter vacua. Since in this scenario
both moduli stabilization and uplift depend on the gaugino condensate
they naturally have similar scales, though fine tuning of a parameter in
the superpotential is still required to give a small four dimensional
cosmological constant. Since the improved theory is valid to all orders
in the gravitational coupling warping of the bulk metric which is not
small can be consistently accommodated when considering the gaugino
condensate, though for the Casimir energy calculations in [ 37 ] small
warping was still assumed.

The other motivation for this work, apart from any possible consequences
for the phenomenology of Heterotic M-Theory, is the investigation of
supergravity on a manifold with boundary per se. Such supergravities
with boundary matter have recently been constructed; the most detailed
are in three dimensions [ 38 , 39 ] , where an off-shell formulation is
available, but there are also models in five [ 40 ] and seven [ 41 ]
dimensions. Five dimensional theories are obviously of particular
interest since their four dimensional boundaries might correspond to the
physical universe. The contribution of the present work in this context
is that by dimensionally reducing a consistent eleven-dimensional
supergravity with boundaries we find an explicit example of a consistent
five-dimensional supergravity on a manifold with boundary, which
includes boundary matter, and we do so without having to include
distributions in the theory. In the absence of a general formalism in
five dimensions, hopefully such an example is of some interest.

### 1.8 Braneworlds

In order to hide extra dimensions, rather than postulating that the
extra dimensions are just too small to be observed à la Kaluza-Klein, we
could allow them to be arbitrarily large if we suppose that we are
constrained to live on a four dimensional brane and so cannot see them.
This braneworld scenario is further motivated by the possibility that
something like Heterotic M-Theory might be the fundamental theory of the
universe, since in Heterotic M-Theory the fields which give rise to
standard model matter are perforce confined to branes.

The simplest model of a braneworld is a scalar field model, which can be
arranged to have topological defects representing the branes and the
fluctuations of the scalar field (the ‘matter’ in the theory) can be
confined to the defect. Even if such models do not give a realistic
picture of the universe, their simplicity makes them amenable to
analysis, in particular to numerical simulation, and one can hope that
studying such models may give insight into some generic features of
braneworld scenarios.

Generically, one would expect gravity to propagate away from the brane
into the bulk spacetime, and so the effects of large extra dimensions
would be visible in gravitational effects even if they are hidden from
standard model type processes. However, if the bulk spacetime is
appropriately warped then gravity can be confined to the brane as well,
as was demonstrated by the Randall-Sundrum model [ 42 ] , which fact
makes it plausible that the universe today might be described as a
braneworld with large extra dimensions even though gravity appears in
experiments to date to be just as four dimensional as the other forces
of nature (at least up to solar system scales).

The braneworld picture also provides an alternative to inflation as a
description of the very early universe. In the ekpyrotic scenario [ 18 ]
the big bang is caused by a collision of branes in a five dimensional
bulk. The horizon and flatness problems are solved not by superluminal
expansion, as in inflationary theories, but rather by the dynamics of
the branes, by letting the branes approach each other rather slowly
before the collision so that areas widely separated relative to the
Hubble scale after collision were in causal contact before it.

In light of this ekpyrotic cosmological scenario, it is interesting to
study the topic of brane collision in scalar field theory models of
braneworlds, with an eye on learning about the generic features of brane
collisions [ 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 ] . A contribution to this
effort is described in Chapter LABEL:cha:Colliding-Branes , concerning
the nature of the singularities which may be formed by the collision of
scalar field theory domain walls.

Braneworld models can also provide a means of modifying (four
dimensional) gravity on large scales, as in the DGP model [ 49 ] . Here
the bulk spacetime is flat, rather than warped as it is in the
Randall-Sundrum case, and four dimensional gravity is provided by having
an Einstein-Hilbert term on the brane, built from the induced metric, as
well as one in the bulk built from the full metric. In this theory
gravity appears four dimensional at short distances but five dimensional
at long distances. There is an extra scalar degree of freedom, but this
has only second order equations of motion even though the Lagrangian
contains higher derivative terms. This property allows the construction
of solutions in which the scalar field is strongly coupled at small
scales and its fluctuations are suppressed by that strong coupling. This
sort of hiding of scalar fields in modified gravity by strong coupling
at small scales is known generically as Vainshtein screening. The
importance of this phenomenologically is that the scalar field can be
hidden from observation on solar system scales, which have been well
tested, while being active on larger scales to affect the expansion of
the universe.

The attractive properties of this scalar when considered in the four
dimensional effective theory inspired a generalization to find a broader
class of theories having a scalar with similar couplings to gravity and
to itself as the one in the DGP model and also retaining second order
equations of motion [ 50 ] . The outcome was a set of theories of
gravity coupled to a scalar having a ‘Galilean’ symmetry, leading the
scalar field to be christened the ‘galileon’. The restriction of
Galilean symmetry and second order equations of motion resulted in an
action with just five free parameters. As the DGP model is a particular
example of these galileon theories, it is natural to ask whether there
is a braneworld description of the whole class. Indeed there is, as
first described in [ 51 ] . The picture is similar to DGP, with a four
dimensional probe brane in a five dimensional spacetime and the scalar
field being just the displacement of the brane in the extra dimension.
Now, however, we include in the brane action all the curvature terms
that give second order equations of motion, that is the Lovelock terms
in the intrinsic curvature [ 52 ] and the Myers terms in the extrinsic
curvature [ 23 ] . In the number of dimensions here, in addition to the
Einstein-Hilbert term there is a cosmological constant; the first two
Myers terms; and a tadpole term. One can also consider such theories
with de Sitter or anti-de Sitter rather than Minkowski spaces, as was
done in [ 53 ] . On the other hand from the four dimensional field
theory perspective it is also natural to consider how one might
generalize to more than one galileon field [ 54 , 55 ] , though in such
theories one encounters a rapidly proliferating number of terms in the
action as more galileon fields are added. To describe such theories in a
braneworld picture we need a higher codimension bulk, as each galileon
field corresponds to the fluctuations in one of the extra dimensions.
This is more challenging than in the codimension one case as we can no
longer describe the branes as boundaries and the toolkit for building
the actions is less well developed. A particular model has been found
for the most symmetric case with a Minkowski brane in a Minkowski bulk [
56 ] . In Chapter 2 we develop the higher codimension construction
allowing for other maximally symmetric spaces. In order to do so we
develop some machinery that may be useful for a further generalization
to the full class of models which can be constructed in the field theory
approach.

#### Statement of Original Research

Chapter LABEL:cha:Heterotic-Reduction describes work previously reported
in [ 34 ] done by the author in collaboration with Ian Moss and Paul
Saffin. The original research is described in Sections 1.9 to
LABEL:sec:The-Boundaries and 1.12 , with the results summarized in
Appendix LABEL:cha:Summary ; the work relating to the bosonic fields
obviously has strong parallels with [ 33 ] which started from Hořava and
Witten’s eleven dimensional theory [ 7 , 8 ] , whereas the work here
starts from Ian Moss’s improved version [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 ] . Section
LABEL:sec:Gaugino-Condensation describes some work by Ahmed and Moss [
36 , 37 ] , and not by the author, to illustrate a consequence of the
reduction of the improved theory.

Chapter LABEL:cha:Colliding-Branes describes work previously reported in
[ 75 ] done by the author in collaboration with Jorma Louko and Paul
Saffin. The original results are described in Sections
LABEL:sec:Asymptotic-Structure , LABEL:sec:Dynamical-Solutions and
LABEL:sec:Simulation-Results to LABEL:sec:Colliding_Branes_Conclusions .

Chapter 2 describes previously unpublished work done by the author in
collaboration with Ian Moss, Antonio Padilla and Paul Saffin. The
original research is described in Sections 2.2 to 2.4 with further
details of the calculations given in Appendix
LABEL:cha:galileon-appendix .

### 1.9 Reduction Ansatz

We now move on to find the appropriate ansatz for our reduction of the
improved Heterotic M-Theory from an eleven dimensional bulk with ten
dimensional boundaries to a five dimensional bulk, @xmath , with four
dimensional boundaries, @xmath and @xmath . The reduction is performed
over a Calabi-Yau threefold, @xmath , which is taken to have @xmath
@xmath moduli and no @xmath moduli. As in 11 dimensions the normal
vector is inward pointing on @xmath and outward pointing on @xmath . The
spin connection is embedded in the @xmath gauge group on @xmath ,
breaking it to @xmath . To find the appropriate ansatz, essentially we
need to find all the five dimensional fields that we can build from the
eleven dimensional ones in this framework.

#### 1.9.1 The Metric

Since we split the eleven dimensional spacetime into a direct product of
the five dimensional spacetime and the Calabi-Yau space, the metric must
be a sum of spacetime and Calabi-Yau parts, with no cross terms. The
Calabi-Yau moduli appear in the ansatz in the Calabi-Yau components of
the metric. In particular, we wish to scale out the Volume modulus,
@xmath , so that we integrate over a Calabi-Yau with a fixed reference
volume @xmath and so that the Calabi-Yau components of the metric are
given by the metric of the reference Calabi-Yau multiplied by an
appropriate power of the volume modulus. In order for the five
dimensional action to be in the Einstein frame and for the volume
modulus to have a correctly normalized kinetic term, the spacetime
components of the metric must also contain a power of the volume
modulus. Einstein frame is the choice of scaling of the metric which
gives us the five dimensional Einstein-Hilbert action with no conformal
factor, @xmath . We then have a line element of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we must find the values of @xmath and @xmath which satisfy these
requirements. @xmath are five dimensional spacetime indices. @xmath and
@xmath are respectively holomorphic and anti-holomorphic indices on
@xmath . @xmath is given in terms of the (1,1) moduli, @xmath , as
@xmath where @xmath is the basis of (1,1)-forms on @xmath . With this
form the metric determinant is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.9.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the eleven dimensional Ricci scalar gives

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath      (1.9.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The extra terms involve @xmath and we do not need them here. We must
have @xmath for the @xmath factors to be consistent and, after
integrating by parts, the kinetic term for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.9.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order for the coefficient to be @xmath , either @xmath or @xmath .
Finally, to be in Einstein frame, @xmath and so we must take @xmath and
@xmath . So the metric ansatz is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Once we allow @xmath the metric, @xmath , of the Calabi-Yau is no longer
constant since the moduli @xmath are spacetime dependent scalars: @xmath
. This results in many extra terms in the action, etc., but we find that
almost all of them contribute just to connection terms in the
derivatives of fields with @xmath indices as @xmath . The exceptions are
a single term from the kinetic term of the eleven dimensional gravitino,
@xmath , and the kinetic term for the moduli, @xmath .

#### 1.9.2 The Three-Form @xmath

Each part of the ansatz for @xmath is the product of a spacetime tensor
with a tensor on the Calabi-Yau space. The available tensors are those
given at the end of Section LABEL:sec:Kaluza-Klein .

The constant scalar field over the Calabi-Yau, gives us a three-form in
five dimensions from the pure spacetime component of @xmath . We will
see in Section LABEL:sec:Dualization how to dualize this three-form to a
scalar @xmath which will form part of the hypermultiplet of the five
dimensional supergravity, Section
LABEL:sub:Hypermultiplet-Quaternionic-Structure . After this dualization
we will have

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We get a spacetime scalar from the Calabi-Yau holomorphic three-form
@xmath , and another from its complex conjugate, the anti-holomorphic
three-form @xmath , which will both be part of the hypermultiplet

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The basis of (1,1)-forms is @xmath with @xmath and the Kähler form is
picked out by the Kähler moduli @xmath as @xmath . These (1,1)-forms
give us @xmath spacetime vectors

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

These vectors gauge the shift isometry of @xmath , as we will see in
Section LABEL:sub:Hypermultiplet-Quaternionic-Structure . The
graviphoton @xmath , which belongs to the gravity multiplet, is the part
corresponding to the Kähler form and the remaining @xmath vectors belong
to vector multiplets.

These are all the constant tensors on the Calabi-Yau. However, the
boundary conditions on @xmath contain (2,2)-form sources for its field
strength @xmath and so, as explained in Section LABEL:sub:Spin_embedding
, we also have a ‘non-zero mode’

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the basis of (2,2)-forms dual to @xmath ( LABEL:eq:v ).

#### 1.9.3 The Gravitino

As the metric is just the sum of the five dimensional metric and the
Calabi-Yau metric, the gamma matrices split into direct products of a
square root of unity with the five dimensional and Calabi-Yau gamma
matrices. There are volume factors given by the square root of the
volume factors in the metric so that the eleven dimensional Dirac
algebra, @xmath , reduces to give @xmath and @xmath . Thus we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The choice of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath is made so that
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is the chirality matrix for the
4d spacetime manifold and @xmath is the chirality matrix for @xmath .

An eleven dimensional spinor gives us a direct product of a five
dimensional spinor with a Calabi-Yau spinor, so to find the ansatz for
@xmath we use the constant spinor, @xmath , and the vector-spinors,
@xmath and @xmath , on the Calabi-Yau. So at first glance @xmath just
gives us a five dimensional vector-spinor from @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and a spinor from @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

However, this only gives us enough fermions for the gravity multiplet
and hypermultiplet. There are also @xmath vector multiplets which need
fermion components. In fact we have one more tool in the basis of
(1,1)-forms, @xmath , which we can use to construct @xmath
vector-spinors on the Calabi-Yau instead of just one:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

There are no more possibilities since the other distinct tensor we have
available, @xmath does not give us anything new since @xmath . As we
explain in Section 1.11.2 the fermion, @xmath , which comes from the
Kähler form part of the basis, @xmath , and is part of the
hypermultiplet, is @xmath , while @xmath is in fact not the five
dimensional gravitino, @xmath , but contains @xmath as well. We will
show there that the ansatz in terms of the five dimensional gravitino,
@xmath , is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

It might seem more natural to maintain everywhere the distinction
between @xmath and the other @xmath components, @xmath , rather than
grouping them together into @xmath , as they do belong to different
multiplets. However, we ultimately decided that the benefits of more
concise presentation outweighed this desire.

#### 1.9.4 The @xmath Boundary

On @xmath , where the @xmath symmetry is not broken, the story is
simple. There is no constant vector on the Calabi-Yau and the only
constant spinor is @xmath , so the gauge fields and gauginos just give
their four dimensional counterparts

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath and @xmath belonging to the adjoint representation of @xmath
just as the eleven dimensional fields do.

#### 1.9.5 The @xmath Boundary

On @xmath the gauge group @xmath is broken to @xmath by the embedding of
the spin connection of the Calabi-Yau into the @xmath part of the
subgroup @xmath . Here situation is somewhat more complicated than on
@xmath . We have a gauge multiplet just as on @xmath , though in the
adjoint of @xmath instead of @xmath . The part of the gauge field
proportional to the generators of the @xmath subgroup is identified with
the spin connection of the Calabi-Yau, which is a one-form (though not
globally defined) giving @xmath . However, there are also generators of
the off-block-diagonal components of @xmath . The decomposition of the
@xmath adjoint representation @xmath is @xmath where @xmath is the
adjoint representation of @xmath and @xmath that of @xmath while @xmath
and @xmath are the off-block-diagonal parts which are in the fundamental
and anti-fundamental respectively of both @xmath and @xmath . These
off-diagonal generators, @xmath and @xmath , have an @xmath gauge index,
@xmath , and also an @xmath index which is equivalent to a holomorphic
or anti-holomorphic index on the Calabi-Yau space. We can have an
additional contribution to @xmath by contracting the @xmath index with
one index of a (1,1)-form, @xmath . This gives us a set of @xmath
spacetime scalars which are charged under the @xmath , @xmath , and
their complex conjugates, @xmath . The complete ansatz for the gauge
field is then

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath belongs to the adjoint representation of @xmath and @xmath
is the spin connection of the Calabi-Yau space considered as an @xmath
adjoint-valued (1,0)-form.

As for the gaugino, we can introduce an extra fermion in the fundamental
representation of @xmath by contracting the @xmath index of @xmath with
@xmath . However, in a similar way to the gravitino, we have @xmath
multiplets (chiral multiplets this time) which need fermions, not just
one. We find these in much the same way, by using the basis of
(1,1)-forms to give us more vector-spinors on the Calabi-Yau, @xmath .
In this way we have @xmath Majorana fermions @xmath , in the fundamental
of @xmath to go along with the five dimensional gaugino in the adjoint:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.9.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

@xmath and @xmath are the left and right handed components of @xmath :
@xmath and @xmath . We label them thus because the chirality in ten
dimensions of @xmath , @xmath , tells us that if we define @xmath and
@xmath then @xmath and @xmath (since @xmath and @xmath ) and so, for
example, @xmath . Defining @xmath and @xmath the chirality of the 4d
Majorana fermions is @xmath and @xmath .

### 1.10 Five Dimensional Multiplets

Now that we have the field content of the five dimensional theory, we
need to know the supersymmetry structure. In any supersymmetric theory,
the component fields are grouped into multiplets whose fields transform
among themselves under supersymmetry. The supersymmetry transformations
of the five dimensional fields are fixed by the eleven dimensional
supersymmetry transformations ( LABEL:eq:E_susy - LABEL:eq:chi_susy_11d
) and the ansatz described above. (We do need to do some extra work to
obtain the supersymmetry transformation of @xmath which is found as part
of the dualization process by which we turn the three-form @xmath into
the scalar @xmath .)

Let us start by considering the gravity multiplet. By definition it
contains the five dimensional vielbein @xmath whose supersymmetry
transformation is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

@xmath appears and must therefore be the second component of the gravity
multiplet, confirming its identification as the gravitino which comes
from examining the kinetic terms in the action (Section 1.11.2 ). The
transformation of the gravitino is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

in which there is one new field @xmath , appearing as its field strength
@xmath . @xmath is the graviphoton, which is the final component of the
gravity multiplet as we confirm by its supersymmetry transformation

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

which contains no new fields. Thus the set @xmath is closed under
supersymmetry; it is the gravity multiplet.

With the @xmath component taken care of by the gravity multiplet, the
@xmath remaining vectors, @xmath form multiplets which we can see from
the variations

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Varying @xmath brings in @xmath which brings @xmath and then the set
closes, so we have @xmath vector multiplets @xmath .

There is one more fermion (in the bulk) and so we have one more
multiplet, which includes @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

The variation of @xmath connects it to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The variations of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath connect back to
@xmath , which is as expected. However, the variation of @xmath also
involves @xmath and in any case a three-form does not fit into the
possible five dimensional supersymmetry multiplets. Both issues are
resolved by dualizing the three-form @xmath to a scalar @xmath which, as
we will see in Section LABEL:sec:Dualization , has a variation

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

which does not involve @xmath , and so @xmath form a hypermultiplet.

The gauge fields @xmath on the @xmath boundary @xmath simply transform
into the gauginos @xmath and vice versa,

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

so we have a vector multiplet @xmath .

On the @xmath boundary @xmath there are a set of @xmath complex scalars
@xmath and fermions @xmath which transform as

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

so we have @xmath chiral multiplets @xmath . The appearance of the
fermions @xmath is due to the fact that the basis over which the @xmath
indices run depends on the Calabi-Yau moduli @xmath . The variation of
the @xmath , ( 1.10.6 ), then gives rise to these terms which would not
be present were the basis fixed. There is also a vector multiplet,
@xmath , similar to that on the @xmath boundary but with gauge group
@xmath whose transformations are

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.10.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

The scalar fields @xmath enter here because in the four dimensional
Yang-Mills theory coupled to chiral multiplets the equation of motion
for the auxiliary field of the vector multiplet depends on the chiral
multiplets. When the auxiliary field which appears ‘legitimately’ in the
supersymmetry transformations of the vector multiplet is replaced by its
(algebraic) equation of motion, it introduces this dependence on the
scalars of the chiral multiplet.

### 1.11 The Bulk

We find the action in the bulk of the reduced theory by substituting the
ansatzes from Section 1.9 into the eleven dimensional action (
LABEL:eq:11d-bulk-action ) and also dualizing the three-form @xmath to a
scalar @xmath (Section LABEL:sec:Dualization ) to show the five
dimensional supergravity structure.

#### 1.11.1 Einstein-Hilbert Term

After integrating out the Calabi-Yau modes, the eleven dimensional
Einstein-Hilbert term gives rise to the five dimensional
Einstein-Hilbert term as well as the kinetic terms for the Calabi-Yau
moduli. The eleven dimensional metric determinant is @xmath which tells
us the relation between the eleven and five dimensional volume elements:
@xmath . We also need the connection coefficients, the non-zero
components of which are

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.11.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.11.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.11.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.11.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and we find

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath
              @xmath      (1.11.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the five dimensional and eleven dimensional gravitational
couplings are related by the volume of the reference Calabi-Yau, @xmath
, as @xmath . The boundary terms which depend on @xmath will cancel
against terms coming from the Gibbons-Hawking term, ( LABEL:eq:K_10,1 )
and ( LABEL:eq:K_10,2 ), as we would expect since the consistency of the
variational principle in eleven dimensions implies its consistency in
five and so we cannot have such a term, whose variation would include
@xmath .

#### 1.11.2 The Five Dimensional Gravitino

The eleven dimensional gravitino gives rise to a number of five
dimensional fermion fields from its spacetime and Calabi-Yau components.
We can identify the proper ansatz by demanding that the five dimensional
fields have canonical kinetic terms. Suppose we start with the
straightforward ansatz

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.11.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.11.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

then reducing the eleven dimensional kinetic term we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath      (1.11.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

so we see that @xmath to correctly normalize the @xmath superpartners,
@xmath ; @xmath ( @xmath is the fermion in the hypermultiplet); and the
5d gravitino @xmath . Thus we see the ansatz ( 1.9.15 ), ( 1.9.16 ) was
indeed the correct choice.

#### 1.11.3 Three-Form Terms

The kinetic term for @xmath , @xmath , gives

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.11.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the curvature of @xmath , @xmath .

The Chern-Simons term, @xmath , gives

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath      (1.11.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

and the gravitino bilinear term @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath      (1.11.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

where we define @xmath . Much use is made in the calculation of @xmath
of the identities in Appendix LABEL:cha:Calabi-Yau_Geometry .

We now have the ingredients in the action needed to dualize the
four-form field strength @xmath to a scalar field @xmath we turn our
attention to this process first, followed by the elucidation of the
quaternionic structure of the hypermultiplet fields which simplifies
these terms in the action somewhat.

### 1.12 Conclusions

We have described here the reduction to five dimensions of an improved
version of Heterotic M-Theory over a Calabi-Yau manifold with (1,1)
moduli only. Comparing to the reduction of Hořava and Witten’s original
formulation of Heterotic M-Theory, the bosonic sector is largely
unaffected, and along with it most of the existing work on the
phenomenology of Heterotic M-Theory.

Although phenomenology based upon the bosonic sector should not be much
affected by the improved version of Heterotic M-Theory, that previous
phenomenological work is now on a firmer footing; we can now see that it
can be built upon a theory which is consistent to all orders in the
gravitational coupling and the fact that the analogous four dimensional
expansion parameter @xmath seems to be of order one, when chosen to give
reasonable values for Newton’s constant and the GUT scale [ 24 ] , is no
longer a problem. On the other hand, work that has been done using
explicitly terms higher order in the gravitational coupling, such as on
the back reaction of anti-branes [ 25 ] and gaugino condensation [ 26 ]
probably needs to be reconsidered in the light of the improved theory.

The inclusion of five-branes, and the further inclusion of
anti-five-branes, has not yet been considered in the improved theory.
Though such objects are vital to Heterotic M-Theory phenomenology, it is
not possible with our current understanding of them to incorporate them
in a fully consistent way which includes the backreaction of their
matter and curvature, in the manner in which we have treated the
boundary branes here. In the absence of such understanding, one might
adopt a hybrid approach with boundary conditions at either end of the
bulk, as we describe here, and junction conditions across the
five-branes, as have been used in the Hořava-Witten theory.

Gaugino condensation has been considered already in the improved theory
in the context of a much simpler reduction [ 36 , 37 ] . The condensate
appears in the boundary condition for the scalars @xmath and @xmath and
so acts as a source of flux. It also appears in the three-fermion terms
in the fermion boundary conditions, its effect being to introduce a
‘twist’ in the chirality of the fermions which contributes to the vacuum
energy. By including just those higher fermion terms necessary for
gaugino condensation into the full reduction given here, one can see
that the gravitino contribution considered in [ 37 ] is the dominant one
[ 34 ] . Therefore the calculation there of the vacuum energy and the
conclusion that it is a candidate to uplift a negative cosmological
constant, as left by moduli stabilization, to a positive one, in
accordance with observation, still hold here.

A full treatment of moduli stabilization in the improved theory would
require the inclusion of the (2,1) moduli for the Calabi-Yau space.
There are no obvious obstacles to this other than complexity so we would
expect it to be feasible if there is sufficient interest to warrant it.

Leaving aside the M-Theory context, the topic of supergravities with
boundary matter is worthy of study of itself, particularly for its
connection to braneworld models. Examples are hard to come by in
dimensions greater than three, where there is an off-shell formulation
to assist. Thus in providing a five dimensional example with four
dimensional boundaries the theory described here may be of some
interest.

## Chapter 2 Braneworlds and Galileons

For modifications of gravity to be phenomenologically viable (as
solutions to the dark energy problem) they must give undetectably small
corrections to general relativity on solar system scales, but large
corrections approaching horizon scales. This forces such modifications
to be non-linear, but in non-linear theories instabilities, such as
ghosts, often become problematic. By generalizing the four dimensional
effective field theory arising from the DGP model, Nicolis et al. found
a promising class of models [ 50 ] . These have a scalar field, @xmath ,
coupled to gravity whose Lagrangian is symmetric under the ‘Galilean’
transformation @xmath , leading them to christen @xmath the ‘galileon’.
Ghosts can be avoided by demanding that the equations of motion contain
at most second derivatives and this demand together with Galilean
symmetry restricts the models to a family with only five free parameters
(in four dimensions): in dimension @xmath the terms in the Lagrangian
take the form @xmath for @xmath .

As the galileon theory was inspired initially by the DGP braneworld
model, it is not surprising that it can itself be embedded in a
braneworld model as the effective theory of a codimension one probe
brane, as was found by de Rham and Tolley for flat spacetime [ 51 ] and
generalized by Goon et al. [ 53 ] . This is achieved by using more
general gravity theories than the DGP model which has just the
Einstein-Hilbert term in both brane and bulk actions. The requirement of
second order equations of motion means that those gravity theories must
be what one might call Lovelock-Myers theories, with Lovelock terms [ 52
] both in the bulk and on the brane supplemented by Myers-type surface
terms [ 23 ] on the brane. On a co-dimension one brane (which is
equivalent to a boundary) there are a series of Lovelock terms for the
intrinsic curvature (cosmological constant @xmath , Einstein-Hilbert
@xmath , Gauss-Bonnet @xmath ,…) and Myers terms for the extrinsic
curvature, which are the surface terms corresponding to the bulk
Lovelock terms (Gibbons-Hawking @xmath , @xmath ,…). In a given
dimension these series terminate, with all the higher terms only
contributing total derivatives to the action. The galileon theory is
constructed by introducing a four dimensional probe brane into a
maximally symmetric five dimensional bulk, neglecting the backreaction
of the brane modes, i.e. of the galileon. The galileon is the
displacement of the brane in the fifth dimension with the Galilean
symmetry thus following from the Poincaré symmetry of the bulk: an
infinitesimal transformation is given by @xmath so if we shift the brane
from @xmath to @xmath there can be no physical change, and so we can see
that the theory is symmetric under Galilean transformations of @xmath .
Four of the five parameters of the galileon field theory then come from
the coefficients of the first two Lovelock terms and the first two Myers
terms. The fifth comes from the coefficient of the tadpole term @xmath
which also turns out to be allowed.

On the other hand, one can also construct four dimensional field
theories with more than one galileon [ 81 , 54 ] . These share many of
the attractive properties of the single galileon theories, although as
the number of galileons increases the number of possible terms in the
action, which is [ 55 ] @xmath for @xmath galileons, increases rather
fast giving 55 free parameters for three galileons and 125 for four
galileons. Just as a single galileon is the displacement of a
codimension one brane in the transverse direction, so should @xmath
galileons be the transverse displacements of a codimension @xmath brane.

Such a construction has been performed for a Minkowski probe brane in a
Minkowski bulk by Hinterbichler et al. [ 56 ] but with an extremely
restricted choice of terms in the action, leaving only one free
parameter. This can only be a braneworld embedding of a rather small
class of the possible field theory galileon models. This choice was made
on the strength of the assertion, based on the results of [ 82 , 83 ] ,
that the only possible terms in the action for a four dimensional brane
of even codimension @xmath are: a cosmological constant and a term
@xmath for @xmath ; and a cosmological constant and the Einstein-Hilbert
term of the induced metric for @xmath . However, the actions found in [
82 , 83 ] are those which allow consistent matching conditions for a
distributional (i.e. zero ‘thickness’) brane with a tension which
backreacts on the bulk geometry. They are not relevant to the case here
where we are interested in probe branes which do not backreact. For
example, black hole theorems restricting the possible solutions and thus
the allowed sources cannot be a restriction here because there is no
backreaction and thus no source for the bulk curvature. We are allowed
any curvature terms we can write down which result in second order
equations of motion. This certainly includes all the Lovelock terms of
the induced curvature (which in four dimensions are just the
cosmological constant and the Einstein-Hilbert term). Presumably some
terms in the extrinsic curvature are also allowed but it is not clear
how to construct the analogues in codimension greater than one of the
Myers terms now that we have an extra (transverse) index on the
extrinsic curvature.

Here we describe some work done in collaboration with Ian Moss, Antonio
Padilla and Paul Saffin. We describe a slightly more general class of
models, allowing for maximally symmetric spaces with arbitrary curvature
but with the same restriction as [ 56 ] on the terms in the action. This
restriction arises from the @xmath symmetry of the extra dimensions
which follows if both brane and bulk are maximally symmetric (and so
restricts the case in [ 56 ] as well). It seems that the only way to
find the complete set of the models which can be constructed in the
field theory approach is to construct less than maximally symmetric
models, because of the strong restriction placed by @xmath symmetry on
the possible terms in the action. This remains yet to be done. It
appears to be a rather challenging task since the analogues in higher
codimension of the Myers surface terms induced by bulk Lovelock
invariants in codimension one are unclear: though in the case we
consider here they are incompatible with the @xmath symmetry up to the
order to which we work. Also unclear is the role of the tadpole term in
higher codimension since in this case there is ambiguity over how one
integrates up to the brane, in contrast to codimension one. However, the
formalism we have developed for constructing the braneworld-galileon
actions may be of some interest; we hope that it might be useful for
constructing more general galileon actions than just those considered
here if a scheme for breaking the @xmath symmetry can be specified.

### 2.1 Galileons in Codimension One

The codimension one case has two properties which make it much more
straightforward than the higher codimension case. The first is that as
mentioned above the possible terms in the action are clear in arbitrary
dimension. The second is that one can find exact expressions for all
these in terms of the galileon @xmath , the displacement of the brane in
the transverse direction. The reason for this is that one can
analytically invert the induced metric on the brane in this case.

Consider a codimension one probe brane. Taking a Gaussian normal
foliation, the full metric of the bulk spacetime is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the co-ordinates @xmath propagated through the leaves of the
foliation at constant @xmath by the trajectories normal to them. Using
the co-ordinates @xmath on the brane also and defining the galileon,
@xmath , as the @xmath -value of each point @xmath on the brane,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

then the induced metric on the brane is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

whose inverse is

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

With these two expressions it is possible to compute exactly the
determinant and intrinsic curvature of the induced metric, and also the
normal vector and hence the extrinsic curvature.

Note however that we only have an analytic expression of the inverse, (
2.1.4 ), because the order of the @xmath ’s does not matter: @xmath . In
the higher codimension case which is our focus here, this trick fails.
We now have a galileon for each transverse direction so if the
codimension is @xmath we have @xmath with @xmath . The induced metric is
similar

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

except that now @xmath fields come in pairs with contracted transverse
indices. Thus @xmath and so we cannot write an analytic expression for
the inverse metric like ( 2.1.4 ). Since we therefore cannot use a fully
explicit, analytic formalism in the higher codimension case we instead
work perturbatively from the outset. We write the full metric of the
bulk space as a Taylor expansion in the distance from the ‘zero
position’ of the brane (its position when all the galileon fields @xmath
vanish) and truncate the rest of our expressions to fourth order in the
@xmath . This approach allows us to use the existing machinery for
calculating, for example, the Ricci scalar in terms of metric
perturbations. We now turn to the elaboration of this perturbative
formalism.

### 2.2 Perturbative Formalism

Consider a codimension @xmath probe 3-brane in an ( @xmath )-dimensional
bulk. We have then @xmath galileons @xmath ( @xmath ) which are the
displacements of the brane in the transverse directions. We will work
perturbatively, assuming from the outset that the galileons are small.
We set the co-ordinates on the bulk spacetime by choosing a foliation
adapted to the brane. Let @xmath denote a four dimensional slice of the
spacetime (the position of the unperturbed brane with @xmath ) with
co-ordinates @xmath ( @xmath ). Then we extend the co-ordinates to the
neighbourhood of @xmath along the @xmath directions normal to the
surface, i.e. @xmath ( @xmath ) so that the co-ordinate basis vectors
@xmath and @xmath are orthogonal. The galileons are just the
displacements of the brane, @xmath , away from @xmath : the co-ordinates
of points on the brane are @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the normalized ( @xmath ) tangent vector to some
geodesic normal to @xmath and @xmath denote the proper distance along
this geodesic from @xmath . Since we are working perturbatively, we take
@xmath to be small and we can write quantities on the brane as a
truncated Taylor series in @xmath about their values on @xmath . The
(full) metric at the point a distance @xmath away from @xmath along the
geodesic whose tangent is @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where of course @xmath is just @xmath but this form is convenient since
we can determine how @xmath acts on the basis vectors @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Weingarten coefficients of the surface
@xmath . For proofs of these statements see Appendix
LABEL:cha:galileon-appendix . In our normal co-ordinates they are
defined quite straightforwardly: the extrinsic curvature ¹ ¹ 1 The
relation of the extrinsic curvature defined like this to the usual
definition for a codimension one hypersurface is discussed in Appendix
LABEL:cha:galileon-appendix is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the ‘twist connection’ is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Up to this point we are entirely agnostic as to the structure of either
the bulk spacetime or the unperturbed brane. To make further progress,
we assume that both are maximally symmetric, as this greatly simplifies
the expressions for the bulk curvature, and the extrinsic curvature and
twist connection of the unperturbed brane. This assumption would need to
be relaxed somehow to construct more general galileon theories, but this
being achieved one could presumably continue in a similar spirit to the
method described below for the maximally symmetric case.

In the maximally symmetric case we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. We will work at up to fourth
order in the galileon fields. To do so we need to evaluate the terms in
the expansion of the metric, ( 2.2.1 ), at the brane, @xmath . There
@xmath and so, writing @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Then from 2.2.1 , and calling the metric at @xmath @xmath , the metric
at @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath
              @xmath      (2.2.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We use the co-ordinates @xmath on @xmath , with @xmath so the induced
metric on @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath
              @xmath      (2.2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We define the scalar @xmath and the vector @xmath . Spacetime indices on
these denote derivatives: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

With the full metric @xmath and the induced metric @xmath we now have
the ingredients we need to evaluate the possible terms in the action as
expansions in @xmath ’s.

### 2.3 Possible Actions

What terms can be present in the brane action? In the codimension one
case one has the Lovelock terms in the intrinsic curvature ( @xmath );
the Myers surface terms involving the extrinsic curvature, which
correspond to the Lovelock terms in the bulk, ( @xmath ); and a tadpole
term @xmath . For a 3-brane in a five dimensional bulk the non-trivial
terms (i.e. those which are not just total derivatives) are, labelling
them as in [ 53 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The question is what the analogues are in the higher codimension case.
The brane is still four dimensional so as before we have the Lovelock
terms @xmath and @xmath and the higher Lovelock terms ( @xmath ) are
total derivatives. However, since a brane with codimension greater than
one is not a boundary the analogues of @xmath and @xmath are unclear as
the extrinsic curvature now has an extra, transverse index. However for
a Minkowski brane in a Minkowski bulk, the extrinsic curvature is at
least @xmath (see Appendix LABEL:cha:galileon-appendix ). With @xmath
symmetry the only way to contract the transverse index on the extrinsic
curvature is with another extrinsic curvature. Therefore any such terms
compatible with @xmath symmetry are in this case @xmath and beyond the
order we consider here. The definition of the tadpole term @xmath also
becomes ambiguous since one now has freedom in choosing the integration
contour. On the other hand, presumably one could dimensionally reduce
the codimension @xmath theory to codimension one with @xmath of the
galileons becoming very massive. In that case one would have to recover
all the terms @xmath to @xmath : analogues of all these terms should
therefore exist. However, such a dimensional reduction would obviously
have to break the @xmath symmetry in picking out a single large
dimension and so it is perhaps not too surprising that when working
within this restriction it is not clear how @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
could appear. The general Lagrangian respecting @xmath symmetry is, up
to this order, the sum with arbitrary coefficients of @xmath and @xmath
which are worked out in detail for the codimension greater than one case
below.

#### 2.3.1 Volume Term @xmath

The volume term is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now if @xmath then

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

so using ( 2.2.21 ) and ( LABEL:eq:Omega^2n ) we can expand @xmath in
terms of the @xmath ’s as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath      (2.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 2.3.2 Einstein-Hilbert Term @xmath

The Einstein-Hilbert term is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The Ricci scalar for a conformally transformed metric is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

in four dimensions, where @xmath is the derivative covariant with
respect to @xmath .

For small perturbations @xmath about a background metric @xmath ,
dropping total derivatives and up to second order in the perturbation,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Einstein tensor and @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and the Lichnerowicz operator @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the derivatives being covariant with respect to @xmath and defining
@xmath .

As @xmath is maximally symmetric we have that @xmath . (Using the
relations ( 2.2.8 ) and ( 2.2.10 ) it is easy to see that @xmath is
related to @xmath and @xmath by @xmath .) This implies that also @xmath
and @xmath . These relations along with ( 2.2.21 ) allow us to expand
the terms in ( 2.3.11 ), (given in equations ( LABEL:eq:R-expansion-1 -
LABEL:eq:R-expansion-5 )) and find

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath
              @xmath      (2.3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

#### 2.3.3 Tadpole Term @xmath

Unbroken @xmath in the transverse directions restricts the candidates
for the tadpole term to just the volume of the surface, @xmath , given
by the locus of the geodesics connecting @xmath and @xmath , whose
co-ordinates in the transverse dimensions are @xmath , @xmath . Clearly
we can obtain the induced metric on the slice at each value of @xmath
just by scaling ( 2.3.8 ) by a factor of @xmath for each @xmath while
the component of the metric along the @xmath direction is given by
@xmath . So the volume element on @xmath is @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath

              @xmath      (2.3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

It seems likely that this is not in fact the correct prescription for
the tadpole term, which is probably simply absent in the @xmath
symmetric case, as seems to be suggested by the field theory [ 55 ] . If
( 2.3.15 ) were to be the correct form, the interpretation of @xmath
would present a puzzle, or perhaps suggest new possibilities for the
field theory galileons.

If instead the @xmath symmetry were broken so that a constant vector
field, @xmath , were available somehow, one could integrate along it
from @xmath to the brane and have something like @xmath which would be
rather more like the field theory tadpole term @xmath .

### 2.4 Conclusions

The results presented in this chapter, ( 2.3.8 ) and ( 2.3.14 ), are
only slightly more general than those which have been given before. We
obtained these results by working perturbatively from the outset so that
the geometrical quantities on the brane could be constructed
straightforwardly as Taylor expansions. This contrasts to the approach
in [ 56 ] which was rather closer to the method used in the codimension
one case. There, with the assumption that both brane and bulk are
Minkowski, the induced curvature of the brane was calculated directly
from the induced metric and its inverse. In this simpler case the only
thing without an exact expression (and therefore requiring a
perturbative expansion) is the inverse induced metric of the brane,
which makes the direct approach feasible. However as we can see in
equations ( 2.2.16 - 2.2.19 ) the metric has a trivial exact expression
only for this very restricted case with no bulk curvature and no
extrinsic curvature (i.e. @xmath and @xmath ) which is lost even for the
rather modest relaxation which we allow here.

We hope that techniques such as those we have introduced here may prove
to be of further use in constructing models in which the @xmath symmetry
of the bulk is broken, which might thereby describe all of the models
allowed in the field theory approach.

## Appendix A Heterotic M-Theory Conventions

### Eleven Dimensions

-   @xmath denotes the bulk spacetime with boundaries @xmath (with
    inward-pointing normal) and @xmath (with outward pointing normal).

-   Indices:

    -   @xmath are the bulk spacetime indices.

    -   @xmath are the boundary spacetime indices.

    -   @xmath and @xmath are the corresponding tangent space indices.

    -   @xmath is the direction normal to the boundaries (i.e. @xmath
        where @xmath is the unit normal vector).

-   The metric is mostly plus.

-   The volume element is @xmath .

-   The Riemann tensor is @xmath or @xmath , the Ricci tensor is @xmath
    and the Ricci scalar is @xmath .

-   The trace over @xmath indices of the curvature two-form is given by
    a standard matrix trace so for example @xmath .

-   The @xmath are imaginary, @xmath , while @xmath is real, @xmath ,
    and satisfy @xmath and @xmath , etc.

-   The Dirac conjugate is @xmath .

-   Fermionic fields swap places under complex conjugation, i.e. @xmath
    .

-   @xmath and @xmath refer to the signs of boundary terms, with the
    upper sign referring to @xmath and the lower to @xmath .

### Five Dimensions

-   @xmath denotes the bulk spacetime with boundaries @xmath (with
    inward-pointing normal) and @xmath (with outward pointing normal).

-   Indices:

    -   @xmath are the bulk spacetime indices.

    -   @xmath are the boundary spacetime indices.

    -   @xmath and @xmath are the corresponding tangent space indices.

    -   @xmath is the direction normal to the boundaries (i.e. @xmath ).

    -   @xmath are @xmath gauge indices on @xmath and @xmath gauge
        indices on @xmath .

    -   @xmath are @xmath indices.

-   The metric is mostly plus.

-   The volume element is @xmath .

-   The Riemann tensor is @xmath or @xmath , the Ricci tensor is @xmath
    and the Ricci scalar is @xmath .

-   The alternating tensor @xmath is normalized so that @xmath and
    @xmath .

-   The gamma matrices satisfy @xmath and @xmath , etc. The @xmath are
    real, @xmath and @xmath is imaginary @xmath .

-   The Dirac conjugate is @xmath .

-   Fermionic fields swap places under complex conjugation, i.e. @xmath
    .

-   @xmath and @xmath refer to the signs of boundary terms, with the
    upper sign referring to @xmath and the lower to @xmath .

### Calabi-Yau Manifold

-   @xmath denotes the Calabi-Yau space over which the reduction is
    performed, so @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

-   Indices:

    -   @xmath are real indices.

    -   @xmath are holomorphic indices, related to the real indices by
        @xmath , @xmath , etc.

    -   @xmath are anti-holomorphic indices on the Calabi-Yau space,
        related to the real indices by @xmath , @xmath , etc.

-   The metric is Euclidean.

-   The volume element is @xmath .

-   The reference volume of @xmath after scaling out the geometric
    moduli is @xmath .

-   The alternating tensor @xmath is normalized so that @xmath .

-   The gamma matrices satisfy @xmath and @xmath , etc. The @xmath are
    imaginary @xmath and @xmath .

-   The Hermitian conjugate of the covariantly constant spinor @xmath is
    defined to be @xmath and then the Dirac conjugate is given by @xmath
