##### Contents

-    Acknowledgement
-    Abstract
-    Introduction
-    1 Definitions and basic notations
    -    1.1 Graphs and multi-graphs
    -    1.2 Digraphs and oriented multi-graphs
    -    1.3 Degree and neighborhood of a vertex
    -    1.4 Paths and cycles
    -    1.5 Connectivity
    -    1.6 Trees and forests
    -    1.7 Coloring
    -    1.8 Contraction and minors
-    2 Antidirected paths in digraphs
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 First Step of the proof
    -    2.3 Second Step (El-Sahili’s proof)
    -    2.4 Our new shorter proof
    -    2.5 Conclusion
-    3 Paths with two blocks in @xmath -chromatic digraphs
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 Maximal spanning out-forest
    -    3.3 Paths with two blocks in strongly connected digraphs
    -    3.4 General case, first method (Addario-Berry et al)
    -    3.5 General case, second method (El-Sahili and Kouider)
    -    3.6 Conclusion

## Introduction

Gallai-Roy’s celebrated theorem [ 8 , 9 ] states that every @xmath
-chromatic digraph contains a directed path of length @xmath . More
generally, one can ask which connected digraphs are contained in every
@xmath -chromatic digraph. Such digraphs are called @xmath -universal.
Since there exist @xmath -chromatic graphs with arbitrarily large girth
[ 10 ] , @xmath -universal digraphs must be oriented trees. Burr [ 11 ]
proved that every oriented tree of order @xmath is @xmath -universal (in
particular every oriented path is @xmath -universal) and he conjectured
that every oriented tree of order @xmath is @xmath -universal. This is a
generalization of Sumner’s conjecture which states that every oriented
tree of order @xmath is contained in every tournament of order @xmath .
The first linear bound for tournaments was given by Häggkvist and
Thomason [ 12 ] . The best bound so far, @xmath , was obtained by El
Sahili [ 13 ] .

Regarding oriented paths in general, there is no better result than the
one given by Burr, that is every oriented path is @xmath -universal.
However in tournaments, Havet and Thomassé [ 14 ] proved that except for
three particular cases, every tournament of order @xmath contains every
oriented path of order @xmath .

El-Sahili showed [ 1 ] that except the regular 5-tournament @xmath , any
5-chromatic oriented digraph in which each vertex has out-degree at
least two, contains a copy of the anitidirected path @xmath of length 4.
To show his result, El-Sahili used a theorem of Gallai [ 5 ] . In
chapter II, we give a detailed explanation of El-Sahili’s proof, we
provide a new elementary shorter proof without using Gallai’s theorem,
and we conjecture a stronger statement.

El-Sahili conjectured [ 15 ] that every path of order @xmath with two
blocks is @xmath -universal, and Bondy and El-Sahili [ 15 ] proved it if
one of the two blocks has length one. The condition @xmath is necessary
because of odd circuits. El-Sahili and Kouider [ 16 ] introduced the
notion of maximal spanning out-forests and used it to show a weak
version of El-Sahili’s conjecture which states that every path of order
@xmath with two blocks is @xmath -universal.

L. Addario-Berry et al [ 2 ] used strongly connected digraphs and a
theorem of Bondy [ 17 ] to show El-Sahili’s conjecture. El-Sahili and
Kouider [ 3 ] gave a new elementary proof without using strongly
connected digraphs or Bondy’s theorem. In chapter III we give a detailed
explanation of both proofs, we show that there is a small error in
Addario-Berry et al’ proof and we provide a correction.

All the definitions and basic notations used in this master thesis will
be explained in Chapter I.

## Chapter 1 Definitions and basic notations

### 1.1 Graphs and multi-graphs

A graph is a pair @xmath of sets such that @xmath is a subset of the
power set @xmath of @xmath where every element of @xmath contains
exactly two elements of @xmath . The elements of @xmath are called the
vertices of @xmath and the elements of @xmath are called the edges of
@xmath . The set of vertices of @xmath is referred to as @xmath , and
the set of edges is referred to as @xmath . An edge @xmath is noted by
@xmath . The order @xmath of the graph @xmath is the number of vertices
in @xmath . A graph where we can find an edge between any two distinct
vertices is called complete . A complete graph of order @xmath is
denoted @xmath ;

A multi-graph is a triplet @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are two sets,
and @xmath is a mapping from @xmath into @xmath such that for every
@xmath in @xmath , @xmath contains one or two vertices of @xmath . We
say that @xmath is the set of vertices of @xmath and we write @xmath ,
similarly we say that @xmath is the set of edges of @xmath and we write
@xmath . The order of a multi-graph is also the number of vertices in
@xmath .

If @xmath is an edge and @xmath contains only one vertex @xmath we say
that @xmath is a loop on @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are two different
edges on the same vertices i.e. @xmath , we say that @xmath and @xmath
are parallel edges . A multi-graph @xmath without loops or parallel
edges can be seen as a graph: we identify it with the graph @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath are two graphs such that @xmath and @xmath we say
that @xmath is a subgraph of @xmath . If in addition @xmath contains all
the edges @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath , we say that @xmath is an
induced subgraph of @xmath , and we write @xmath . If @xmath is a
subgraph of @xmath and @xmath we say that @xmath spans @xmath .

A mapping @xmath is said to be a morphism of graphs if @xmath we have
@xmath whenever @xmath . If @xmath is injective, we say that @xmath
contains a copy of @xmath which is @xmath , or for simplicity we may say
that @xmath contains @xmath . If @xmath is bijective, we say that @xmath
is an isomorphism of graphs and that @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic .

If @xmath and @xmath are two multi-graphs, then we say that @xmath is a
sub-multi-graph of @xmath if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the
restriction of @xmath on @xmath .

### 1.2 Digraphs and oriented multi-graphs

A digraph is a pair @xmath of sets such that @xmath , and such that for
every @xmath we must have @xmath , in particular if @xmath then @xmath .
We call @xmath the set of vertices of @xmath and we write @xmath ,
similarly we call @xmath is the set of arcs (or edges) of @xmath and we
write @xmath . If @xmath , we write @xmath ; we say that @xmath is the
tail of @xmath and we write @xmath and we say that @xmath is the head of
@xmath and we write @xmath . The order of a digraph is the number of
vertices in @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath are two digraphs such that @xmath and @xmath we say
that @xmath is a subdigraph of @xmath . If in addition @xmath contains
all the arcs @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath , we say that @xmath is
an induced subdigraph of @xmath , and we write @xmath . If @xmath is a
subdigraph of @xmath and @xmath we say that @xmath spans @xmath .

A mapping @xmath is said to be a morphism of digraphs if @xmath we have
@xmath whenever @xmath . If @xmath is injective, we say that @xmath
contains a copy of @xmath which is @xmath , or for simplicity we may say
that @xmath contains @xmath . If @xmath is bijective, we say that @xmath
is an isomorphism of digraphs and that @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic
.

Let @xmath be a digraph. the underlying graph @xmath of @xmath is
defined as @xmath , where @xmath is defined as @xmath . A digraph whose
underlying graph is complete is called a tournament .

An Oriented multi-graph is a triplet @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are
two sets, and @xmath is a mapping from @xmath into @xmath . We say that
@xmath is the set of vertices of @xmath and we write @xmath , similarly
we say that @xmath is the set of arcs (or edges) of @xmath and we write
@xmath . If @xmath and @xmath we write @xmath ; we say that @xmath is
the tail of @xmath and we write @xmath and we say that @xmath is the
head of @xmath and we write @xmath . The order of an oriented
multi-graph is the number of vertices in @xmath .

The underlying multi-graph of an oriented multi-graph @xmath , is the
multi-graph @xmath where @xmath is defined as @xmath . If @xmath is an
oriented multi-graph whose underlying multi-graph is a graph (contains
no loops and no parallel edges), @xmath can be seen as a digraph: we
identify @xmath with @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath are two oriented multi-graphs, then @xmath is a
sub-oriented-multi-graph of @xmath if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the
restriction of @xmath on @xmath .

For simplicity, we will not be strict when dealing with graphs (resp.
multi-graphs, oriented multi-graphs or digraphs), in the sense that if
@xmath is a graph (resp. multi-graph, oriented multi-graph or digraph)
we may not differ strictly between @xmath and @xmath or between @xmath
and @xmath : If @xmath is a vertex of @xmath and @xmath is an edge of
@xmath , we may write @xmath and @xmath rather than @xmath and @xmath .
Also if @xmath is a subgraph (resp. sub-multi-graphs,
sub-oriented-multi-graph or subdigraph) of @xmath , and @xmath is an
edge (or arc) of @xmath we denote by @xmath or @xmath the subgraph
(resp. sub-multi-graphs, sub-oriented-multi-graph or subdigraph) of
@xmath obtained from @xmath by adding the edge @xmath , and if @xmath we
denote by @xmath the subgraph (resp. sub-multi-graphs,
sub-oriented-multi-graph or subdigraph) of @xmath obtained from @xmath
by deleting the edge @xmath .

### 1.3 Degree and neighborhood of a vertex

Let @xmath be a graph, if @xmath is an edge of @xmath and we say that
the vertices @xmath and @xmath are adjacent and we say that @xmath is
incident to @xmath and @xmath . The neighborhood @xmath of a vertex
@xmath is defined as the set of vertices adjacent to it, and its degree
@xmath is the number of vertices in @xmath which is equal to the number
of edges incident to @xmath .

Let @xmath be a graph. The maximum degree of @xmath is defined as @xmath
and the minimum degree of @xmath is defined as @xmath .

Let @xmath be a digraph. The neighborhood @xmath of a vertex @xmath is
its neighborhood in the underlying graph. The degree @xmath of a vertex
@xmath is its degree in the underlying graph. the out-neighborhood
@xmath of a vertex @xmath is defined as @xmath . Similarly the
in-neighborhood @xmath is defined as @xmath . The out-degree @xmath of a
vertex @xmath is the number of arcs whose tail is @xmath , and the
in-degree @xmath of @xmath is the number of arcs whose head is @xmath .
We define also @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

### 1.4 Paths and cycles

Let @xmath be a graph (or multi-graph), a path @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath in @xmath is a finite sequence @xmath (we can have @xmath ) of
distinct vertices such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are the end vertices of @xmath . A sub-path of a path
@xmath is a path which is a subset of @xmath . A cycle @xmath in @xmath
is a finite sequence @xmath (we can have @xmath ) of distinct vertices
such that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath is a cycle, then if
@xmath such that @xmath mod @xmath and @xmath mod @xmath , then @xmath
is called a chord of @xmath , if such chord does not exist we say that
@xmath is chordless . A graph (or multi-graph) is said to be acyclic if
it does not contain any cycle; note that an acyclic multi-graph is
necessarily a graph. The length @xmath (resp. @xmath ) of a path @xmath
(resp. a cycle @xmath ) is the number of edges in it. A hamiltonian path
@xmath (resp. cycle @xmath ) is a path (resp. cycle) which spans @xmath
, i.e. @xmath (resp. @xmath ).

The distance @xmath between two vertices @xmath and @xmath , is the
minimal length of a path from @xmath to @xmath if such path exists. If
there is no path between @xmath and @xmath , we set @xmath . The map
@xmath verifies the axioms of generalized metric, and so @xmath is a
generalized metric space. The diameter @xmath of a graph (or
multi-graph) @xmath , is the maximal distance between two vertices of
@xmath .

The girth @xmath of a graph (or multi-graph) @xmath is the minimal
length of a cycle in it if such one exists, and if @xmath is acyclic we
set @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath contains a loop and if @xmath then
@xmath contains parallel edges, so if @xmath , @xmath contains no loops
and no parallel edges and so @xmath is necessarily a graph. Note that
all the above definitions are also defined for oriented multi-graphs by
applying them on the underlying multi-graphs.

Let @xmath be a digraph. A directed path @xmath in @xmath is a finite
sequence of different vertices @xmath (we can have n=1) such that @xmath
for @xmath . A block of a path @xmath in @xmath is a maximal directed
sub-path of @xmath . A path having @xmath blocks of consecutive lengths
@xmath is denoted by @xmath (or @xmath ) if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath
. An antidirected path is a path whose blocks are all of length 1. A
circuit @xmath in @xmath is a finite sequence of different vertices
@xmath (we can have n=1) such that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

### 1.5 Connectivity

Let @xmath be a graph (or multi-graph), @xmath is connected if @xmath ,
i.e. there exist a path between any two vertices. @xmath is disconnected
if it is not connected. @xmath is @xmath -connected if it remains
connected after the removal of any @xmath vertices. The connectivity
@xmath is the maximal integer @xmath such that @xmath is @xmath
-connected ( @xmath if and only if @xmath is disconnected). @xmath is
@xmath -edge-connected if it remains connected after the removal of any
@xmath edges. The edge-connectivity @xmath is the maximal integer @xmath
such that @xmath is @xmath -edge-connected ( @xmath if and only if
@xmath is disconnected).

Let @xmath be a graph (or multi-graph), a maximal connected subgraph of
@xmath is called a connected component of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath
is connected, a vertex @xmath whose removal disconnect @xmath is a
cut-vertex of @xmath and an edge @xmath whose removal disconnect @xmath
is a bridge of @xmath . A maximal connected subgraph of @xmath without
cut-vertices is called a block of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a digraph (resp. oriented multi-graph), all the above
notations are defined for @xmath by applying them on its underlying
graph (resp. underlying multi-graph). @xmath is called strongly
connected if by choosing any two vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath we
can find a directed path from @xmath to @xmath and a directed path from
@xmath to @xmath .

### 1.6 Trees and forests

An acyclic graph is called a forest . A connected acyclic graph is
called a tree , so a forest is the union of trees (each graph is the
union of its connected components). The vertices of degree 1 in a tree
are called the leaves of the tree. A tree containing only one vertex is
called a trivial tree , then a non-trivial tree contain at least two
leaves (consider for example the ends of a longest path).

The following assertions are equivalent for a graph T (the proof is
straightforward for the first four, use a simple induction for the last
two):

1.  @xmath is a tree.

2.  Any two vertices of @xmath are linked by a unique path.

3.  @xmath is minimally connected, i.e. @xmath is connected and @xmath
    is disconnected for all edges @xmath .

4.  @xmath is maximally acyclic, i.e @xmath is acyclic and @xmath
    contains a cycle for any two non-adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath
    of @xmath .

5.  @xmath is connected and @xmath .

6.  @xmath is acyclic and @xmath .

An oriented tree is a digraph whose underlying graph is a tree,
similarly an oriented forest is a digraph whose underlying graph is a
forest. An out-leaf of a tree is a leaf whose out-degree is zero,
similarly an in-leaf of a tree is a leaf whose in-degree is zero. An
out-branching (resp. in-branching ) is an oriented tree in which a
unique vertex which we call the root has its in-degree (resp.
out-degree) 0, and the other vertices has in-degree (resp. out-degree)
1. An out-forest (resp. in-forest ) is an oriented forest whose
connected components are out-branchings (resp. in-branchings). Let
@xmath be an out-forest, the level @xmath of a vertex @xmath is the
order of a longest directed path ending at @xmath .

### 1.7 Coloring

A @xmath -coloring of a graph (or multi-graph) @xmath is a mapping
@xmath (we can use any set of @xmath elements instead of @xmath ). If
@xmath is a vertex of @xmath we say that @xmath is the color of @xmath ,
and if @xmath is adjacent to a vertex of color @xmath , we say that
@xmath is adjacent to the color @xmath . A good @xmath -coloring of a
graph @xmath is a coloring @xmath such that any adjacent vertices does
not have the same color.

If @xmath admits a good @xmath -coloring, we say that @xmath is @xmath
-colorable . A subset @xmath of @xmath is said to be stable if there is
no adjacent vertices in it, i.e. the set of edges in the subgraph @xmath
of @xmath induced by @xmath is empty. @xmath is said to be independent
if @xmath is stable. Note that @xmath is @xmath -colorable if and only
if we can partition @xmath into @xmath stable subsets.

The chromatic number @xmath of @xmath is the least integer @xmath such
that @xmath is @xmath -colorable. If @xmath and @xmath we say that
@xmath is @xmath -critical . All the above notations can be defined for
digraphs (resp. oriented multi-graphs) by applying them on their
underlying graphs (resp. underlying multi-graphs).

### 1.8 Contraction and minors

Let @xmath be a graph, and let @xmath be a subset of @xmath (or a
subgraph of G), then the graph obtained from @xmath by contracting
@xmath is @xmath defined by @xmath where @xmath is a new vertex and
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a digraph, and let @xmath be a subdigraph of @xmath , We
say that @xmath is contractable by @xmath if for all vertices @xmath in
@xmath , we cannot find two arcs @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath , i.e. all arcs in @xmath between @xmath and @xmath are in the
same direction. In this case, the digraph obtained from @xmath by
contracting @xmath is @xmath defined by @xmath where @xmath is a new
vertex and @xmath .

Let @xmath be an oriented multi-graph, and let @xmath be a
sub-oriented-multi-graph of @xmath , then the oriented multi-graph
obtained from @xmath by contracting @xmath is @xmath where @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath is defined by @xmath where @xmath if @xmath and @xmath
if @xmath .

Note that the notation @xmath have different meaning when interpreting
@xmath as a digraph or oriented multi-graph. The notation takes its
meaning relatively to the context.

If @xmath is a graph (resp. digraph or oriented multi-graph) and if
@xmath is a graph (resp. digraph or oriented multi-graph), we say that
@xmath is a minor of @xmath if there exist a finite sequence @xmath of
graphs (resp. digraph or oriented multi-graph) such that @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath @xmath is a subgraph (resp. subdigraph or
sub-oriented-multi-graph) of @xmath or obtained from @xmath by
contracting some subgraph (resp. subdigraph or sub-oriented-multi-graph)
of it.

## Chapter 2 Antidirected paths in digraphs

### 2.1 Introduction

The antidirected path @xmath is a digraph defined, up to isomorphism as
follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the 5-tournament satisfying @xmath . Grunbaum [ 5 ] proved
that @xmath is the only 5-tournament which doesn’t contain a copy of
@xmath . El-Sahili [ 1 ] showed that except @xmath , any 5-chromatic
oriented digraph in which each vertex has out-degree at least two,
contains a copy of @xmath . He showed by an example that the condition
that each vertex has out-degree at least two is necessary.

To show his result, El-Sahili used a theorem of Gallai [ 6 ] , which
states that if @xmath is k-critical, then each block of the subgraph of
@xmath induced by the vertices of degree @xmath , is either complete or
chordless odd cycle.

In this chapter we will give a detailed explanation of the argument used
by El-Sahili to show his theorem. We will then provide a new elementary
shorter proof which does not require the use of Gallai’s theorem. We
conclude this chapter by stating a new conjecture generalizing this
theorem.

### 2.2 First Step of the proof

Theorem 2.1 [ 1 ] : Let @xmath be a 5-chromatic connected digraph
distinct from @xmath in which each vertex has out-degree at least two.
Then @xmath contains a copy of @xmath .

To prove this theorem, we need several lemmas:

Lemma 2.2 [ 6 ] : Except for @xmath , any 5-tournament contains a copy
of @xmath .

Proof : Suppose to the contrary that there exists a 5-tournament @xmath
other then @xmath which does not contain any @xmath , then there exist
at least one vertex @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath , let @xmath . we
can assume without loss of generality that we have @xmath or @xmath .

In the first case, if @xmath such that @xmath , we may assume without
loss of generality that @xmath , then @xmath is a @xmath , so we
conclude that @xmath , but in this case @xmath would be a @xmath .

In the latter case, we have @xmath because otherwise @xmath is a @xmath
. If @xmath such that @xmath , we may assume without loss of generality
that @xmath and so @xmath is be a @xmath , so we conclude that @xmath ,
but in this case @xmath is a @xmath . @xmath

Corollary 2.3 : If @xmath is a digraph verifying the conditions of
Theorem 2.1 and if @xmath contains a @xmath , then @xmath contains a
copy of @xmath .

Proof : Let @xmath be the subpath of @xmath formed by the first three
edges, and let @xmath be the subpath of @xmath formed by the first two
edges. Since @xmath contains @xmath , then @xmath contains a
5-tournament. If this 5-tournament is not @xmath then by Lemma 2.2 we
conclude that @xmath contains a copy of @xmath .

Then we may assume that @xmath contains @xmath , and since @xmath is not
exactly @xmath , then we will have an edge @xmath in @xmath such that
@xmath is outside @xmath and @xmath belongs to @xmath . If @xmath then
this edge along with a path @xmath in @xmath starting at @xmath (we can
always find a copy of @xmath in @xmath starting at any point of it),
form a path @xmath . Otherwise, since @xmath , then there exist a vertex
@xmath distinct from @xmath such that @xmath . If @xmath , then the path
@xmath along with a copy of @xmath in @xmath starting at @xmath , form a
copy of @xmath . If @xmath , then the path @xmath along with a copy of
@xmath in @xmath starting at @xmath and not intersecting @xmath (For any
two vertices of @xmath , we can always find a copy of @xmath starting at
one vertex and not intersecting the other), form a copy of @xmath .
@xmath

Theorem 2.4 [ 7 ] : If @xmath is a connected graph which is not complete
nor an odd cycle, then @xmath .

Corollary 2.5 [ 4 ] : If @xmath is a digraph which does not contain any
tournament of order @xmath ( @xmath ), and in which any vertex has
in-degree at most @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof : Suppose to the contrary that @xmath and let @xmath be a @xmath
-critical subdigraph of @xmath . If there exists a vertex @xmath in
@xmath such that @xmath then @xmath , and since @xmath is @xmath
-critical then @xmath and we can easily check that @xmath (extend a good
@xmath -coloring of @xmath by giving @xmath a color not adjacent to it;
we can find such color since @xmath is adjacent to at most @xmath
vertices) which contradicts the fact that @xmath .

We conclude that for every vertex in @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath ,
and since @xmath we conclude that for every vertex @xmath in @xmath we
have @xmath and so @xmath which implies that @xmath . Obviously @xmath
is not an odd cycle since @xmath , and it is not complete since
otherwise @xmath would contain a @xmath -tournament, so by Brooks
theorem (Theorem 2.4) we conclude that @xmath which contradicts the fact
that @xmath . @xmath

Lemma 2.6 : If @xmath is a connected digraph in which each vertex has
in-degree at most one. Then @xmath contains at most one cycle which is a
circuit .

Proof : Let @xmath be a cycle which is a subdigraph of @xmath , if
@xmath is not a circuit then @xmath such that @xmath or @xmath . Since
@xmath and @xmath then we have @xmath and @xmath , but we have @xmath
then @xmath such that @xmath which is a contradiction. We conclude that
every cycle in @xmath is necessarily a circuit.

Suppose that there exist two different circuits @xmath and @xmath
subdigraphs of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath , since @xmath then we can
say without loss of generality that @xmath and thus @xmath such that
@xmath with @xmath , but @xmath has another in-neighbor in @xmath which
is a contradiction. We conclude that @xmath , but @xmath is connected
then there exists a path between a vertex of @xmath and a vertex of
@xmath , let @xmath be a minimal such path ( @xmath and @xmath ). @xmath
is minimal, so @xmath is the only vertex of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
is the only vertex of @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath has an in-neighbor
in @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath , let @xmath be the maximum integer
such that @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath and @xmath which contradicts
the fact that @xmath , so @xmath and @xmath but @xmath has another
in-neighbor in @xmath which contradicts the fact that @xmath . @xmath

Note that the above corollary and lemma holds also when we substitute
“in-degree” by “out-degree”.

In the sequel, @xmath denote an oriented digraph verifying the
conditions of theorem 2.1 . We suppose to the contrary that @xmath does
not contain any copy of @xmath . by the above corollary we may assume
that @xmath does not contain any 5-tournament. Let @xmath be a
5-critical subdigraph of @xmath and let @xmath be the subdigraph of
@xmath induced by the vertices of out-degree at least three in @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath .

Lemma 2.7 : @xmath contains at least one vertex whose out-degree in
@xmath is at least three, i.e. @xmath is not empty .

Proof : Otherwise we would have @xmath for every vertex @xmath in @xmath
. @xmath , and hence @xmath , contains no 5-tournament, so by corollary
2.5 we conclude that @xmath , which is a contradiction. @xmath

Lemma 2.8 : Every vertex in @xmath has at most one in-neighbor in @xmath
.

Proof : Suppose to the contrary that there exists a vertex @xmath having
two in-neighbors @xmath and let @xmath . If @xmath , we may suppose
without loss of generality that @xmath , then @xmath since @xmath , thus
@xmath is a @xmath , a contradiction. So @xmath and more generally we
can say that @xmath and @xmath are not adjacent. @xmath so @xmath thus
@xmath is a @xmath , a contradiction. @xmath

Corollary 2.9 : @xmath .

Proof : Clear. @xmath

Lemma 2.10 : Let @xmath be a vertex of @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath . If @xmath then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Proof : If @xmath then @xmath since @xmath , so @xmath is a @xmath which
is a contradiction. So we must have @xmath .

If we suppose that @xmath , we may assume without loss of generality
that @xmath . We have @xmath so @xmath and then @xmath is a @xmath , a
contradiction. So we have @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath , so @xmath , and since @xmath then @xmath such that
@xmath . If @xmath then @xmath is a @xmath , a contradiction. So @xmath
, let @xmath , then @xmath is a @xmath , a contradiction. So @xmath (We
prove similarly that @xmath ). @xmath

Lemma 2.11 : If @xmath and @xmath are two vertices such that there exist
two adjacent vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then @xmath .

Proof : We may assume without loss of generality that @xmath . If @xmath
then @xmath , by lemma 2.10 @xmath cannot be @xmath , and so @xmath is a
@xmath which is a contradiction. @xmath

Lemma 2.12 : @xmath is an independent set of @xmath .

Proof : Suppose to the contrary that @xmath is not an independent set,
so there exist a connected component @xmath of @xmath which contains at
least two vertices. If @xmath is a circuit, then every vertex of @xmath
has one in-neighbor in @xmath and has at least two out-neighbors outside
@xmath since its out-degree in @xmath is at least 3. If @xmath is not a
cycle, let @xmath be the last vertex in a maximal directed path in
@xmath , we can easily verify that @xmath and @xmath so @xmath has at
least three out-neighbors outside @xmath since @xmath .

So in all cases, we can always find a vertex @xmath in @xmath having at
least two out-neighbors outside @xmath and such that @xmath , let @xmath
be the in-neighbor of @xmath in @xmath and let @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath three out-neighbors of @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath are outside @xmath (i.e. @xmath and @xmath ). @xmath is
5-critical, so any vertex in @xmath has at least 4 neighbors, we
conclude that @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are not adjacent,
@xmath has one in-neighbor in @xmath , otherwise we may assume without
loss of generality that @xmath , but since @xmath we conclude again that
@xmath has one in-neighbor in @xmath . So in all cases we can say
without loss of generality that there exist a vertex @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath , by Lemma 2.10 we have @xmath and by Lemma 2.8 we
have @xmath so @xmath which implies that @xmath such that @xmath . Since
@xmath , there exists a vertex @xmath such that @xmath , suppose that
@xmath then let @xmath so @xmath is a @xmath , a contradiction. So we
have @xmath . @xmath then let @xmath , so by lemma 2.8 @xmath and @xmath
. Let @xmath , then @xmath is a @xmath , a contradiction.

We conclude that @xmath and by lemma 2.8 @xmath cannot be @xmath .
@xmath so there exist a vertex @xmath different from @xmath such that
@xmath . If @xmath , let @xmath , so @xmath is a @xmath , a
contradiction. So @xmath , and by lemma 2.11 we cannot have @xmath , and
since @xmath , @xmath so @xmath is a @xmath , a contradiction. @xmath

Lemma 2.13 : Let @xmath , then @xmath has exactly three out-neighbors
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

Proof : Suppose that any two out-neighbors of @xmath in @xmath are not
adjacent, and let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be three out-neighbors of
@xmath in @xmath . @xmath such that @xmath . By Lemma 2.8 we cannot have
@xmath because otherwise we would have @xmath , so we may assume without
loss of generality that @xmath . Suppose @xmath , we have @xmath so
@xmath , let @xmath so @xmath is a @xmath which is a contradiction. So
we conclude that @xmath and similarly @xmath but we will have a copy of
@xmath which is @xmath , a contradiction. So we conclude that at least
two in-neighbors of @xmath , say @xmath and @xmath , are adjacent, we
may suppose that @xmath , so by lemma 2.10 we have also @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath has four out-neighbors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . By lemma 2.10 we have @xmath and @xmath , thus @xmath
and @xmath which gives a contradiction with lemma 2.8 . @xmath

### 2.3 Second Step (El-Sahili’s proof)

In the sequel, we will need the use of the following theorem proved by
Gallai:

Theorem 2.14 [ 5 ] : Let @xmath be a @xmath -critical graph, then each
block of the subgraph of @xmath induced by the vertices of degree @xmath
is either complete or a chordless odd cycle .

Let @xmath be the subdigraph of @xmath induced by the vertices of degree
4.

Lemma 2.15 : Any vertex @xmath of @xmath has at least two in-neighbors
in @xmath .

Proof : If @xmath , then @xmath because @xmath is 5-critical, and since
@xmath then @xmath . So we may assume that @xmath , let @xmath where
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (By lemmas 2.10 and 2.13 ). @xmath ,
we have @xmath because otherwise we can find @xmath and we can find
@xmath , so @xmath is @xmath , which is a contradiction. If we suppose
that @xmath we will have @xmath and so @xmath . Thus @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are in the same block of @xmath , this block cannot be
an odd cycle, so by theorem 2.14 it’s complete which contradicts the
fact that @xmath . @xmath

We now associate to each vertex @xmath in @xmath the set @xmath ( @xmath
), defined as follows: @xmath where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ; Set
@xmath . If @xmath , put @xmath ; if not, let @xmath be the unique
vertex of @xmath distinct from @xmath such that @xmath . We have @xmath
. Again, if @xmath , put @xmath ; otherwise, let @xmath be the unique
vertex of @xmath distinct from @xmath such that @xmath ; such a vertex
exists by the above lemma. We have @xmath , since otherwise we would
have a path @xmath in @xmath .

We may continue this process until meeting a vertex of in-degree at
least three in @xmath ; call this vertex @xmath , where @xmath is the
number of iterations required. Such a vertex exists and @xmath . In fact
suppose that @xmath are defined as above and @xmath . By lemma 2.11 we
have @xmath . If @xmath , the vertices @xmath and @xmath will be in the
same block of @xmath . The block of @xmath containing @xmath cannot be
an odd cycle nor complete since @xmath which contradicts theorem 2.14 .
Set @xmath and @xmath ; we have @xmath for every @xmath in @xmath .

Lemma 2.16 : If u and v are two distinct vertices of @xmath then @xmath
.

Proof : Let @xmath and @xmath @xmath and suppose that @xmath . If @xmath
then since @xmath and @xmath are not adjacent we should have @xmath ,
otherwise we would have @xmath or @xmath . So @xmath so @xmath with
@xmath which is a contradiction since @xmath and @xmath . So we conclude
that @xmath and similarly @xmath . If @xmath (i.e. @xmath ), then @xmath
since otherwise we would have @xmath (which is a contradiction), and
similarly if @xmath we will have @xmath and so @xmath which implies that
@xmath which is also a contradiction. We conclude that if @xmath then
@xmath and @xmath with @xmath ; and more precisely we have @xmath or
@xmath , because otherwise we would have @xmath which is a
contradiction. Since @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we conclude
that @xmath and then @xmath . Since @xmath then @xmath and @xmath , but
@xmath , we can easily conclude that @xmath and then @xmath which is a
contradiction since @xmath and @xmath . So @xmath and similarly @xmath ,
so @xmath such that @xmath ; we will prove by induction on @xmath that
@xmath : it is true for l=0, suppose that it is true for @xmath so
@xmath which implies that @xmath , but @xmath and @xmath so @xmath . Set
@xmath , we conclude that @xmath but this implies that @xmath which is a
contradiction. @xmath

Lemma 2.17 : Let @xmath . We have @xmath and @xmath .

Proof : Let @xmath and @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we conclude that all the inequalities are in fact equalities, which
holds only if we have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . @xmath

Corollary 2.18 : For all @xmath , @xmath contains exactly two vertices .

Proof : Clear, by the definition of @xmath , and by lemma 2.17 . @xmath

Proof of Theorem 2.1 : Define the sets:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have @xmath . Suppose that @xmath , then @xmath because otherwise we
can find a vertex @xmath outside @xmath which is adjacent to a vertex
@xmath of @xmath ( @xmath is connected since it is 5-critical) and so
@xmath which means that @xmath or @xmath (see the definitions of @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath ), then since @xmath then in all cases we have
@xmath which is a contradiction. Let @xmath be a vertex of @xmath , then
put @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath we are done, otherwise the
colors 1,2 and 3 suffice to color the vertices of @xmath , let @xmath
then put @xmath and @xmath . We can easily check that @xmath is a good
4-coloring of the 5-chromatic digraph @xmath which is a contradiction.

So @xmath which means that @xmath or @xmath . Since @xmath then @xmath ,
and so we can find a vertex in @xmath which is not in @xmath . So we can
find a vertex @xmath such that @xmath or @xmath . We can assume without
loss of generality that @xmath which implies that @xmath . Let @xmath ,
@xmath so @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are not adjacent, we can find
@xmath such that @xmath , and if they are adjacent we can assume without
loss of generality that @xmath and so again we can find @xmath such that
@xmath . So without losing generality we can say that in all cases we
can find @xmath such that @xmath . @xmath since otherwise @xmath and
@xmath , but @xmath and @xmath so @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath which
is contradiction since @xmath , and so @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath
such that @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath would be a @xmath which is a
contradiction. We conclude that @xmath , and we have also @xmath because
otherwise we would have @xmath . Then @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are of degree 4, and so they are in the same block of @xmath
which cannot be neither an odd cycle nor complete which contradicts
theorem 2.14 . @xmath

### 2.4 Our new shorter proof

We provide a new shorter proof of El-Sahili’s theorem, which is
elementary in the sense that it does not use Gallai’s theorem. We will
use all the theorems, lemmas and corollaries of the first step.

New proof of theorem 2.1 : For all @xmath in @xmath we define @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath is not empty since @xmath
while @xmath can be empty. @xmath because otherwise @xmath would be a
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath . By lemma 2.12 , every vertex in @xmath
has only two out-neighbors i.e. @xmath and @xmath , in particular @xmath
is stable.

If @xmath is not empty then @xmath such that @xmath , since otherwise
@xmath implies that @xmath such that @xmath which means that @xmath is a
@xmath where @xmath . By lemma 2.12 , every vertex in @xmath has only
two out-neighbors i.e. @xmath and one vertex in @xmath , in particular
@xmath is stable.

Let @xmath , we define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
and @xmath as follows: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are obtained from @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath by removing @xmath and then contracting @xmath and @xmath if
any of them is not empty.

We can easily check that all the vertices of @xmath has at most two
out-neighbors. Suppose that @xmath contains a 5-tournament @xmath , then
@xmath contains at least one contracted vertex @xmath (Otherwise @xmath
would be a subdigraph of @xmath ). @xmath or @xmath for some @xmath ,
and in both cases @xmath has at most one out-neighbor in @xmath , and
this means that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Which gives a contradiction. So @xmath does not contain any 5-tournament
and by corollary 2.5 we conclude that @xmath .

Let @xmath be the least integer such that @xmath , then @xmath because
@xmath is 5-critical. Let @xmath and let @xmath be a good 4-coloring of
@xmath . Color the vertices in @xmath by @xmath and color those in
@xmath by @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath are adjacent (in @xmath ) to at most three colors,
we color them by a remainder color, then similarly color @xmath and then
@xmath (They are each adjacent to at most three colors) and we get
@xmath , a contradiction.

We conclude that @xmath and @xmath are adjacent to the four colors 1,2,3
and 4. We may assume without loss of generality that @xmath is adjacent
to 1 and 2 and that @xmath is adjacent to 3 and 4. If @xmath , color
@xmath by 3, @xmath by 1, @xmath by 2 and @xmath by 4, and we get good
4-coloring. So @xmath , we may assume without loss of generality that
@xmath . Color @xmath by 3 and color @xmath by 1, @xmath by 2 and @xmath
by 4, and we get good 4-coloration and @xmath , a contradiction. @xmath

### 2.5 Conclusion

In this chapter we have presented El-Sahili’s theorem [ 1 ] stating that
we can always find a copy of the anti-directed path @xmath , in any
@xmath -chromatic digraph where every vertex has at least two
out-neighbors and which is not exactly @xmath . We have presented
El-Sahili’s proof and we have provided a new shorter proof.

Is the condition that every vertex has at least two out-neighbors really
necessary? El-Sahili gave a positive answer in his paper through the
following example: Construct a digraph by adding to @xmath an arc @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath , then we can easily check that this digraph
does not contain a copy of @xmath .

The example given above contains @xmath and this shows that the
condition that every vertex has at least two out-neighbors is necessary
for digraphs containing @xmath . What if it does not contain @xmath ?
El-Sahili concluded his paper [ 1 ] by asking the following question:
Can we find a 5-chromatic digraph which contains neither a 5-tournament
nor @xmath ?

We conclude this chapter by stating the following conjecture of us:

Conjecture 2.19 : Let @xmath be a @xmath -chromatic graph where @xmath .
If @xmath does not contain any @xmath -tournament, and if every vertex
of @xmath has at least @xmath out-neighbors. Then @xmath contains the
antidirected path @xmath of length @xmath starting with a backward arc .

## Chapter 3 Paths with two blocks in @xmath-chromatic digraphs

### 3.1 Introduction

An important problem in graph theory is to find which oriented paths can
be found in @xmath -chromatic digraphs. Gallai-Roy’s celebrated theorem
[ 8 , 9 ] states that every @xmath -chromatic digraphs contains a
directed path of length @xmath . The question is that can we find an
oriented path of length @xmath with more than one block? or more
generally, how big should be the chromatic number of a digraph to
guarantee the existence of an oriented path of length @xmath ?

Burr [ 11 ] proved that every @xmath -chromatic digraph contains any
tree of order @xmath , in particular every @xmath -chromatic digraph
contains any oriented path of length @xmath . In this chapter we are
interested in paths with two blocks. El-Sahili [ 15 ] introduces the
function @xmath which is defined to be the minimal integer @xmath such
that every @xmath -chromatic digraph contains any path with two block
@xmath with @xmath , and he conjectured that @xmath for @xmath .
El-Sahili proved [ 15 ] that @xmath . El-Sahili and Bondy [ 15 ] proved
that the conjecture holds when one of the two blocks have length 1.

El-Sahili and Kouider [ 16 ] introduced the notion of maximal spanning
out-forest and used it to prove that @xmath . Addario-Berry et al [ 2 ]
used strongly connected digraphs and maximal spanning out-forests to
prove El-Sahili’s conjecture ( @xmath for @xmath ). Later El-Sahili and
Kouider [ 3 ] provided a new elementary proof of El-Sahili’s conjecture
without using strongly connected digraphs. In this chapter we provide a
detailed explanation of both methods. We show that the first method
contains a small error and we provide a correction.

### 3.2 Maximal spanning out-forest

The level @xmath of a vertex @xmath in an out-forest @xmath is defined
as in the case of out-branching; the order of a longest directed path
ending at @xmath . We denote by @xmath the out-branching of @xmath
rooted at @xmath and by @xmath the directed path in @xmath of order
@xmath which ends at @xmath . For all @xmath , @xmath denotes the @xmath
-directed path in @xmath .

Let @xmath be a digraph, a spanning subdigraph @xmath of @xmath is said
to be a maximal spanning out-forest if @xmath is a out-forest such that
@xmath , if @xmath with @xmath then there exists a directed path from
@xmath to @xmath in @xmath , i.e. @xmath . The set @xmath of vertices
having the same level @xmath is a stable (by definition).

Let @xmath be an out-forest which is a spanning subdigraph of a digraph
@xmath . If @xmath is not a maximal out-forest, then there exist an arc
@xmath such that @xmath and there is no directed path from @xmath to
@xmath in @xmath , the out-forest @xmath obtained from @xmath by
deleting the arc whose head is @xmath (If such one exists) and adding
the arc @xmath is called an elementary improvement of @xmath .

We can easily see that the level of each vertex in @xmath is at least
its level in @xmath , and there exists a vertex ( @xmath ) whose level
strictly increases. Since the level of a vertex cannot increase
infinitely (The maximum level that can be reached is —V(D)—), we can see
that after a finite number of elementary improvements we get to a
maximal spanning out-forest which is call a maximal closure of @xmath .
Thus starting with a spanning out-forest that contains no arcs we can
prove the existence of a maximal spanning out-forest of @xmath . We have
also another way to get the existence of a maximal spanning out-forest;
choose an out-forest @xmath which maximizes the sum of the levels of all
vertices.

The notion of maximal spanning out-forests introduced by El-Sahili and
Kouider [ 16 ] is useful in the context of universal digraphs. As shown
by El-Sahili and Kouider [ 16 ] , it gives an easy proof of Gallai-Roy’s
theorem. Indeed, consider a maximal spanning out-forest of an @xmath
-chromatic digraph @xmath . Since every level is a stable set, there are
at least @xmath levels. Hence @xmath contains a directed path of length
at least @xmath . Final forests are also useful for finding paths with
two blocks, as illustrated by the following proof due to El-Sahili and
Kouider [ 16 ] .

Lemma 3.1 [ 16 ] : Let @xmath be a maximal spanning out-forest of a
digraph @xmath . If @xmath is an arc from @xmath to @xmath . Then

1.  If @xmath , then @xmath contains a @xmath .

2.  If @xmath , then @xmath contains a @xmath .

Proof : 1. Let @xmath be the directed path of @xmath which starts at
@xmath and ends at @xmath and @xmath be the directed path in @xmath
starting at @xmath and ending at @xmath . Then @xmath is a @xmath .

2. Let @xmath be the directed path in @xmath which starts at @xmath and
ends at @xmath . Let @xmath be the directed path in @xmath starting at
@xmath and ending at @xmath . Then @xmath is a @xmath . @xmath

Corollary 3.2 [ 16 ] : Every digraph with chromatic number at least
@xmath contains a @xmath .

Proof : 1. Let @xmath be a maximal spanning out-forest of @xmath . Color
the levels @xmath of @xmath with colors @xmath . Then color the level
@xmath , where @xmath , with color @xmath such that @xmath mod @xmath .
Since this is a @xmath -coloring, it’s not a good, and so there exists
an arc which satisfies the hypothesis of Lemma 2.3 . @xmath

### 3.3 Paths with two blocks in strongly connected digraphs

Theorem 3.3 [ 17 ] : Every strongly connected digraph @xmath has a
circuit of length at least @xmath .

Let @xmath be a positive integer and @xmath be a digraph. A directed
circuit @xmath of @xmath is @xmath -good if @xmath and @xmath . Note
that Theorem 3.3 states that every strongly connected digraph D has a
@xmath -good circuit.

Note that the last part of the proof in [ 2 ] of the following lemma
contains an error. We will show the proof in [ 2 ] and explain why it is
false, and then we will provide a correction.

Lemma 3.4 : Let @xmath be a strongly connected oriented multi-graph and
@xmath . Then @xmath has a @xmath -good circuit.

Proof : By Bondy’s theorem, there exists a circuit with length at least
@xmath , so the lemma is true for @xmath . If @xmath then if @xmath is
the shortest circuit of @xmath , then it’s chordless and therefore
@xmath or @xmath . Suppose that @xmath and consider a shortest circuit
@xmath with length at least @xmath . We claim that @xmath .Suppose to
the contrary that @xmath , and let @xmath be a maximal
sub-oriented-graph of @xmath such that @xmath is a strongly connected
digraph in which @xmath is a subdigraph. If any two vertices of @xmath
are adjacent in @xmath , they are still adjacent in @xmath , and so
@xmath , moreover @xmath is a hamiltonian circuit of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a vertex of @xmath , if @xmath are in-neighbors of @xmath
in @xmath , listed in such a way that @xmath appear in the same order
along @xmath , the sub-circuit of @xmath not containing @xmath would
have length at least @xmath since it contains @xmath and @xmath in
addition to the out-neighbor of @xmath in @xmath . This contradicts the
minimality of @xmath , so we conclude that every vertex has at most
@xmath in-neighbors in @xmath and similarly at most @xmath out-neighbors
in @xmath .

A handle decomposition of @xmath is a sequence @xmath such that:

1.  @xmath is a circuit of @xmath .

2.  For @xmath , @xmath is a handle , that is, a directed path in @xmath
    (with possibly the same end-vertices i.e. a circuit) meeting @xmath
    exactly at his end-vertices.

3.  @xmath .

An @xmath which is an arc is a trivial handle . It is well-known that
@xmath is invariant for all handle decompositions of @xmath (indeed,
@xmath is the number of arcs minus the number of vertices plus one, it
is proved by a simple induction on @xmath ). However the number of
nontrivial handles is not invariant. Let us then consider @xmath , a
handle decomposition of @xmath with minimum number of trivial handles.
Since the trivial handles does not add any new vertices, we can
enumerate first the nontrivial handles, and so we can assume that @xmath
are not trivial and that @xmath are arcs.

Let @xmath . Clearly @xmath is a strongly connected spanning subdigraph
of @xmath . Observe that since @xmath , @xmath is not an induced circuit
which means that @xmath , so @xmath because otherwise a trivial handle
would be a chord of @xmath so by shortcutting @xmath through this chord
we get two non trivial non handles which contradicts the maximality of
@xmath .

We denote by @xmath the handle @xmath minus its end-vertices.

If @xmath , the digraph @xmath is strongly connected, and therefore
@xmath is also strongly connected. Moreover since @xmath we have @xmath
. Thus by Bondy’s theorem, there exists a circuit of length at least
@xmath in @xmath that is shorter than @xmath , a contradiction with the
minimality of @xmath .

If @xmath , @xmath is the unique out-neighbor of @xmath in @xmath
because otherwise we would make two non trivial handles out of @xmath ,
contradicting the maximality of @xmath . Similarly, @xmath is the unique
in-neighbor of @xmath . Since the out-degree and the in-degree of every
vertex is at most @xmath , both @xmath and @xmath have degree at most
@xmath in the underlying graph of @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows
that @xmath because otherwise we can extend a good @xmath -coloring of
@xmath by giving each of @xmath (we can always find such a color since
@xmath is adjacent to at most @xmath vertices) and then we do the same
with @xmath . Since @xmath is strongly connected, it contains, by
Bondy’s theorem, a circuit with length at least @xmath , contradicting
the minimality of C.

Hence, we may assume that @xmath . @xmath , by the maximality of @xmath
, the unique arc in @xmath leaving @xmath is @xmath (otherwise we would
make two nontrivial handles out of @xmath ). Similarly, @xmath , the
unique arc in @xmath entering @xmath is @xmath . In particular, as for
@xmath , @xmath has out-degree 1 in @xmath and @xmath has in-degree 1 in
@xmath .

The next paragraph is, word by word (with exception for the
terminology), the last part of the proof in [ 2 ] which contains an
error :

“Another consequence is that the underlying graph of @xmath has two
connected components @xmath and @xmath . Since the degrees of @xmath and
@xmath in the underlying graph of @xmath are at most @xmath and @xmath
is at least @xmath -chromatic, it follows that @xmath or @xmath is at
least @xmath . Each vertex has in-degree at most @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath , so @xmath and @xmath . Hence @xmath is at least
@xmath -chromatic and strongly connected. Thus by Bondy’s theorem,
@xmath contains a circuit of length at least @xmath but shorter than
@xmath . This is a contradiction.” [ 2 ]

The error is that there is no reason to say that @xmath for @xmath , in
fact @xmath for @xmath but we can have @xmath for @xmath and so we can
have @xmath , and therefore @xmath can be greater than @xmath . So we
will prove that @xmath through another proof:

Let @xmath and let @xmath be the minimum integer greater than 1 such
that @xmath . Suppose that @xmath : since the unique arc in @xmath
entering @xmath is @xmath then we have @xmath and since @xmath we have
@xmath and therefore @xmath which contradicts the minimality of @xmath .
Then @xmath and @xmath @xmath

The existence of good circuits directly implies the main theorem in the
case of strongly connected digraphs.

Corollary 3.5 : Let @xmath where @xmath and let @xmath be a strongly
connected @xmath -chromatic digraph then @xmath contains a @xmath .

Proof : Since @xmath and @xmath represent the same digraph and since
@xmath , we may assume that @xmath which means that @xmath . By lemma
3.4 @xmath contains an @xmath -good circuit @xmath , the chromatic
number of the (strongly connected) contracted oriented multi-graph
@xmath is at least @xmath , since otherwise we may use a good @xmath
-coloring of @xmath to construct a good @xmath -coloring of @xmath :
keep the colors of the vertices of @xmath , and for the vertices of
@xmath we give one vertex the color of @xmath and then we color the
other vertices by @xmath new colors. We conclude that @xmath and by
Bondy’s theorem, @xmath has a circuit of length at least @xmath , and in
particular the vertex @xmath is the end of a path @xmath of length
@xmath in @xmath . Finally @xmath contains a @xmath . @xmath

### 3.4 General case, first method (Addario-Berry et al)

Theorem 3.6 : Let @xmath and let @xmath be an @xmath -chromatic digraph.
Then @xmath contains a @xmath .

Proof . We can assume that @xmath , and therefore @xmath . Suppose to
the contrary that @xmath does not contain @xmath . Let @xmath be a
maximal spanning out-forest of @xmath .

Consider the following coloring (Which we call canonical coloring ) of
@xmath : for @xmath , the vertices of @xmath are colored @xmath , and
for @xmath , the vertices of @xmath are colored @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath mod @xmath . Since we colored @xmath with less than @xmath
colors, this coloring can not be good. In particular, there exists an
arc @xmath from @xmath to @xmath where @xmath and @xmath mod @xmath . By
Lemma 3.1 (1) , we get a contradiction if @xmath . Thus @xmath , and by
Lemma 3.1 (2) , we necessarily have @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is
a maximal spanning out-forest we can find in @xmath a directed path from
@xmath to @xmath . In particular @xmath has a circuit @xmath of length
at least @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath is @xmath -good, if not, then by
Lemma 3.4 , it contains an @xmath -good circuit. So in all cases we can
find an @xmath -good circuit which is disjoint from @xmath .

We inductively define couples @xmath as follows: Set @xmath , @xmath .
Then, if there exists an @xmath -good circuit @xmath of @xmath , define
@xmath and let @xmath be any maximal closure in @xmath of @xmath .

With the previous definitions, we have @xmath . This inductive
definition certainly stops on some @xmath where the canonical coloring
of @xmath is a good coloring.

At each inductive step, the circuit @xmath must contain a vertex @xmath
of @xmath , otherwise the union of @xmath (which has length at least
@xmath ) and a path of @xmath starting at @xmath and ending at @xmath
(which would have length at least @xmath if @xmath does not meet @xmath
) would certainly contain a @xmath . Let @xmath the unique in-neighbor
of @xmath in @xmath . @xmath , since @xmath because we apply successive
elementary improvements, and @xmath cannot be greater than @xmath ,
otherwise @xmath would be the end of a path @xmath of length @xmath in
@xmath and thus @xmath would contain a @xmath . Thus every circuit
@xmath , @xmath , has an in-neighbor @xmath in @xmath .

Observe that we cannot have any arc between two circuits @xmath since
they are disjoint and the length of each one is at least @xmath , and if
there is such an arc we get a @xmath since @xmath . Observe also that no
vertex of @xmath has a neighbor, (in- or out-), in any level @xmath for
any @xmath because otherwise we get a @xmath . Moreover, no vertex of
@xmath has an in-neighbor in @xmath .

Let us call bad vertices the out-neighbors of the vertices of all @xmath
in @xmath and good vertices the non-bad vertices in @xmath . A bad
vertex @xmath cannot have in-neighbors in more than one circuit @xmath ,
since the length of those circuits is at least @xmath and so joining two
circuits @xmath with @xmath through two arcs towards it make a @xmath .
Moreover @xmath has at most @xmath in-neighbors in @xmath : Suppose to
the contrary that @xmath are in-neighbors of @xmath in @xmath ,
enumerated with respect to the cyclic order of @xmath such that @xmath
is the first vertex @xmath along @xmath which appears after @xmath (i.e.
@xmath ). Let @xmath be the path of @xmath starting at @xmath and ending
at @xmath . Now @xmath contains a @xmath , a contradiction.

Let @xmath is a bad vertex, we denote by @xmath the set of descendants
of @xmath in @xmath , i.e. the set of vertices @xmath such that there is
a path from @xmath to @xmath in @xmath , including @xmath itself.

We claim that every arc @xmath entering @xmath (i.e. @xmath and @xmath )
in @xmath is such that @xmath and @xmath . Indeed, suppose that @xmath ,
@xmath would be a strict descendant of @xmath in @xmath and then @xmath
and so @xmath , thus @xmath . Let @xmath be the path in @xmath (of
length at least @xmath ) ending at @xmath , let @xmath be the path in
@xmath starting at @xmath and ending at @xmath and let @xmath be an
in-neighbor of @xmath in @xmath . @xmath would contain a @xmath , which
gives a contradiction; so we conclude that @xmath , if @xmath we would
have @xmath , @xmath without having any directed path from @xmath to
@xmath which contradicts the fact that @xmath is a spanning maximal
out-forest. So we must have @xmath which means that there exist @xmath
such that @xmath . We must have @xmath since @xmath cannot have
in-neighbors in more than one circuit @xmath .

We claim also that we have no arcs leaving @xmath . Indeed, let @xmath
be an arc of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath , there
exists a path @xmath (of length at least @xmath ) in @xmath ending at
@xmath which does not meet @xmath nor @xmath . Let @xmath be the path in
@xmath which starts at @xmath and ends at @xmath , and let @xmath be an
in-neighbor of @xmath in @xmath . We can then find a copy of @xmath in
@xmath . Thus @xmath and therefore it belongs to some @xmath , but this
is impossible since @xmath .

We resume:

-   There is no arcs between different @xmath ’s.

-   Each @xmath is adjacent to a unique vertex in @xmath which is bad.

-   If @xmath is a bad vertex, then the only arcs between @xmath and
    @xmath are those between @xmath and a unique circuit @xmath , we
    have at most @xmath such arcs.

Let us color @xmath with @xmath colors. Let @xmath be the subdigraph
@xmath induced by the vertices of @xmath which are not in @xmath for any
bad vertex @xmath . The canonical coloring of @xmath is good since all
the vertices in @xmath of level @xmath are good. We will extend this
coloring for the other vertices of @xmath (which are vertices of some
@xmath , or descendants of some bad vertex).

Every @xmath is @xmath -good and thus @xmath -colorable. Moreover, we
have no arcs between any two circuits @xmath , so we may color their
vertices by the colors @xmath . This extension of the coloring is also
good since the vertices whose level is at most @xmath are colored with
colors @xmath , and the vertices of @xmath whose level is at least
@xmath are descendants of good vertices.

So it remains to extend the coloring for the descendants of bad
vertices. Let @xmath be a bad vertex, then @xmath is adjacent (in @xmath
) to at most @xmath vertices in some unique @xmath , so we can properly
choose a color @xmath for @xmath from the @xmath colors @xmath . Since
the strict descendants of @xmath are not adjacent to any vertex outside
@xmath , we properly color any descendant @xmath of @xmath with a color
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath mod @xmath . We get a good @xmath
-coloring of @xmath , which is a contradiction. @xmath

### 3.5 General case, second method (El-Sahili and Kouider)

To prove theorem 3.6 , we will use the following weaker result, proved
by El-Sahili and Bondy:

Theorem 3.7 [ 15 ] : For @xmath , every @xmath -chromatic digraph
contains a path @xmath .

We explain now the new method of El-Sahili and Kouider to prove theorem
3.6 :

New proof of theorem 3.6 . Let @xmath be an @xmath -chromatic digraph.
Due to theorem 3.7 , it is sufficient to prove that @xmath contains any
path @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Consider a maximal spanning
out-forest @xmath of @xmath minimizing @xmath . The vertices in @xmath
are taken the color @xmath for @xmath . For @xmath , set @xmath .

Step 1: Suppose to the contrary that @xmath contains no path @xmath .
Then @xmath is a stable set for @xmath . Indeed, this fact is trivial
for @xmath . If @xmath is not stable for @xmath , then there is an edge
@xmath . Since vertices having the same level are not adjacent, we must
have @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath , so by lemma 3.1 @xmath contains a
path @xmath which is a contradiction. if @xmath is stable, we get @xmath
stables which contradicts the fact that @xmath , then @xmath is not
stable. By lemma 3.1 the only possible arcs in @xmath are those with
heads in @xmath . These vertices of @xmath are said to be bad. It is
clear that if @xmath is a bad vertex then @xmath contains a circuit of
length at least @xmath , and so each vertex in @xmath is the end of a
directed path of length @xmath , and this means that:

There is no edge @xmath in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath (1).

We get a contradiction if we give the uncolored vertices colors in
@xmath to obtain a good @xmath -coloring of @xmath . By remark (1) This
can be done separately on each @xmath where @xmath is bad. Let @xmath be
a bad vertex of @xmath and suppose that @xmath is chosen as above with a
minimal number of bad vertices.

Step 2: Let @xmath , we have @xmath since otherwise we will have @xmath
, and so @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , contains a path @xmath . Set
@xmath . A vertex @xmath is said to be rich in @xmath if @xmath and
@xmath for all @xmath . If @xmath contains no rich vertices, then each
vertex @xmath can take a color @xmath such that @xmath . A remainder
vertex @xmath takes the color @xmath if @xmath . We obtain an good
@xmath -coloring which is a contradiction. Similarly we verify that
@xmath is rich. Let @xmath be a rich vertex in @xmath . we have @xmath .
In fact if there is another vertex @xmath , let @xmath be the smallest
integer such that @xmath , we have @xmath . Let @xmath . Since @xmath is
a maximal spanning out-forest then @xmath which contains @xmath . If
@xmath , @xmath contains a path @xmath . If @xmath , then let @xmath ,
@xmath exists due to the minimality of @xmath , @xmath contains a path
@xmath . The same argument proves that:

@xmath is the unique rich in-neighbor of @xmath with level greater than
@xmath (2).

Denote by @xmath the vertex @xmath and by @xmath the circuit @xmath and
set @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . Note that there exist an integer
@xmath such that @xmath . We show that @xmath is a rich vertex: @xmath
must contain a rich vertex @xmath , because otherwise we may give all
the vertices in @xmath an appropriate color in @xmath and then give
@xmath the color @xmath , and the color @xmath for remaining vertices in
@xmath . We get then a good @xmath -coloring, a contradiction. Then we
must have @xmath by remark (2). If @xmath is not rich then @xmath . We
show as above that @xmath for all @xmath : If @xmath , we may suppose
that @xmath is minimal, let @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath contains a path
@xmath . If @xmath , then let @xmath , @xmath exists due to the
minimality of @xmath , @xmath contains a path @xmath .

If @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath : Suppose
to the contrary that @xmath , since @xmath @xmath is the end of a
directed path @xmath of length @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath so @xmath
contains a path @xmath regardless of the orientation of @xmath . So we
@xmath , but this means that @xmath because otherwise @xmath would again
contain a @xmath . @xmath means that either @xmath or @xmath , the
latter case does not hold since @xmath and @xmath , so @xmath and thus
@xmath is necessarily @xmath . We conclude that @xmath is the only edge
between @xmath and @xmath . (3)

Color a vertex @xmath by the color @xmath if @xmath and by the color
@xmath if @xmath . We do the same with any other rich neighbor of @xmath
in @xmath . We give the other vertices of @xmath appropriate colors from
@xmath , @xmath is then colored by @xmath and each remainder vertex
@xmath ( @xmath ) is colored by the color @xmath . We get an good @xmath
-coloration of @xmath , which is a contradiction.

So @xmath is a rich vertex verifying @xmath for all @xmath . Let @xmath
where @xmath is the predecessor of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath and let
@xmath be a maximal closure of @xmath . Since @xmath is minimal, then
@xmath if @xmath . This proves that @xmath and @xmath is still rich in
@xmath with @xmath , but @xmath is an in-neighbor of @xmath , then
@xmath and @xmath . By supposing that @xmath is chosen such that @xmath
is maximal, we get @xmath . This gives @xmath . Another important fact
can be easily verified is that @xmath for @xmath . Hence @xmath . We
repeat the same reasoning as above to prove that @xmath ( @xmath ) is
also a rich vertex verifying @xmath for all @xmath . This can be
verified by a simple induction for all the vertices in @xmath .

Step 3: If @xmath , then by theorem 3.7 @xmath contains a path @xmath .
This path can be completed to obtain a path @xmath by adding @xmath ,
where @xmath is the end-vertex of the @xmath corresponding to the block
of length 1 which is rich and @xmath is an in-neighbor of @xmath of
level @xmath . Then we conclude that @xmath .Color @xmath by the @xmath
colors @xmath .

If @xmath contains exactly @xmath vertices (i.e. @xmath ), then at least
two of the vertices of @xmath are not adjacent, we may suppose without
loss of generality that @xmath since any vertex of @xmath can take the
level @xmath in some convenient maximal spanning out-forest of @xmath .
We give each vertex @xmath , @xmath , the color @xmath . Let @xmath be a
rich vertex in @xmath then we must have @xmath , otherwise we would use
@xmath (as above) to make a directed path of length @xmath ending at
@xmath , and intersecting @xmath only at @xmath , so by adding an
appropriate directed path of @xmath we get a @xmath . We prove as above
(as in (3)) that if @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath .Color a vertex @xmath by the color @xmath if @xmath
and by the color @xmath if @xmath . We do the same for all rich vertices
in @xmath and the other non-reach vertices in @xmath are colored by
appropriate colors from @xmath . The vertex @xmath is colored by @xmath
and each remainder vertex @xmath is colored by the color @xmath , @xmath
. We get a good @xmath coloring, which is a contradiction.

We conclude that @xmath (i.e. @xmath ), so @xmath and @xmath . If we
consider two vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath with @xmath . Since
@xmath , then @xmath may be viewed as the union of two directed paths
@xmath and @xmath , such that one of them, say @xmath , is of length at
least @xmath . Set @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath
are such that @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath or @xmath , @xmath would
contain a path @xmath regardless of the orientation of @xmath , where
@xmath is the in-neighbor of @xmath in @xmath . So we must have @xmath
and @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath would contain a @xmath regardless of the
orientation of @xmath , where @xmath is the in-neighbor of @xmath in
@xmath . So we must have @xmath and @xmath .

Color @xmath by the @xmath colors @xmath such that @xmath is colored
@xmath and @xmath is colored @xmath . For all @xmath of color @xmath we
color each vertex @xmath by the color @xmath with @xmath and @xmath mod
@xmath . We claim that the vertices in @xmath of color @xmath cannot be
adjacent to @xmath : If @xmath is of color @xmath then @xmath and so if
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath , then @xmath contain a @xmath if @xmath
and @xmath contain a @xmath if @xmath . Then this coloring is a good
@xmath -coloring of @xmath , which contradicts the fact that @xmath .
@xmath

### 3.6 Conclusion

We have presented in this chapter the problem of finding paths with two
blocks in @xmath -chromatic digraphs. We have proven with two methods
that for @xmath , we can find any oriented path of length @xmath with
two blocks in any @xmath -chromatic digraph. What if we have more than
two blocks?

We conclude this chapter by stating this new conjecture of El-Sahili:

Conjecture 3.8 [ 3 ] : For @xmath , every @xmath -chromatic digraph
contains any oriented path of length @xmath .

In fact this conjecture generalizes Rosenfeld’s conjecture which states
that every tournament of order @xmath contains any oriented path of
order @xmath , which was proved by Havet and Thomassé with three
exceptions which are tournaments of order 3,5 and 7. The condition
@xmath is therefore necessary due to these three exceptions.