UNIFORM algebras have been extensively investigated because of their
importance in the theory of uniform approximation and as examples of complex
Banach algebras. An interesting question is whether analogous algebras exist
when a complete valued field other than the complex numbers is used as the
underlying field of the algebra. In the Archimedean setting, this
generalisation is given by the theory of real function algebras introduced by
S. H. Kulkarni and B. V. Limaye in the 1980s. This thesis establishes a broader
theory accommodating any complete valued field as the underlying field by
involving Galois automorphisms and using non-Archimedean analysis. The approach
taken keeps close to the original definitions from the Archimedean setting.
Basic function algebras are defined and generalise real function algebras to
all complete valued fields. Several examples are provided. Each basic function
algebra is shown to have a lattice of basic extensions related to the field
structure. In the non-Archimedean setting it is shown that certain basic
function algebras have residue algebras that are also basic function algebras.
A representation theorem is established. Commutative unital Banach F-algebras
with square preserving norm and finite basic dimension are shown to be
isometrically F-isomorphic to some subalgebra of a Basic function algebra. The
theory of non-commutative real function algebras was established by K. Jarosz
in 2008. The possibility of their generalisation to the non-Archimedean setting
is established in this thesis. In the context of complex uniform algebras, a
new proof is given using transfinite induction of the Feinstein-Heath Swiss
cheese "Classicalisation" theorem.