The study of anyons offers one of the most exciting challenges in
contemporary physics. Anyons are exotic quasiparticles with non-trivial
exchange statistics, which makes them difficult to simulate. However,
they are of great interest as some species offer the prospect of a
highly fault-tolerant form of universal quantum computation, and it has
been suggested that the simplest such species may appear in the
fractional quantum Hall state with filling fraction @xmath = 12/5.
Despite the current strong interest in the development of practical
quantum computing, our ability to study the collective behaviour of
systems of anyons remains limited.

Meanwhile, tensor network algorithms are a relatively recent development
in the field of condensed matter physics. They consist of Ans√§tze for
the low-energy states of a lattice system, whose number of free
parameters scale at most polynomially in the system size, and algorithms
for their optimisation, manipulation, and analysis. However, many
condensed matter systems possess a high degree of symmetry, which may be
exploited to yield an even more efficient description of the low-energy
subspace, and when I began work on my Thesis these algorithms (with the
exception of DMRG) did not in general take advantage of these
symmetries.

In this Thesis I develop a formalism, based on the frameworks of spin
networks and category theory, whereby a tensor network acting on any
lattice model exhibiting a mathematical structure corresponding to a
Unitary Braided Tensor Category (UBTC) may be represented in a
particularly compact and efficient manner corresponding to the
exploitation of this structure. This permits the exploitation of global
Abelian and non-Abelian internal group symmetries, both to facilitate
the study of particular symmetry sectors of the model, and for
computational gain. Furthermore, the formalism also naturally admits the
study of models possessing non-trivial exchange statistics (e.g.
fermions, Abelian anyons) and models possessing a UBTC structure which
is not associated with a group (some Abelian and non-Abelian anyons),
all for a computational cost polynomial in the system size.

In addition I also describe the development of a tensor network
algorithm to exploit the spatial symmetry of scale invariance present in
quantum critical lattice systems. The resulting Ansatz provides a
remarkably efficient description of the low-energy subspace of an
infinite quantum critical lattice model, naturally yielding the
polynomial correlators typical of such a system, and providing easy
access to the majority of the conformal data which describe its
behaviour in the continuum limit. Combining this Ansatz with the UBTC
formalism for tensor networks provides a demonstration of the
flexibility of these techniques, computing the conformal data associated
with the continuum limit of two non-Abelian anyonic quantum critical
lattice models.

In summary, this Thesis provides a new Ansatz for the study of quantum
critical lattice models, and a formalism permitting the exploitation of
Abelian and non-Abelian symmetries of lattice models, allowing the
analysis of many fermionic and anyonic systems in polynomial time.
