Understanding and classifying phases of matter is a vast and important
area of research in modern physics. Of special interest are phases at
low temperatures where quantum effects are dominant. Theoretical
progress is thwarted by a general lack of analytical solutions for
quantum many-body systems. Moreover, perturbation theory is often
inadequate in the strongly interacting regime. As a result, numerical
approaches have become an indispensable tool to address such problems.
In recent times, numerical approaches based on tensor networks have
caught widespread attention. Tensor network algorithms draw on insights
from Quantum Information theory to take advantage of special
entanglement properties of low energy quantum many-body states of
lattice models. Examples of popular tensor networks include Matrix
Product States, Tree tensor Network, Multi-scale Entanglement
Renormalization Ansatz and Projected Entangled Pair States. The main
impediment of these methods comes from the fact that they can only
represent states with a limited amount of entanglement. On the other
hand, exploitation of symmetries, a powerful asset for numerical
methods, has remained largely unexplored for a broad class of tensor
networks algorithms.

In this thesis we extend the formalism of tensor network algorithms to
incorporate global internal symmetries. We describe how to both
numerically protect the symmetry and exploit it for computational gain
in tensor network simulations. Our formalism is generic. It can readily
be adapted to specific tensor network representations and to a wide
spectrum of physical symmetries. The latter includes conservation of
total particle number (U(1) symmetry) and of total angular momentum
(SU(2) symmetry), and also more exotic symmetries (anyonic systems). The
generality of the formalism is due to the fact that the symmetry
constraints are imposed at the level of individual tensors, in a way
that is independent of the details of the tensor network. As a result,
we are led to a framework of symmetric tensors. Such tensors are then
used as building blocks for tensor network representations of
quantum-many states in the presence of symmetry.

For a long time several physical problems of immense interest have
remained elusive to numerical methods mostly owing to extremely high
simulation costs. These include systems of frustrated magnets and
interacting fermions that are relevant in the context of quantum
magnetism and high temperature superconductivity. With symmetry now as a
potent ally, tensor network algorithms may finally be used to draw
positive insights about such systems.
