In our daily lives, organizing resources into a set of categories is a
common task. Organizing resources into categories makes searching
through those resources easier by limiting the focus to a specific
category. Limiting the focus significantly reduces the amount of
information one must search. Categorization becomes more useful as the
collection of resources increases, when managing resources becomes more
and more difficult if they are not organized appropriately. Large
collections like those made up by books, movies, and web pages, for
instance, are usually cataloged in libraries, organized in databases and
classified in directories, respectively. However, the usual largeness of
these collections requires a vast endeavor and an outrageous expense to
organize manually.

Recent research is moving towards developing automated classifiers that
reduce the increasing costs and effort of the task. Most of the research
in this field has focused on self-content, where the publisher is the
only author, as a data source to discover the aboutness of the resource.
Self-content presents the problem that it is not always representative
enough, and sometimes it is difficult to access depending on the type of
resource. Little work has been done analyzing the appropriateness of and
exploring how to harness the annotations provided by users on social
tagging systems as a data source. Users on these systems save resources
as bookmarks in a social environment by attaching annotations in the
form of tags. It has been shown that these tags facilitate retrieval of
resources not only for the annotators themselves but also for the whole
community. Likewise, these tags provide meaningful metadata that refers
to the content of the resources.

In this thesis, we deal with the utilization of these user-provided tags
in search of the most accurate classification of resources as compared
to expert-driven categorizations. After performing a set of experiments
to choose a suitable classifier for this kind of task, we explore social
annotations looking for a way to best use them. For this purpose, we
have created three large-scale datasets including tagging data for
resources from well-known social tagging systems: Delicious,
LibraryThing, and GoodReads. Those resources are accompanied by
categorization data from sound and consolidated expert-driven
taxonomies. From these resources the appropriateness of social tags for
predicting categories can be evaluated.

Specifically, we first study several ways of representing the massive
number of social tags by amalgamating the contributions of large
communities of users. We analyze their suitability for the
classification task, upon both broader top level categories and narrower
deep level categories. Then, we explore the nature, characteristics, and
distributions of tags in folksonomies, in order to determine how the
settings of each system affect the tagging behavior and the usefulness
of tags for the classification task. We go deeper into tag distributions
by analyzing the usefulness of weighting schemes based on inverse
frequency values. Finally, using state-of-the-art user behavior
detection processes, we identify users on social tagging systems who
better fit the classification task.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first research work performing
actual classification experiments utilizing social tags. By exploring
the characteristics and nature of these systems and the underlying
folksonomies, this thesis sheds new light on the way of getting the most
out of social tags for the sake of automated resource classification
tasks. Therefore, we believe that the contributions in this work are of
utmost interest for future researchers in the field, as well as for the
scientific community in order to better understand these systems and
further utilize the knowledge garnered from social tags.
