In this thesis we study the behavior of bipartite entanglement of a large
quantum system, by analyzing the distribution of the Schmidt coefficients of
the reduced density matrix. Applying the general methods of classical
statistical mechanics, we develop a canonical approach for the study of the
distribution of these coefficients for a fixed value of the average
entanglement. We introduce a partition function depending on a fictitious
temperature, which localizes the measure on the set of states with higher and
lower entanglement, if compared to typical (random) states with respect to the
Haar measure. The purity of one subsystem, which is our entanglement
measure/indicator, plays the role of energy in the partition function. This
thesis consists of two parts. In the first part, we completely characterize the
distribution of the purity and of the eigenvalues for pure states. The global
picture unveils several locally stable solutions exchange stabilities, through
the presence of first and second order phase transitions. We also detect the
presence of metastable states. In the second part, we focus on mixed states.
Through the same statistical approach, we determine the exact expression of the
first two moments of the local purity and the high temperature expansion of the
first moment. We also bridge our problem with the theory of quantum channels,
more precisely we exploit the symmetry properties of the twirling
transformations in order to compute the exact expression for the first moment
of the local purity.