###### Contents

-    Publications
-    1 Introduction and motivation
-    2 @xmath @xmath Supergravity
    -    2.1 The full bosonic lagrangian
    -    2.2 The graviton multiplet
    -    2.3 Vector multiplets
    -    2.4 Hypermultiplets
    -    2.5 Symmetries
-    I Maximal Supersymmetry
    -    3 Fully supersymmetric vacua
        -    3.1 Introduction
        -    3.2 Supersymmetry transformations
        -    3.3 Scalar potential and equations of motion
        -    3.4 Examples
    -    4 Supersymmetry preserving Higgs mechanism
        -    4.1 Introduction
        -    4.2 Solution generating technique
-    II Black Hole Solutions
    -    5 Asymptotically flat black holes
        -    5.1 Introduction
        -    5.2 Ungauged theory
        -    5.3 Gauged theory
    -    6 Asymptotically AdS black holes
        -    6.1 Introduction
        -    6.2 Spherical solutions
        -    6.3 Static magnetic spherical BPS black holes
        -    6.4 Black branes and toroidal black holes
        -    6.5 Higher genus black holes
-    III Superalgebras and BPS Bounds
    -    7 Conserved supercharges
        -    7.1 Introduction
        -    7.2 Supercurrents and charges from the Noether theorem
    -    8 BPS bounds in minimal gauged supergravity
        -    8.1 Introduction
        -    8.2 Minimal gauged supergravity
        -    8.3 Two different BPS bounds with spherical symmetry
        -    8.4 Non-spherical BPS bounds
        -    8.5 Superalgebras
    -    9 BPS bounds in the matter-coupled theory
        -    9.1 Introduction and general results
        -    9.2 Asymptotically flat solutions
        -    9.3 AdS @xmath asymptotics
        -    9.4 mAdS @xmath asymptotics
        -    9.5 RiAdS @xmath asymptotics
        -    9.6 Final remarks
    -    10 Black hole superalgebras
        -    10.1 Introduction
        -    10.2 Near-horizon superalgebras
        -    10.3 Asymptotic superalgebras
        -    10.4 Black hole superalgebras and a no-go theorem
        -    10.5 A glance at black objects in @xmath
    -    11 Discussion and Outlook
        -    11.1 Lessons
        -    11.2 Future directions
    -    A Notation, conventions and spacetimes
        -    A.1 Notation and conventions
        -    A.2 Metrics and field strengths
    -    B Integrability conditions
        -    B.1 Commutators of supersymmetry tranformations
        -    B.2 Fully BPS vacua
        -    B.3 Half BPS vacua
    -    C Isometries of special Kähler manifolds
    -    D The universal hypermultiplet
    -    E Asymptotic Killing spinors
        -    E.1 AdS @xmath
        -    E.2 Magnetic AdS @xmath
        -    E.3 Riemann AdS @xmath
    -    F Rotations in AdS @xmath
    -    G Supercharge of the general gauged theory
        -    G.1 Additional details on @xmath @xmath gauged supergravity
        -    G.2 Supersymmetry charge
    -    Acknowledgements

### Publications

The main chapters of this thesis are based on the following (mostly
published) works:

-   chapter 3:
    [ 1 ] K. Hristov, H. Looyestijn and S. Vandoren, Maximally
    supersymmetric solutions of @xmath @xmath gauged supergravity , JHEP
    11  (2009) 115.

-   chapters 4, 5:
    [ 2 ] K. Hristov, H. Looyestijn and S. Vandoren, BPS black holes in
    @xmath @xmath gauged supergravities , JHEP 08  (2010) 103.

-   chapter 6:
    [ 3 ] K. Hristov and S. Vandoren, Static supersymmetric black holes
    in AdS @xmath with spherical symmetry , JHEP 04  (2011) 047.

-   chapters 7, 8, 9:
    [ 4 ] K. Hristov, C. Toldo and S. Vandoren, On BPS bounds in @xmath
    @xmath gauged supergravity , JHEP 12  (2011) 014.
    [ 5 ] K. Hristov, On BPS Bounds in @xmath @xmath Gauged Supergravity
    II: General Matter couplings and Black Hole Masses , JHEP 03  (2012)
    095.
    [ 6 ] K. Hristov, C. Toldo and S. Vandoren, Black branes in AdS: BPS
    bounds and asymptotic charges , proceedings of the ”XVII European
    Workshop on String Theory 2011”, Padova, Italy, 5-9 September 2011

-   chapter 10:
    K. Hristov, new unpublished material.

Other publications, to which the author has contributed:

-   [ 7 ] K. Hristov, Axion Stabilization in Type IIB Flux
    Compactifications , JHEP 01  (2009) 046.

0] ] ] ] ] ]

### Chapter 1 Introduction and motivation

The main subject of this work, the analysis of the vacuum structure of
four-dimensional @xmath supergravity, might at first seem rather
technical and disconnected from the fundamental questions of modern high
energy physics. This thesis is after all just a case study of a
particular theory that is ill-defined at high energies and does not seem
to describe the physics of our universe even only at an effective level.
The very meaning of “vacuum structure” is somewhat obscure and the
question which background solutions are “vacua” will be further pursued
in the main body of this work. Nevertheless, I will try to argue that
classifying and understanding the various solutions in @xmath @xmath
supergravity is in fact very much relevant for a number of important
topics. This particular supergravity theory is connected in numerous
direct or more subtle ways to different branches of theoretical physics,
a more detailed account of which follows. This list encompasses a number
of major topics in high energy physics at present. However, due to the
vast amount of research topics, it is far from being comprehensive and
some interesting implications have been omitted.

###### General Relativity

General Relativity (GR) has been one of the two hugely successful and
groundbreaking ideas in 20th century physics. It is essentially a
classical theory of gravity, developed by Einstein to reconcile his
special theory of relativity with the notions of gravitational
acceleration and space and time. GR introduces the revolutionary idea
that the space and time are not just a background for physics to happen,
but a dynamic part of it. Thus matter can influence and change the
curvature of the spacetime, which in turn dictates the motion of matter.
These ideas have been tested and verified in numerous experiments since
they were first published in 1915, and GR is at present the best
established and least controversial theory in physics ¹ ¹ 1 The
superluminal neutrinos found in a recent experiment [ 8 ] seem to be
potentially incompatible with the theories of special and general
relativity, but further evidence and analysis are needed before more
definitive statements can be made. At present, it seems likely that the
final outcome of the experiment will be in accordance with Einstein’s
theory after some technical errors are corrected. . Crucially, GR
predicts its own failure at small scales due to the generic appearance
of singularities in spacetimes. In this sense it is an incomplete theory
and it is generally thought that GR should be viewed as the classic
limit at low energies (large scales) of a more fundamental theory of
quantum gravity.

Notice that, although GR is a relatively old and well-understood theory,
we are very far from having a full classification of its possible
solutions, i.e. of the spacetime and matter configurations permitted by
the Einstein equations. Many attempts have been made but due to the
infinite possibilities for matter couplings to gravity this is a
hopeless task in its full generality. It is also important to understand
which solutions are physically possible, starting from some realistic
assumptions for the matter inside our universe. This is related with the
well-known cosmic censorship conjectures (see e.g. [ 9 ] for more
details). It is here that studies of @xmath @xmath supergravity
solutions can be connected with the theory of GR. At the classical
level, @xmath supergravity is just a particular type of relativistic
theory coupled with matter. However, due to the presence of
supersymmetry its symmetric solutions are governed by first instead of
second order differential equations. This makes classification of
solutions a much more feasible task, although it has also not been
accomplished yet. Further details on the progress towards classification
will be presented in the main body of this thesis.

###### Quantum gravity

The other paradigm shift of 20th century physics was the quantum theory,
explaining how things at the very small scales behave. The foundations
of the quantum theory were laid by Planck’s work on black body
radiation, giving birth to quantum mechanics. Subsequent work of
Einstein on the photo-electric effect and of Bohr on the atomic model
led to further confirmation of the quantum theory of particle physics.
The non-intuitive concepts of uncertainty and probabilistic
interpretation, developed further by Heisenberg and Schrödinger among
others, remain some of the most puzzling physics facts. These quantum
principles have been of major importance to humanity, giving rise to a
number of technical applications. A further quantum treatment of
relativistic electrodynamics led to the formulation of quantum field
theory (QFT), the framework describing all particle interactions.

As successful as they have been until now, the principles of quantum
mechanics have not yet been reconciled with the Einstein theory of
General Relativity. As already mentioned, GR cannot be a complete theory
and it is generally desired and believed that a theory of quantum
gravity can be formulated. Any consistent quantum theory that in its
classical (large scale) limit reduces to GR would in principle qualify
for a theory of quantum gravity. However, such a theory is notoriously
difficult to formulate. There have been numerous proposals in
literature, but they are all a subject of current research and are
heavily disputed. Therefore it is fair to say that a theory of quantum
gravity has not been established yet, while mentioning as most notable
candidates at present loop quantum gravity and string theory. From this
point of view, @xmath @xmath supergravity is usually placed inside the
broader framework of string theory, but it does not need to necessarily
take a stand in this competition (see more later).

It is worth mentioning that we can explore some aspects of the quantum
nature of gravity even without advocating any of the above mentioned
theories. Although @xmath supergravity might not be a sensible quantum
theory at very high energies, it is believed that the solutions
preserving some of the fermionic symmetries of the theory remain stable
at all energies. This can be used to probe some of the quantum
properties of gravity. Black hole solutions are particularly interesting
in this sense because they possess a classical entropy that remains the
same in the quantum regime. A full theory of quantum gravity has to then
explain the microscopic origin of this entropy in terms of fundamental
degrees of freedom [ 10 , 11 ] . This quantum aspect is less emphasized
in the main text, but we will nevertheless be able to gain some
intuition and comment on it in the concluding chapter.

###### String theory

One of the leading candidates for a theory of quantum gravity, string
theory is based on a relatively new idea developed in 1970. It assumes
that all elementary ingredients of nature are strings, instead of
particles, propagating in a @xmath -dimensional spacetime. The
gravitational interaction in this context is just one of the infinitely
many string excitations. All other particles that we observe in nature
are also supposed to arise via the same mechanism. At low-energies
string theory can still be described by effective particle theories,
such as supergravities, and the hope is that eventually this will lead
to the Standard Model of particle physics.

The Standard Model is at present the quantum field theory that describes
best all physical phenomena, except gravity. It is being constantly
checked and updated by the particle accelerators, presently by CERN’s
Large Hadron Collider (LHC). In the context of string theory, the
Standard Model is thought of as a low-energy limit of the theories of
supergravity, which in turn arise as low-energy limits of string theory.
This topic within string theory is usually called flux compactification
because one needs to split the original @xmath dimensions into @xmath
small and compact directions and the @xmath dimensions we can all see.
This way @xmath -dimensional supergravities arise, and the less amount
of supersymmetry there is (quantified by the value of @xmath ), the
closer to real world physics we are. In other words, we live in an
@xmath universe. However, this could still happen within an @xmath
theory by the process of supersymmetry breaking. It is conceivable that
the universe is a @xmath symmetric vacuum that can be found in @xmath
supergravity, which in turn is a limiting case of string theory. Whether
this is the correct approach to embedding our universe in string theory
remains highly speculative and there is neither theoretical, nor
experimental evidence to substantiate it. We will see in more detail in
what follows that in fact de Sitter (dS) universes like ours are very
rarely found and generally unstable solutions of supergravity.

###### AdS/CFT correspondence

A field that originated from string theory and now enjoying life of its
own, the AdS/CFT correspondence is presently generating most of the
interest in high energy physics. The correspondence was discovered by
Maldacena in 1997 [ 12 ] and has its roots in earlier ideas of ’t Hooft
[ 13 , 14 ] . It relates quantum gravity on a @xmath -dimensional
anti-de Sitter (AdS) spacetime and a @xmath -dimensional conformal field
theory (CFT) in the absence of gravity. Although the precise
correspondence involves the full quantum theories, it can also be
partially verified in the corresponding classic or semi-classic limits.
This is where supergravity enters the picture, being the low-energy
effective action of string theory via flux compactifications. For some
particular cases and dimensions the duality between the two sides can be
made very precise and extremely non-trivial checks in the case of AdS
@xmath /CFT @xmath have been performed, suggesting that the general
concept is correct. However, mathematically speaking, AdS/CFT remains a
conjecture and one is even tempted to invert the statement and use it as
a definition of quantum gravity given complete knowledge of the dual
CFT.

Connection with the fundamental theory of quantum gravity aside, the
real importance of AdS/CFT in very recent years has been in its various
applications in experimentally reachable areas of physics. It turns out
that even with simple classical solutions, e.g. black holes that
asymptote to AdS, one can simulate to a good approximation a number of
physically relevant field theories at strong coupling, such as the
quark-gluon plasma [ 15 , 16 ] tested at particle accelerators like the
LHC and numerous condensed matter systems, e.g. [ 17 , 18 , 19 ] . It is
therefore very important to understand well the possible asymptotic AdS
solutions in supergravity, a subject that is directly related with the
topic of this thesis.

###### Supersymmetry and supergravity

A fundamental particle in a quantum theory can be either a fermion or a
boson. This defines the quantum statistics it obeys - only a single
fermion can occupy a particular quantum state at a given time, while no
such restriction applies for bosons. Matter we know of is made entirely
of fermions, e.g. the electrons, the protons and neutrons made out of
quarks, atoms and molecules made out of electrons, protons and neutrons.
Bosons on the other hand are the mediators of forces, such as the
particle of light, the photon, that carries the electromagnetic force.
Supersymmetry relates these two different types of particles. Each boson
has a fermionic partner, and vice versa, forming a pair of
superpartners. There can be situations where more than two particles are
related this way, leading to a higher amount of supersymmetry
(i.e. higher @xmath , see the more precise meaning in the next chapter).
As mentioned above, the Standard Model does not exhibit such a symmetry,
whereas it is an essential component for supergravities and
(super)string theory.

The other essential ingredient of supergravity is of course gravity,
i.e. we need to describe the graviton, the boson carrying the force of
gravity. Its superpartner fermion is standardly called the gravitino.
There will be @xmath gravitini in any theory of supergravity, thus one
can think of @xmath supergravity as the collection of all possible
theories of gravity with supersymmetry and exactly two gravitini. There
is no further restriction on the form of matter that can be included (as
long as it exhibits the required symmetry), thus we will see that
different possibilities for matter-coupled @xmath supergravities exist.

Originally, supergravities were discovered independently of any
connection with string theory as separate candidates for theories of
quantum gravity [ 20 ] , but it was soon realized that they are
non-renormalizable, i.e. not well behaved at high energies. However,
recent progress suggests that in fact @xmath @xmath supergravity may be
finite and thus well-behaved even if non-renormalizable by power
counting. All supergravity theories are related via a complicated web of
dualities, compactifications, and reductions. Their interconnection and
intrinsic similarity mean that studying one particular theory can lead
to a better understanding of all of them. In this sense the particular
case of @xmath among the other @xmath -dimensional theories is
best-suited for making relations with others. It does not have so much
symmetry to only allow for very restricted classes of solutions, and
possesses just enough symmetry to be still mathematically tractable.
This will be explained in more details in the following with explicit
examples. Many of the tools used for classifying solutions immediately
generalize to other supergravities. One is thus able to infer many
implications about supergravity as a general concept from the case study
of @xmath @xmath supergravity.

Having introduced supersymmetry and supergravity, we need to say that
the notion of supersymmetric, or BPS, states is central for this thesis.
These are background solutions that remain invariant under some of the
supersymmetry transformations of the theory they exist in. The BPS
states, together with the corresponding BPS bounds they obey, are the
building blocks of the vacuum structure of any supergravity theory.
Leaving the technical terminology for later chapters, one of the
important conceptual ideas in this thesis is that every supersymmetric
solution in supergravity can be viewed as a vacuum in the sense that it
defines a ground state. Another related notion, which has a prominent
role in this thesis, is the supergroup of symmetries corresponding to a
given BPS state and described by its superalgebra. BPS states and their
superalgebras are a bridge between classical and quantum gravity since
the existence of supersymmetry protects solutions from any high energy
corrections that can destabilize them. This means that a BPS state in an
effective theory such as 4d @xmath supergravity continues to exist and
keeps its main properties, i.e. superalgebra, in the full quantum
theory.

###### Thesis contribution

The relation between the main topic of this thesis and the above short
list of major branches in theoretical physics might at this point seem
rather obscure and sometimes contradictory. @xmath @xmath supergravity
has been placed among both effective and fundamental theories, useful
for its BPS solutions while real world physics does not exhibit any
supersymmetry. This reflects well the state of the art in high energy
physics at present: there is a general fuzzy pattern of what seem to be
the relevant pieces of the puzzle and their internal connections. Still,
there are many loose ends that need to be fitted in the full picture. In
this sense the present work has the aim of understanding some particular
ideas, representing just a single piece in the puzzle of physics.
Although the results of this work might not be of great importance for
solving the puzzle, many of the general concepts could turn out to be
useful in the future.

In more precise terms, the study of the vacuum structure of @xmath
@xmath supergravity will enable us to make concrete statements on some
of the issues mentioned above. This unfortunately cannot be achieved
with a pure physics intuition and without a certain degree of
technicality in the discussions. I will therefore use exact definitions
and try to present only fully rigorous results in the remaining chapters
of the thesis, returning to more general and speculative discussions in
the concluding chapter.

The direct contributions of this thesis to the major topics introduced
above can be summarized briefly as follows. In the context of General
Relativity, the vacuum structure of @xmath supergravity gives a new
perspective on the cosmological censorship conjecture. We are going to
see how BPS bounds provide a stability criterion on classical solutions
in GR and project out some undesired solutions. We further use BPS
bounds and superalgebras to learn more about the quantum gravity aspects
of black holes and discuss possible outcomes for the faith of certain
(classically) nakedly singular spacetimes in a full quantum gravity
regime. Supersymmetric black hole solutions are also discussed from
string theory perspective, since we show that certain novel classes of
four-dimensional static black holes can be embedded in M-theory. These
are interesting for the study of microscopic entropy from brane
constructions. Since these new black holes have AdS asymptotics, their
dual field theories can be of potential use for direct applications of
the AdS/CFT dictionary. We give a very detailed analysis of the
symmetries of AdS and the conserved charges on its boundary, showing
that there are several distinct AdS-like vacua in @xmath supergravity.
The techniques we use for determining supersymmetric solutions, BPS
bounds and conserved charges, are directly applicable to other
supersymmetry and supergravity theories in various dimensions. Several
of the main chapters in this thesis can thus be used for applications in
10 and 11 dimensional supergravities that are of more fundamental nature
from string/M-theory point of view.

These main lessons from the vacuum structure of @xmath supergravity are
spread somewhat eclectically in the main body of this thesis. This is
inevitably due to the different mathematical tools needed in the
separate parts of the thesis, a more detailed account of which follows.

###### Thesis content

In chapter 2 the theory at question, namely @xmath @xmath supergravity,
is introduced in some detail. This is done separately for pure
supergravity and for the possible matter couplings to vector and
hypermultiplets. A clear distinction between the gauged and ungauged
theories is made with explanation of the physical significance in each
case. This chapter is the groundwork for all further discussions and
results in this thesis and is thus of central importance. The reader
needs to posses a reasonable understanding of supergravity theory before
reading further.

The remaining main chapters of this thesis are divided into three parts
to ease the reader in choosing topics. Each of these parts can in
principle be read independently of the others, although the
understanding of certain technical points in part II can be facilitated
by first reading part I while part II provides some examples for the
general concepts in part III .

In part I we start with the “easiest” solutions one can find in
supergravity theories, the ones that follow entirely from supersymmetry.
This means that the equations to be solved are only first order partial
differential equations instead of second order. As shown in chapter 3 ,
this is enough to completely determine the solutions that preserve all
supersymmetries of the action. This is equivalent with saying that only
fully-supersymmetric (or fully-BPS) solutions are discussed. We then
solve the differential equations and determine certain algebraic
conditions on the fields of the theory that will ensure one can find
such solutions. As far as the allowed spacetimes are concerned, there
are only four possible configurations: three flat vacua, amongst which
four-dimensional Minkowski space, and one vacuum with constant non-zero
curvature, AdS @xmath . These solutions are also important in the later
chapters when we try to find asymptotically flat (Minkowski) or
asymptotically AdS black hole solutions (see later in part II ). The
next chapter of this part, 4 , is very similar in spirit. It uses some
of the identities discovered in the study of fully-supersymmetric vacua
in order to propose a method of generating new solutions with extra
matter from already known ones. Alternatively, one can view the results
as describing a consistent supersymmetric truncation for the
matter-coupled @xmath @xmath theories. This leads to a reduced number of
degrees of freedom and thus to a simplification of the theory whenever
needed.

Part II deals primarily with the study of black hole solutions in @xmath
@xmath ungauged and gauged supergravity. It contains a general summary
of all known black hole solutions that asymptote either to Minkowski or
to AdS space, but focuses on the supersymmetric solutions that can be to
a large extent fully classified. In chapter 5 the focus is entirely on
asymptotically flat black holes. The supersymmetric solutions in this
case are fully classified in the ungauged theory, and some generic
statements can be made in the case of gaugings that leave the
asymptotics flat. An attempt to find a qualitatively new class of
solutions with charged hypers is made, but it turns out that some of the
fields in this case need to be ghosts, which generally renders such
solutions unphysical. In the next chapter only asymptotically AdS black
holes are considered. These solutions can only be found in the theories
with gauging. They are relevant for some applications of the AdS/CFT
correspondence and exhibit qualitatively very different relation with
supersymmetry compared to their flat analogs. We discuss in details
particularly the case of static supersymmetric black holes that are
shown to exist only when nontrivial scalar profiles are considered [ 21
, 22 ] . This is an example where the addition of extra matter can
crucially change the properties of the spacetime and teaches us an
important lesson for the supersymmetric vacuum structure. This topic
comes into focus also in the next part of this thesis.

The last main part of this work is devoted to superalgebras and BPS
bounds in @xmath @xmath supergravity. It provides a different viewpoint
towards the classification of solutions and some other issues discussed
in parts I and II . It zooms out of the particular details of a given
solution and concentrates on large classes that have the same
asymptotics, e.g. asympotically flat or asymptotically AdS solutions of
any type. In chapter 7 , the general procedure of finding the
superalgebra of a given field configuration is outlined. Although it is
focused on the specific supergravity theory at hand, the principles are
in fact completely general and thus applicable for any field theory
possessing supersymmetry (i.e. all supersymmetric field theories and
supergravities). It turns out that this approach leads to well-defined
asymptotic charges for all solutions that asymptote to a supersymmetric
vacuum. Thus the technique of holographic renormalization [ 23 , 24 , 25
, 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] at the boundary of AdS is no longer
explicitly needed. In chapter 8 we then concentrate on the simplest type
of gauged @xmath @xmath supergravity. The focus of this chapter is on
the surprising fact that there are two different vacua with the same AdS
asymptotics, differentiated by the value of the magnetic charge. The two
different superalgebras and BPS bounds are discussed in details and some
previous confusion in literature is clarified. The next chapter then
discusses @xmath @xmath supergravity with matter couplings. The main
fermionic anticommutator of the superalgebra is derived, allowing one to
find the relevant superalgebra practically in every possible case
allowed by the theory. Some particular examples are discussed, showing
how the black holes from chapter 6 fit in the story. The final chapter
of this part of the thesis, 10 , presents a very explicit application of
the superalgebra analysis to the purpose of classifying solutions. The
different static BPS solutions of part II are discussed and their
corresponding superalgebras are derived. This allows us to prove a no-go
theorem for the existence of spherically symmetric BPS black holes in
AdS @xmath in absence of hypermultiplets, while giving a clear
prediction on the attractor mechanism for such black holes in theories
with suitable hypermultiplet gaugings. We also show that the
near-horizon geometries for black holes in Minkowski and magnetic AdS
are unique and distinct from each other. We close this chapter with some
remarks on the possible black hole superalgebras in @xmath dimensions,
which turn out to be strikingly similar to their four-dimensional
counterparts. We then give analogous conditions for the potential
existence of non-rotating BPS black holes and black rings in AdS @xmath
.

In the end of the main body of this work, chapter 11 summarizes and
emphasizes the important lessons learned from the analysis of the vacuum
structure of @xmath @xmath supergravity. Connections with the issues
raised in the present chapter are made and some more general statements
and conjectures are discussed. The outlook section includes a proposal
for the microscopic description of black holes in AdS @xmath via a
version of the AdS/CFT correspondence. This chapter concludes the
relevant physical discussion in this thesis. In order to make the main
text less technical, some more mathematical aspects are left to the
appendices. They are referred to inside the main text and are included
to ensure that this work is self-contained. Additionally, there are
plenty of references to original work used in this thesis and therefore
the interested reader should be able to explicitly check and understand
all equations and discussions.

### Chapter 2 @xmath @xmath Supergravity

This chapter gives an introduction to @xmath @xmath supergravity. It is
a central chapter in this work as it explains the lagrangian and field
content that will be used throughout the thesis, along with the main
notation and conventions. However, it is not a comprehensive review and
concentrates on the features of supergravity that are important for the
purposes of the later chapters. A more thorough introduction to
supersymmetry can be found in [ 31 , 32 , 33 ] , whereas supergravity is
covered in [ 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 ] . The connection between the four- and
ten-dimensional supergravities is reviewed in [ 38 , 39 , 40 ] .

We will start directly with the most general bosonic lagrangian of
@xmath @xmath supergravity with electric gauging, explaining the main
field content and supersymmetry variations. The remaining parts of the
chapter discuss more carefully the main supersymmetry multiplets: the
gravity multiplet that is always present in a theory of supergravity,
and the vector and hypermultiplets that provide additional matter
couplings. Particular emphasis will be put on the difference between
ungauged and gauged theories and the respective scalar potentials. We
finish with a qualitative discussion about the other local and global
symmetries of the theory.

#### 2.1 The full bosonic lagrangian

The standard (two derivative) bosonic part of the on-shell lagrangian of
@xmath @xmath electrically gauged supergravity with @xmath vector and
@xmath hypermultiplets is given by ² ² 2 We always use the action @xmath
. :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In what follows we always put fermions to zero on classical solutions,
therefore we concentrate on the bosonic part of the lagrangian. The
fundamental bosonic fields are the metric @xmath , @xmath vector fields
@xmath ( @xmath ), @xmath complex scalar fields @xmath ( @xmath ), and
@xmath real scalar fields @xmath ( @xmath ) called hypers. The fermionic
degrees of freedom match exactly the bosonic ones because of
supersymmetry. There are two gravitinos @xmath (spin @xmath ), @xmath
gauginos @xmath (spin @xmath ), and @xmath hyperinos @xmath (spin @xmath
), where @xmath . The full lagrangian is supersymmetric, i.e. invariant
under transforming the bosons and fermions into each other in a
particular way. Since we eventually put all fermions to zero, all
bosonic variations vanish, while the fermionic variations read:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

upto terms of higher order in fermions. The two Weyl spinors @xmath are
the arbitrary supersymmetry transformation parameters that carry a total
of @xmath free parameters (in @xmath dimensions). We therefore say that
this is an @xmath theory with @xmath supercharges (the number of
supercharges depends on the spacetime dimension).

The matrices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are called the gaugino, hyperino
and gravitino mass matrices respectively, and are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The scalar potential ( 2.2 ) can be written in terms of the mass
matrices as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantities @xmath are related with the special geometry of the
vector multiplet moduli space and are explained in detail a bit later,
just like @xmath that come from the quaternionic geometry of the
hypermultiplet moduli space. The structure constants @xmath are also
considered in more detail further in the text, while the conventions for
the @xmath matrices, as well as some other notational issues, are left
for App. A .

#### 2.2 The graviton multiplet

The @xmath graviton multiplet [ 41 , 42 ] consists of the graviton
@xmath , a doublet of gravitinos @xmath with positive chirality ³ ³ 3
Chiral spinors are the eigenspinors of @xmath . Spinors of positive
(negative) chirality therefore obey:

@xmath (2.10)

and a gauge field @xmath , called the graviphoton (the reason for the
index @xmath will become clear when we introduce the vector multiplets).
As everywhere in this thesis, the negative chirality fermions are given
by @xmath . The supersymmetric theories that only consist of the
graviton multiplet are called minimal supergragravities.

##### 2.2.1 Ungauged

The bosonic part of the supersymmetric action for the ungauged @xmath
@xmath minimal theory is:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gravitino variation in this case is just

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The theory remains invariant under global rotations of the gravitino
doublet @xmath , i.e. there is a a @xmath symmetry group. This symmetry
of the action is called R-symmetry and is generally present in all
@xmath ungauged supergravities, corresponding to the rotations between
the @xmath gravitinos. There is also a local @xmath gauge symmetry
acting on the vector field.

##### 2.2.2 Gauged

We can use the gauge symmetry to gauge some of the global isometries of
the theory, i.e. the R-symmetry group. One then picks a @xmath subgroup
of the @xmath and promotes it to a local symmetry (in the same time
explicitly breaking the remaining global symmetries). This results in
the so called minimal gauged supergravity, where the gravitinos become
charged under the vector field (via a covariant derivative) with a
charge (coupling constant) @xmath . Due to supersymmetry, the bosonic
action also gets modified by a negative constant proportional to @xmath
, which effectively plays the role of a cosmological constant term:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The gravitino variation becomes

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with @xmath or @xmath corresponding to the @xmath different ways of
embedding the @xmath gauge group in the original @xmath symmetry.

Notice that although only slightly different, the lagrangians of the
gauged and the ungauged theories ( 2.13 ) and ( 2.11 ) will have
qualitatively different solutions. In the ungauged case one can only
have spacetimes with vanishing Ricci scalar as solutions, while in
gauged case the scalar curvature is forced to be negative: @xmath .
Therefore already at this stage we can predict that the ungauged theory
will give rise to Minkowski and other more general asymptotically flat
solutions, while the gauged theory has an AdS @xmath vacuum and
asymptotically AdS solutions of different types. On the other hand, it
is certain that de Sitter vacua are not allowed in these simple minimal
supergravity theories. We in fact need to include more general matter
couplings to the gravity multiplet in order to make the vacuum structure
richer and more interesting.

#### 2.3 Vector multiplets

The @xmath vector multiplet contains a complex scalar @xmath , a doublet
of chiral fermions @xmath , called the gauginos, and a vector field
@xmath .

We then couple a number @xmath of vector multiplets, with an index
@xmath , to the graviton multiplet. We use a common index @xmath to
group the gauge fields @xmath and @xmath together ⁴ ⁴ 4 In the
lagrangian ( 2.1 ) the graviphoton @xmath and vector fields @xmath mix
between each other and appear as vector fields @xmath , @xmath , with
corresponding field strengths @xmath . .

###### Special geometry

Supersymmetry requires that the moduli space, described by the metric
@xmath , is a special Kähler manifold [ 43 ] . The Kähler property
implies that @xmath is locally the derivative of a real function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The function @xmath is called the Kähler potential. It is
not unique as the metric @xmath remains the same under the Kähler
transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The metric @xmath typically depends on the fields @xmath , and could
contain regions in field space where it is no longer positive definite.
Therefore, one has to restrict the fields to the so-called positivity
domain, where the metric is positive definite.

The extra property of special Kähler manifolds is the existence of
sections @xmath and @xmath , which are holomorphic functions of @xmath .
The Kähler potential @xmath for the metric @xmath , as in ( 2.14 ), is
then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the sections @xmath and @xmath , we can construct

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . A further requirement of special Kähler geometry is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The terms proportional to @xmath make @xmath and @xmath transform
covariantly under Kähler transformations ( 2.15 ). These terms define
the @xmath Kähler connection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

that appears in the supercovariant derivative ( 2.3 ).

The period matrix @xmath is defined by the properties

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be shown [ 44 ] that the matrix @xmath is invertible, which gives
the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it additionally follows that @xmath is symmetric. We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and these matrices appear as couplings in the Lagrangian. @xmath is
invertible and negative definite [ 44 ] , and therefore each gauge field
has a kinetic term with a positive sign.

Some further identities one can derive are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is sometimes possible to specify the sections @xmath and @xmath in
terms of a single holomorphic function @xmath , called the prepotential.
In applications to supersymmetry, @xmath is then given as @xmath , and
is homogeneous of second degree. We then have @xmath and @xmath .

Using the period matrix, we define the linear combinations

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.27)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

which are the anti-selfdual parts of the graviphoton and matter field
strengths (earlier denoted by @xmath ), respectively. These relations
can be inverted to yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Examples

A simple example of special geometry is given by the prepotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using a coordinate @xmath , and choosing the gauge @xmath , the sections
@xmath and @xmath read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which are clearly holomorphic functions of @xmath . The metric @xmath
can easily be computed from ( 2.16 ) and reads @xmath We see we have to
restrict ourselves to @xmath and recognize this as the metric on the
Poincaré disk.

Another important class of examples, which arise in Calabi-Yau
compactifications in string theory, is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are constant, real numbers, determined by the topology
of the Calabi-Yau manifold.

##### 2.3.1 Ungauged

The bosonic terms in the lagrangian are given by

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.32)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

As before, we have the Einstein-Hilbert term that now comes together
with a non–linear sigma model for the complex scalars @xmath . The third
term is the kinetic term for the gauge fields, and the last term is a
generalization of the @xmath -angle term of Maxwell theory. The
fermionic supersymmetry transformations now include both gravitinos and
gauginos:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Electro-magnetic duality

The introduction of vectors allows for one important symmetry of the
equations of motion in the ungauged theory called electro-magnetic, or
e/m, duality. If we define ⁵ ⁵ 5 We are using the standard notation in
literature, which unfortunately uses the very similar notations @xmath
and @xmath for different field strengths.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

it turns out that the Bianchi identities for the “electric” field
strengths @xmath are the same as the equations of motion for the
“magnetic” field strengths @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can therefore rotate @xmath and @xmath between each other while
keeping the equations of motion invariant. It turns out that the
relevant symmetry group is the symplectic group @xmath . The electric
and magnetic field strengths therefore make up a single symplectic
vector,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The e/m duality also rotates the sections @xmath and @xmath as a
symplectic vector in the above way in order to keep the equations of
motion of the scalar fields invariant. It is a symmetry of the equations
of motion, but not of the lagrangian. Nevertheless, it only changes the
lagrangian in a very restricted sense, i.e. it leaves it in the general
form ( 2.32 ) with different @xmath due to the change of the sections
and field strengths. This means that e/m duality transforms between
different @xmath supergravities with the same dynamics.

###### Example

E/m duality essentially relates theories with different
prepotentials/sections. A simple and often used example is the
(electric) STU model that is a special case of ( 2.31 ) with sections
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

If one now rotates the @xmath ’s and the corresponding @xmath ’s with
all possible symplectic matrices one will generate the full duality
orbit of theories that have the same solutions. One particular choice of
symplectic rotation (we will give the explicit details in chapter 6.3
when we really need them) leads to a different prepotential in the same
orbit, the magnetic STU model:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that not all lagrangians in this or any other given duality orbit
come with a prepotential. However, in any given duality orbit there is
at least one lagrangian with a prepotential. Due to the more compact
notation and often simpler calculations one usually prefers to deal only
with theories with prepotentials, knowing that this is enough to capture
the dynamics of all possible duality orbits in ungauged @xmath @xmath
supergravity.

##### 2.3.2 Gauging internal isometries

We first consider the @xmath vector multiplets and assume the scalar
sector to be invariant under the isometries

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the parameters of the transformations, and we have
included a coupling constant @xmath . To preserve supersymmetry when we
gauge these isometries, the Killing vector fields @xmath must be
holomorphic.

To close the gauge algebra on the scalars, the Killing vector fields
must span a Lie-algebra with commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and structure constants @xmath of some Lie-group @xmath that one wishes
to gauge. Not all holomorphic isometries can be gauged within @xmath
supergravity. The induced change on the sections needs to be consistent
with the symplectic structure of the theory, and this requires the
holomorphic sections to transform as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.42)
  -- -- -- --------

The first term on the right-hand-side of ( 2.42 ) contains a constant
matrix @xmath that acts on the sections as infinitesimal symplectic
transformations. For electric gaugings, which we mostly consider in this
thesis, we mean, by definition, that the representation is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the matrix @xmath and @xmath is its transpose. The
tensor @xmath is required to be symmetric for @xmath to be a symplectic
generator. Moreover, there are some additional constraints on the @xmath
in order for the @xmath to be symplectically embedded within the same
Lie-algebra as in ( 2.41 ). The second term in ( 2.42 ) induces a Kähler
transformation on the Kähler potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some holomorphic functions @xmath . Finally, closure of the gauge
transformations on the Kähler potential requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

We summarize some other identities on vector multiplet gauging in
appendix C .

Magnetic gaugings allow also non-zero entries in the upper–right corner
of @xmath , but we will not consider them here. The gauged action, in
particular the scalar potential, that we consider below is not invariant
under magnetic gauge transformation. To restore this invariance, one
needs to introduce massive tensor multiplets, but the most general
lagrangian with both electric and magnetic gauging is not fully
understood yet (for some partial results see [ 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 ]
). The theory with mutually compatible electric and magnetic gaugings
was recently derived in [ 50 ] .

Given a choice for the gauge group ( 2.43 ), one can reverse the order
of logic and determine the form of the Killing vectors, and therefore
the gauge transformations of the scalar fields @xmath . This analysis
was done in [ 36 ] , and the result is written in the appendix, see (
C.6 ).

In the lagrangian, one replaces the partial derivatives with the
covariant derivatives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the gauge fields @xmath transform as @xmath . Notice that the
additional terms effectively introduce additional couplings for the
“electric” gauge fields @xmath but not for their magnetic counterparts
(one can define them to be the gauge fields @xmath from @xmath ). This
is why such gaugings are called electric and they break electromagnetic
duality. Therefore the gauged supergravity lagrangians in this work can
no longer be related by e/m duality ⁶ ⁶ 6 In the context of the example
presented above with the electric and magnetic STU models, they are
equivalent only for ungauged supergravity. When gauged, these two models
lead to different physics as we will show explicitly in chapters 6.3 . .
Furthermore, the lagrangian contains the full nonabelian field strengths

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, to preserve supersymmetry, we have to modify the supersymmetry
transformations and add additional terms to the lagrangian [ 37 ] , such
as mass terms for the fermions (c.f. ( 2.8 )). Also a scalar potential
has to be added, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The lagrangian and susy variations in this case take essentially the
most general form as written in the beginning of the chapter, without
the terms that concern the hypermultiplet sector which we are yet to
discuss. However, we first need to give some more details on the
gauging, concerning the notion of moment maps and the tensor @xmath .

###### Moment maps

The Killing vectors @xmath are holomorphic. Using the Killing equation,
one finds that they can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the real, scalar functions @xmath are called moment maps. For
special Kähler spaces, it is convenient to use instead a definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath was defined in equation ( 2.42 ). Since the Kähler
potential satisfies ( 2.44 ), it is easy to show that @xmath is real.
From this definition, it is easy to verify ( 2.49 ). Hence the @xmath
can be called moment maps, but they are not subject to arbitrary
additive constants. Using ( 2.45 ) and ( 2.50 ), it is now easy to prove
the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

also called the equivariance condition. The @xmath Kähler connection
also gets additional terms due to the gauging and reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Gauge invariance

Under the gauge transformations ( 2.40 ), the period matrix @xmath
transforms. From ( 2.22 ) one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

To compensate for this transformation, we need to add an additional term
to the lagrangian [ 51 ] , which involves the @xmath tensor. There are
some additional constraints on this tensor. In the abelian case, the
only constraint is that the totally symmetrized @xmath -tensor vanishes,
i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies that for a single vector field, the @xmath tensor term
vanishes. The additional constraints for nonabelian gaugings involve the
structure constants [ 51 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 2.3.3 Fayet-Iliopoulos (FI) gauging

Instead of gauging an internal isometry, one can also proceed in analogy
to the mininal gauged case, i.e. promote a subgroup of the @xmath to a
local symmetry. This is standardly called Fayet-Iliopoulos or FI gauging
and involves a number of constants @xmath that appear in the scalar
potential and specify the charge of the gravitinos. These will become
more clear once we discuss hypermultiplet moment maps in the next
section. Here we will just give the lagrangian and susy variations for
the @xmath FI gauged supergravity that will be used in the later
chapters of the thesis,

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.56)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

with FI parameters @xmath or @xmath and susy rules

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If there are enough (at least three) vector fields, one can
alternatively choose to gauge the @xmath symmetry. This results in a
nonabelian gauged supergravity with FI terms, the theory in this case is
discussed in [ 52 , 53 ] . The abelian and nonabelian gauged
supergravities with FI terms can be more easily understood once we
discuss hypermultiplet moduli spaces, to which topic we turn our
attention now.

#### 2.4 Hypermultiplets

An on-shell @xmath hypermultiplet consists of four real scalars @xmath
and two chiral fermions @xmath . For @xmath hypermultiplets, we have
bosonic fields @xmath , with @xmath and fermions @xmath with @xmath .
The bosonic lagrangian for the hypermultiplets is a non-linear sigma
model

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Supersymmetry [ 54 ] now requires the @xmath -dimensional metric @xmath
to be a quaternionic-Kähler space, of negative scalar curvature ⁷ ⁷ 7 A
quaternionic-Kähler space need not be Kähler, and by a slight abuse of
nomenclature, we will refer to them as quaternionic spaces. . This
requires that there are three almost complex structures @xmath , @xmath
, that satisfy a quaternionic algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The metric @xmath is hermitean with respect to each @xmath , and we can
define three quaternionic two-forms @xmath . They are not closed, but
they are covariantly constant with respect to an @xmath connection
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath connection @xmath defines the @xmath curvature @xmath , and
then we have the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a non-zero ⁸ ⁸ 8 When @xmath , we have a hyper-Kähler
manifold, which features in the rigid @xmath hypermultiplet. constant.
Supersymmetry requires this constant to be related to Newton’s constant
as @xmath , and therefore we have @xmath (we work in natural units where
all constants are set to @xmath ). With these units, the Ricci scalar
curvature of the quaternionic manifold is given as @xmath , and is
therefore always negative.

We can decompose the metric @xmath in quaternionic vielbein @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the antisymmetric symplectic and @xmath
tensors.

###### The universal hypermultiplet

As an example of a quaternionic space, we discuss the so-called
“universal hypermultiplet”. In compactifications of type II string
theory one typically finds a number of hypermultiplets. One of them is
always present, and is therefore called the universal hypermultiplet.

It is possible to construct consistent truncations, such that it is the
only hypermultiplet. The metric is then the coset space @xmath , which
can be written in terms of the real coordinates @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The field @xmath is called the dilaton and the metric is restricted to
the region where @xmath . Its expectation value @xmath determines the
string coupling constant @xmath via @xmath , where @xmath is the volume
of the Calabi-Yau space. For more details about the universal
hypermultiplet and its isometries see appendix D .

##### 2.4.1 Ungauged hypermultiplet sector

In the case when the hypermultiplet sector is not gauged, one can just
directly add the bosonic piece ( 2.58 ) to the full supergravity
lagrangian, i.e. the ungauged hypermultiplets couple minimally with the
gravity multiplet and do not directly couple to the vectormultiplet
fields. One is therefore still free to gauge an internal isometry in the
vector multiplet sector and keep the hypermultiplets ungauged. Gaugings
of the R-symmetry are however no longer possible if we want to keep the
hypermultiplet scalars ungauged. We still need to mention the hyperino
supersymmetry variation, which is simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 2.4.2 Gauged quaternionic isometries

Similar to the vector multiplet scalars, the hypermultiplet lagrangian (
2.58 ) has its isometries as global symmetries, and we can gauge them.
The transformation of the scalars is denoted as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

and these Killing vectors @xmath form a representation of the same gauge
algebra as in ( 2.41 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

These gaugings again introduce additional fermionic terms and a scalar
potential, as given in ( 2.2 ). The full bosonic lagrangian and
supersymmetry transformations for general hypermultiplet and vector
multiplet gaugings were already given in the beginning of this chapter.

###### Moment maps

Although the quaternionic spaces are not complex, we can still define
moment maps for the quaternionic Killing vectors. The moment maps @xmath
are defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using these, we find the equivariance condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath connection gets modified to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In absence of hypermultiplets, @xmath , and for suitable
structure constants @xmath , it is possible to keep the @xmath ’s as
non-zero constants, standardly denoted @xmath . This is only possible if
the gauge group contains @xmath or @xmath factors. Such constants are
called Fayet-Iliopoulos (FI) terms, as already explained.

#### 2.5 Symmetries

We have already mentioned several types of symmetries of the lagrangian,
but here we go over the symmetries of @xmath @xmath supergravity a bit
more comprehensively, skipping technical details. A detailed technical
account can be found in [ 55 ] . We will separate the symmetries in
three categories: local symmetries, global symmetries, and dualities, or
equation of motion symmetries. It is important to stress that the
following symmetries concern only the supergravity action, not its
solutions. Any given solution could preserve a part of the original
symmetries, but this is strictly case dependent and will be discussed
when we turn our attention to solutions of the theory in the remainder
of this thesis.

###### Local symmetries

The local symmetries are: general coordinate transformations, local
Lorentz transformations, gauge invariance, and of course local @xmath
transformations. We have given details about the supersymmetry
transformations, while the others are very standard physical symmetries
so we will not spell them out more explicitly here. Note that the
general coordinate, local Lorentz, and gauge transformations are all
parametrized by a bosonic parameter, i.e. they are bosonic symmetries.
On the other hand, supersymmetry is a fermionic symmetry (parametrized
by the spinors @xmath ). The commutator of two supersymmetry variations
is then also a bosonic quantity, and is in fact always a linear
combination of the bosonic symmetries present. In this sense, the
supersymmetry transformations of a given theory are always explicitly
dependent on the bosonic symmetries. Therefore @xmath @xmath
supergravity always comes with all the above listed local symmetries,
while the global symmetries and dualities can depend on the details of
the multiplets included.

###### Global symmetries

The different global symmetries were already mentioned above. Apart from
the R-symmetry group that is fixed by @xmath being @xmath , the other
global symmetries need not always be the same. These are the internal
symmetries of the special and quaternionic Kähler manifolds of the
vector and hypermultiplet scalars. All the global symmetries can be
promoted to local ones using the gauge fields. This is the process of
gauging that was explained for the various parts of the lagrangian
above. Therefore it is not always easy to distinguish between local and
global symmetries of the action. In some cases promoting a part of a
global symmetry to a local one can break the remaining global symmetry,
e.g. the FI gaugings breaking the @xmath to a gauged @xmath or @xmath .
Note that although local and global symmetries might seem hard to
distinguish and are related to each other mathematically, their physical
meaning is strikingly different. Local symmetries in the theory signify
redundant degrees of freedom, i.e. they are not real physical
symmetries. On the contrary, the global symmetries are truly
characterizing the physical system and thus provide means of
understading any given vacuum at consideration, as will be discussed
more explicitly in part III of this thesis.

###### Dualities

We already discussed the meaning of dualities when we introduced
electro-magnetic duality above. They are important for this work because
they are symmetries of the equations of motion, i.e. solutions of the
theory are forced to respect them by construction. This often turns out
to be a good guiding principle for constructing general classes of
solutions. E/m duality can even be used for the construction of the
supergravity lagrangian itself. Restoring it in the case of gauged
supergravity leads to the formulation of magnetically gauged theories [
47 , 48 , 50 ] that will be discussed in more details when needed.

## Part I Maximal Supersymmetry

### Chapter 3 Fully supersymmetric vacua

#### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter, we study the configurations that preserve maximal
supersymmetry, i.e. the classical solutions of the general lagrangian (
2.1 ) that preserve all eight supercharges. These models include
arbitrary electric gaugings in the vector and hypermultiplet sectors. We
present several examples of such solutions and connect some of them to
vacuum solutions of flux compactifications in string theory. It is of
general interest to study four-dimensional supersymmetric string vacua
and their low-energy effective supergravity descriptions. Firstly, in
the context of flux compactifications and gauged supergravities, one is
motivated by the problem of moduli stabilization and the properties of
string vacua in which these moduli are stabilized. Often, one focuses on
supersymmetric vacua since there is better control over the dynamics of
the theory, though for more realistic situations, e.g. in accelerating
cosmologies, the vacuum must break all supersymmetry. Secondly, we are
motivated to look for new versions of the AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath
correspondence. The recently proposed dualities studied in [ 56 ] are
based on AdS @xmath string vacua preserving 32 or 24 supersymmetries.
Versions of the AdS/CFT correspondence with less amount of supersymmetry
are not yet well established, but are important for studying aspects of
four-dimensional quantum gravity, and potentially also for certain
condensed matter systems at criticality described by three-dimensional
conformal field theories.

In string theory, ungauged @xmath models arise e.g. from Calabi-Yau
compactifications of type II string theories or @xmath compactifications
of the heterotic string. Both models are known to have a rich dynamical
structure with controllable quantum effects in both vector and
hypermultiplet sectors that are relatively well understood. Gaugings in
@xmath supergravity are well studied and have a long history [ 43 , 57 ,
58 , 51 , 59 , 37 , 60 , 61 ] . Their analysis in terms of string
compactifications with fluxes started in [ 62 , 63 , 64 ] , and is an
ongoing research topic. For a (partial) list of references, see [ 65 ,
66 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 ] .

In the ungauged case, a complete classification of all the
supersymmetric solutions already existed [ 73 , 74 , 75 , 76 ] , and
there were some partial results in the gauged case for (abelian) vector
multiplets [ 77 , 78 , 79 ] . We extend this by taking completely
general vector and hypermultiplet sectors. Since we concentrate only on
the maximally supersymmetric solutions, we use different methods than
the ones in the above references. The spacetime conditions we obtain for
our solutions closely resemble other maximally supersymmetric solutions
in other dimensions such as [ 80 ] .

###### Plan of this chapter

In section 3.2 we analyze the supersymmetry rules and derive the
conditions for maximally supersymmetric vacua. The possible solutions
divide in two classes of space-times, with zero scalar curvature and
with negative scalar curvature, and we explicitly list all the possible
outcomes. We discuss further the scalar potential for the obtained vacua
in section 3.3 and show that they automatically satisfy all equations of
motion. In section 3.4 , we consider explicit cases from string theory
compactifications and general supergravity considerations that exemplify
the use of our maximal supersymmetry conditions. Some helpful identities
and notation are left for the appendices, where we also present some
intermediate formulas that are important for our results.

#### 3.2 Supersymmetry transformations

We consider in this section vector multiplets, hypermultiplets and the
gravitational multiplet, with arbitrary electric gaugings as given by
the general lagrangian ( 2.1 ). It can be seen by inspection that the
maximally supersymmetric configurations ⁹ ⁹ 9 We remind the reader that
in this thesis we use interchangeably the terms supersymmetric
configurations and BPS configurations, meaning the field expectation
values that are invariant under some supercharges in the theory. are
purely bosonic, and the fermions need to be zero. This follows from the
supersymmetry variations of the bosonic fields, which can be read off
from [ 37 ] . Therefore, we can restrict ourselves to the supersymmetry
variations of the fermions only.

##### 3.2.1 Gauginos

As seen in the previous chapter, the transformation of the gauginos is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

up to terms that are higher order in the fermions and which vanish for
purely bosonic configurations.

A maximally supersymmetric configuration preserves all eight
supercharges, hence the variation of the fermions should vanish for all
choices of the supersymmetry parameters. Since at each point in
spacetime they are linearly independent, the first term on the right
hand side of ( 3.1 ) must vanish separately from the others,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It implies the integrability condition ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We will assume in the
remainder of this chapter that the gauge coupling constant @xmath . The
case of @xmath is treated in the literature in e.g. [ 75 , 76 ] .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and complex conjugate. Here, @xmath is the full non-abelian field
strength, given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The second and third term in the supersymmetry variation of the
gauginos, equation ( 3.1 ), need also to vanish separately, since they
multiply independent spinors of the same chirality. For the second term,
this leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the inverse Kähler metric, with Kähler potential @xmath
from ( 2.16 ).

Finally, setting the third term in the supersymmetry variation to zero
leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Close inspection of ( 3.6 ) shows that both terms are linearly
independent in @xmath space, hence they must vanish separately,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and their complex conjugates.

##### 3.2.2 Hyperinos

The hyperinos transform as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

again, up to terms that are of higher order in the fermions. The
hyperino mass matrix @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly as for the gauginos, @xmath supersymmetric configurations
require the two terms in ( 3.8 ) to vanish separately. Since the
quaternionic vielbeine are invertible and nowhere vanishing, the scalars
need to be covariantly constant,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

implying the integrability conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, there is a second condition from ( 3.8 ) coming from the
vanishing of the hyperino mass matrix @xmath . This leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and complex conjugate.

In the absence of hypermultiplets, i.e. when @xmath , the @xmath
conditions from the variations of the hyperinos disappear. However, the
second condition in ( 3.7 ) remains, with the moment maps replaced by FI
parameters. Our formalism therefore automatically includes the case
@xmath .

##### 3.2.3 Gravitinos

The supersymmetry transformations of the gravitinos are (up to
irrelevant higher order terms in the fermions)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the gauged supercovariant derivative (specified in
equation ( 2.3 )).

Notice again that for @xmath , in fact even also in the absence of
vector multiplets when @xmath , the gravitino mass-matrix @xmath can be
non-vanishing and constant. In the lagrangian, which we discuss in the
next section, this leads to a (negative) cosmological constant term. The
anti-selfdual part of the graviphoton field strength @xmath satisfies
the identity ( 2.28 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined in ( 2.27 ). From the vanishing of the gaugino
variation, we have that @xmath , so a maximally supersymmetric
configuration must satisfy @xmath , or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this, we then see that equation ( 3.12 ) implies the integrability
conditions ( 3.11 ) in the hypermultiplet sector. For the integrability
equations in the vector multiplet sector, the situation is more subtle,
as the Killing vectors are complex and holomorphic. Now, the BPS
condition ( 3.7 ) only implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In appendix C we show that @xmath is an identity of the theory, and
hence the integrability condition is always satisfied. The integrability
condition might only locally be sufficient, but this is fine for our
purposes. One might however check in addition whether the covariant
constancy of the vector multiplet scalars imposes further (global)
restrictions.

To solve the constraints from the gravitino variation, we must first
look at the gauged supercovariant derivative on the supersymmetry
parameter, c.f. ( 2.3 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Besides the spin connection @xmath , there appear two other connections
associated to the special Kähler and quaternion-Kähler manifolds. We
need to compute their curvatures since they enter the integrability
conditions that follow from the Killing spinor equations. The first one
is called the gauged @xmath Kähler-connection, defined by [ 37 , 36 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under a gauge transformation, one finds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The curvature of this connection can be computed to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the moment map, defined in ( 2.50 ), and we have used
the equivariance condition ( 2.51 ). For maximally supersymmetric
configurations, the scalars are covariantly constant and hence the
curvature of the Kähler connections satisfies @xmath .

The second connection appearing in the gravitino supersymmetry variation
is the gauged @xmath connection of the quaternion-Kähler manifold ( 2.69
). It reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the (ungauged) @xmath connection of the
quaternion-Kähler manifold, whose curvatures are related to the three
quaternionic two-forms. The effect of the gauging is to add the second
term on the right hand side of ( 3.21 ), proportional to the triplet of
moment maps of the quaternionic isometries, with @xmath . The curvature
of ( 3.21 ) can then be computed to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the quaternionic curvature. For fully BPS solutions, we
therefore have @xmath .

We can now investigate the integrability conditions that follow from the
vanishing of the gravitino transformation rules ( 3.13 ). From the
definition of the supercovariant derivative ( 3.17 ), we find ¹¹ ¹¹ 11
Strictly speaking, we get the supercovariant curvatures appearing in (
3.23 ), which also contain fermion bilinears. Since the fermions are
zero on maximally supersymmetric configurations, only the bosonic part
of the curvatures remains.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the covariant constancy of the scalars. We recall
that @xmath are the moment maps on the special Kähler geometry, whereas
@xmath are the quaternion-Kähler moment maps. Alternatively, we can
compute the commutator from the vanishing of the gravitino variations
spelled out in ( 2.3 ). By equating this to the result of ( 3.23 ), we
get a set of constraints. Details of the calculation are given in
appendix C , and the results can be summarized as follows. First of all,
we find the covariant constancy of the graviphoton field strength ¹² ¹²
12 Recall that @xmath and @xmath are related by complex conjugation, and
hence the vanishing of @xmath implies @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Secondly, we get that the quaternionic moment maps must satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, there are cross terms between the graviphoton and the moment
maps, which enforce the conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation separates the classification of BPS configurations in two
sectors, those with a solution of @xmath at a particular point (or
locus) in field space, and those with non-vanishing @xmath (for at least
one index @xmath ) but @xmath . We will see later on that this
distinction corresponds to zero or non-zero (and negative) cosmological
constant in the spacetime.

Another requirement that follows from the gravitino integrability
conditions is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( 2.50 ), and is real. Using ( 3.15 ), this
is equivalent to the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is satisfied as @xmath , so ( 3.27 ) does not lead to any new
constraint.

Finally, there is the condition on the spacetime Riemann curvature. It
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be checked that this leads to a vanishing Weyl tensor, implying
conformal flatness. From the curvature, we can compute the value of the
Ricci-scalar to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the classification of fully supersymmetric configurations
separates into negative scalar curvature with @xmath , and zero
curvature with @xmath at the supersymmetric point. In both of these
cases there are important simplifications.

###### Negative scalar curvature

The case of negative scalar curvature is characterized by @xmath and
@xmath at the supersymmetric point. Since the BPS conditions imply that
then both @xmath and @xmath (see equation ( 3.5 )), we find that all
field strengths should be zero: @xmath . The gauge fields then are
required to be pure gauge, but can still be topologically non-trivial.
Furthermore, because of the vanishing field strengths, the integrability
conditions on the scalar fields are satisfied, and a solution for the
sections @xmath is obtained by a gauge transformation on the constant
(in spacetime) sections. Finally, the Riemann tensor is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which shows that the space is maximally symmetric, and therefore locally
AdS @xmath . The scalar curvature is @xmath .

###### Zero scalar curvature

The class of zero curvature is characterized by configurations for which
@xmath at the supersymmetric point. In this case, we can combine the
conditions @xmath and @xmath into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrix appearing here is the invertible matrix of special geometry
(as used in ( 2.22 )), hence we conclude that @xmath . The Riemann
tensor is then

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From the covariant constancy of the graviphoton, condition ( 3.24 ), we
find @xmath . Spaces with covariantly constant Riemann tensor are called
locally symmetric, and they are classified, see e.g. [ 81 , 55 , 80 ] .
In our case we also have zero scalar curvature, and then only three
spaces are possible:

1.  Minkowski space M @xmath ( @xmath )

2.  AdS @xmath S @xmath

3.  The pp-wave solution

The explicit metrics and field strengths for the latter two cases are
listed in appendix A.2 , while M @xmath and AdS @xmath are further
discussed in great detail in the coming chapters of this thesis.

##### 3.2.4 Summary

Let us now summarize the results. There are two different classes:
negative scalar curvature (leading to AdS @xmath ) and zero scalar
curvature solutions (leading to @xmath , AdS @xmath S @xmath or the
pp–wave).

The result of our analysis is that all the conditions on the spacetime
dependent part are explicitly solved ¹³ ¹³ 13 This is apart from the
scalar fields and Killing spinors, which are spacetime dependent. The
integrability conditions that we have imposed guarantee locally the
existence of a solution, although we did not explicitly construct it.
Its construction cannot be done in closed form in full generality, but
can be worked out in any given example [ 55 ] . , and the remaining
conditions are purely algebraic, and depend only on the geometry of the
special Kähler and quaternionic manifolds. The solutions to these
algebraic equations define the configuration space of maximally
supersymmetric configurations. There are two separate cases:

###### Negative scalar curvature (AdS@xmath)

This case is characterized by configurations for which @xmath at the
supersymmetric point. The BPS conditions are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (3.34)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

which should be satisfied at a point (or a locus) in field space. The
field strengths are zero, @xmath , and the space–time is AdS @xmath with
scalar curvature @xmath .

###### Zero scalar curvature (@xmath, AdS@xmathS@xmath or pp–wave)

In this case, the BPS conditions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We remind that, when @xmath (Minkowski space), all field strengths are
vanishing ( @xmath ).

#### 3.3 Scalar potential and equations of motion

As shown in the previous chapter, the scalar potential can be written in
terms of the mass-matrices,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the gaugino and hyperino mass-matrices, @xmath and @xmath
respectively, vanish on @xmath supersymmetric configurations, one sees
that the scalar potential is semi-negative definite, and determined by
the gravitino mass-matrix @xmath . Even in the absence of vector and
hypermultiplets, the gravitino mass-matrix can be non-vanishing, leading
to a negative cosmological constant in the lagrangian. We thus find for
@xmath preserving configurations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the absence of hypermultiplets, @xmath preserving AdS @xmath vacua
can therefore only be generated by non-trivial Fayet-Illiopoulos terms.

It can be verified that maximally supersymmetric configurations also
solve the equations of motion. To show this, one varies the lagrangian (
2.1 ) and uses the identities ( 2.54 ), ( 2.55 ) and the formulas in
section 3.2.4 . After a somewhat tedious but straightforward computation
one sees that all equations of motion are indeed satisfied by the
maximally supersymmetric configurations.

#### 3.4 Examples

In this section we list some (string theory motivated) examples of
@xmath theories, leading to @xmath supersymmetric configurations. We
first mention briefly some already known and relatively well-understood
@xmath vacua from string theory and then concentrate on our two main
examples in subsections 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 that exhibit best the different
features discussed above. In the last subsection we include some
supergravity models, not necessarily obtained from string
compactifications, leading to AdS @xmath vacua that can be of interest.

Obtaining gauged @xmath supergravity seems to be important for string
theory compactifications since it is an intermediate step between the
more realistic @xmath models and the mathematically controllable
theories. Thus in the last decade there has been much literature on the
subject. An incomplete list of examples consists of [ 65 , 69 , 70 , 71
, 72 ] and it is straightforward to impose and solve the maximal
supersymmetry constraints in each case. In some cases the vacua have
been already discussed or must exist from general string theory/M-theory
considerations.

For example, it was found that the coset compactifications studied in [
71 ] do not lead to @xmath supersymmetric configurations. This can also
be seen from imposing the constraints in section 3.2.4 . In contrast,
the compactification on @xmath presented in [ 65 ] does exhibit @xmath
solutions with non-trivial hypermultiplet gaugings. The authors of [ 65
] explicitly found @xmath Minkowski vacua by satisfying the same susy
conditions as in section 3.2.4 . From our analysis, it trivially follows
that also the pp-wave and the AdS @xmath S @xmath backgrounds can also
be found in these theories.

A similar example is provided by the (twisted) @xmath compactification
of the heterotic string, recently analyzed in [ 72 ] . For abelian
gaugings, one can verify that the three zero scalar curvature vacua are
present in these models.

We now turn to discuss the remaining models in more detail.

##### 3.4.1 M-theory compactification on @xmath structure manifolds

There is a very interesting model for @xmath supergravity with
non-abelian gauging of the vector multiplet sector, arising from
compactifications of M-theory on seven-manifolds with @xmath structure [
69 ] . More precisely, they consider Calabi-Yau (CY) threefolds fibered
over a circle. The @xmath -tensor, introduced in ( 2.53 )-( 2.54 ), is
non-trivial in these models. For the precise M-theory set-up, we refer
the reader to the original paper [ 69 ] ; here we only discuss the
relevant data for analyzing the maximal supersymmetry conditions:

-   The vector multiplet space can be parametrized by special
    coordinates, @xmath , @xmath , and prepotential

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with the triple intersection numbers @xmath that depend on the
    particular choice of the CY-manifold. This gives the Kähler
    potential

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath denotes the volume of the compact manifold. The gauge
    group is non-abelian with structure constants

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.40)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and a @xmath -tensor whose only non-vanishing components are

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The constant matrix @xmath specifies the Killing vectors and
    moment-maps of the special Kähler manifold:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.42)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.43)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Not for any choice of @xmath is the Killing equation satisfied. As
    explained in [ 69 ] , this is only the case when the relation ( 2.54
    ) holds. This also ensures that ( 2.55 ) is satisfied, as one can
    easily check.

-   Generally in this class of compactifications there always appear
    hypermultiplet scalars, but there is no gauging of this sector, so
    the Killing vectors and the moment maps @xmath are vanishing.

The scalar potential in this case reduces to the simple formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is positive semi-definite.

Analyzing the susy conditions is rather straightforward. Since @xmath ,
the only allowed @xmath vacua are the ones with zero-scalar curvature.
What is left for us to check are the conditions @xmath and @xmath . The
latter is very easy to check and holds as an identity at every point in
the special Kähler manifold. Also, it is equivalent to the relation
@xmath which is satisfied whenever there exists a prepotential [ 59 ] .
The condition @xmath eventually leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution to the above equation that always exists is the
decompactification limit when @xmath . The other more interesting
solutions depend on the explicit form of the matrix @xmath . In case
@xmath is invertible there are no further solutions to ( 3.45 ). On the
other hand, when @xmath has zero eigenvalues we can have @xmath M-theory
vacua, given by (a linear combination of) the corresponding zero
eigenvectors of @xmath . For the supergravity approximation to hold, one
might require that this solution leads to a non-vanishing (and large)
volume of the CY three-fold. Each eigenvector will correspond to a flat
direction of the scalar potential, and with @xmath along these
directions. The case where the full matrix @xmath is zero corresponds to
a completely flat potential, the one of a standard M-theory
compactification on @xmath without gauging.

Thus it is clear that @xmath is an important object for this type of
M-theory compactifications and we now give a few more details on its
geometrical meaning [ 69 ] . In the above class of M-theory
compactifications we have a very specific fibration of the Calabi-Yau
manifold over the circle. It is chosen such that only the second
cohomology @xmath is twisted with respect to the circle, while the third
cohomology @xmath is unaffected. Thus the hypermultiplet sector remains
ungauged as in regular @xmath compactification, while the vector
multiplets feel the twisting and are gauged. This twisting is
parametrized exactly by the matrix @xmath , as it determines the
differential relations of the harmonic (on the CY manifold) two-forms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the circle coordinate.

Let us now zoom in on the interesting case when we have nontrivial zero
eigenvectors of @xmath , corresponding to non-vanishing volume of the CY
manifold. For a vanishing volume, or a vanishing two-cycle, the
effective supergravity description might break down due to additional
massless modes appearing in string theory ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 For a detailed
analysis of the possibilities in a completely analogous case in five
dimensions see [ 82 ] . . Therefore the really consistent and relevant
examples for @xmath vacua are only those when the matrix @xmath is
non-invertible with corresponding zero eigenvectors that give nonzero
value for every @xmath .

To illustrate this better, we consider a particular example, given in
section 2.5 of [ 69 ] , of a compactification where the CY three-fold is
a @xmath -fibration. In this setting one can explicitly construct an
@xmath -matrix, compatible with the intersection numbers @xmath . Here
one can find many explicit cases where all of the above described
scenarios happen. As a very simple and suggestive example we consider
the 5-scalar case with @xmath , @xmath , and twist-matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The general solution of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the resulting volume is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is clearly positive semi-definite. In the case when either @xmath
or @xmath vanishes we have a singular manifold that is still a solution
to the maximal supersymmetry conditions. When all three coefficients
(that are essentially the remaining unstabilized moduli fields) are
non-zero, we have a completely proper solution both from supergravity
and string theory point of view, thus providing an example of @xmath
structure compactifications with zero-curvature @xmath vacua. This
example can be straightforwardly generalized to a higher number of
vector multiplets, as well as to the lower number of 4 scalars (there
cannot be less than 4 vector multiplets in this particular case).

Finally we note that a special case of the general setup described above
was already known for more than twenty years in [ 51 ] (3.21), where
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It was derived purely from 4d supergravity
considerations, but it now seems that one can embed it in string theory.

##### 3.4.2 Reduction of M-theory on Sasaki-Einstein@xmath

There has been much advance in the last years in understanding
Sasaki-Einstein manifolds and their relevance for M-theory
compactifications, both from mathematical and physical perspective. A
metric @xmath is Sasaki-Einstein if and only if the cone metric, defined
as @xmath , is Kähler and Ricci-flat. These spaces are good candidates
for examples of the AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath correspondence and an
explicit reduction to @xmath has been recently obtained in [ 70 ] .
Originally the effective lagrangian includes magnetic gauging and a
scalar-tensor multiplet, but after a symplectic rotation it can be
formulated in the standard @xmath formalism discussed here. After the
dualization of the original tensor to a scalar we have the following
data for the multiplets, needed for finding maximally supersymmetric
vacua:

-   There is one vector multiplet, given by @xmath and @xmath , leading
    to @xmath and Kähler potential

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.50)
      -- -------- -- --------

    There is no gauging in this sector, i.e. @xmath and @xmath for all
    @xmath . This also means that both @xmath and @xmath vanish.

-   The hypermultiplet scalars are @xmath with the universal
    hypermultiplet metric ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 The relation with the coordinates
    @xmath used in [ 70 ] is given by @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore,
    there is an overall factor @xmath in their definition of the
    universal hypermultiplet. Finally, they use a different @xmath frame
    to calculate the moment maps @xmath , which is why they are rotated
    with respect to the ones displayed here. , introduced in ( 2.63 ):

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.51)
      -- -------- -- --------

    We have an abelian gauging (see app. D for all isometries of the
    universal hypermultiplet), given by:

      -- -------- -- -- --------
         @xmath         (3.52)
      -- -------- -- -- --------

    and the moment maps, calculated in appendix D , are

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We can now proceed to solving the maximal supersymmetry constraints. The
conditions involving vector multiplet gauging are satisfied trivially,
while from @xmath we obtain the conditions @xmath and @xmath . Therefore
@xmath (the solution @xmath makes the Kähler potential ill-defined) and
@xmath . However, not all the moment maps at this vacuum can be zero
simultaneously, leaving AdS @xmath as the only possibility for a @xmath
vacuum solution. One can then see that @xmath is satisfied, so the only
remaining condition is @xmath . This fixes @xmath . Therefore we have
stabilized all (ungauged) directions in moduli space: @xmath . The
potential is nonzero in this vacuum since @xmath , which means the only
possibility for the space-time is to be AdS @xmath with vanishing field
strengths. This is indeed expected since @xmath compactifications of
M-theory lead to an @xmath AdS @xmath vacuum, the one just described by
us in the dimensionally reduced theory.

One can verify that this vacuum is stable under deformations in the
hypermultiplet sector of the type discussed in [ 83 , 84 ] . To show
this, first observe that the condition @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
always ensures vanishing @xmath and @xmath . Secondly, one may verify
that the deformations to the quaternionic moment maps are proportional
to @xmath or @xmath , and hence the remaining @xmath conditions from
section 3.2.4 are satisfied. It would be interesting to understand if
this deformation corresponds to a perturbative one-loop correction in
this particular type of M-theory compactification.

##### 3.4.3 Other gaugings exhibiting @xmath vacua

Another example of an AdS @xmath supersymmetric vacuum can be obtained
from the universal hypermultiplet. In the same coordinates @xmath as
used in the previous example, the metric is again given by ( 3.51 ).
This space has a rotational isometry acting on @xmath and @xmath , given
by @xmath in the notation of ( 3.52 ). We leave the vector multiplet
sector unspecified for the moment, and gauge the rotation isometry by a
linear combination of the gauge fields @xmath . This can be done by
writing the Killing vector as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some real constant parameters @xmath . The quaternionic moment maps
are given by (see appendix D )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be seen that there are no points for which @xmath , so this means
that only AdS @xmath @xmath vacua are possible. To complete the example,
we have to specify the vector multiplet space, and solve the conditions
@xmath and @xmath . The latter can be solved as @xmath , and then also
@xmath . The first one then reduces to @xmath . This condition is
trivially satisfied when e.g. @xmath . A more complicated example is to
take the special Kähler space of the previous subsection with no gauging
in the vector multiplet sector. There is one complex scalar @xmath , a
section @xmath and a prepotential @xmath . We then find a solution for
@xmath , under the condition that @xmath and @xmath are non-vanishing
real constants of opposite sign. More complicated examples with more
vector multiplets may be constructed as well. It would be interesting to
study if such examples can be embedded into string theory.

A similar situation arises in the absence of hypermultiplets. As
mentioned in the end of section 3.2.2 , we can have non-vanishing moment
maps that can be chosen as @xmath . Then we again need to satisfy the
same condition @xmath as above, and we already discussed the possible
solutions.

### Chapter 4 Supersymmetry preserving Higgs mechanism

#### 4.1 Introduction

This chapter is a bridge between the fully supersymmetric solutions that
were described in the previous discussion and the solutions that break
some of the supersymmetries, which will be a subject of the coming
chapters. We use the results derived in chapter 3 to define a consistent
truncation of gauged @xmath @xmath supergravity into another (un)gauged
@xmath @xmath lagrangian with reduced number of multiplets. The main
idea is simple - in gauged supergravity, one can give expectation values
to some of the scalars (from both the vector and hypermultiplets) such
that one breaks the gauge symmetry spontaneously in a maximally
supersymmetric @xmath vacua, specified by the conditions ( 3.34 ) or (
3.35 ). Let us suppose for simplicity that the vacuum has zero
cosmological constant, the argument can be repeated for @xmath
preserving anti-de Sitter vacua. Due to the Higgs mechanism some of the
fields become massive, and as a consequence of the @xmath preserving
vacua, the gravitinos remain massless and the heavy modes form massive
@xmath vector multiplets. As a second step, we can set the heavy fields
to zero, and the theory gets truncated to an ungauged @xmath
supergravity. These truncations are consistent due to the fact that
supersymmetry is unbroken. Black holes and other types of solutions can
then be found by taking any solution of the ungauged theory and
augmenting it with the massive fields that were set to zero. In fact, it
is clear from this procedure that one can even implement a non-BPS
solution of the ungauged theory into the gauged lagrangian. This
procedure works for non-abelian gaugings, as long as it is broken
spontaneously to an abelian subgroup with residual @xmath supersymmetry.

Let us now illustrate the above mechanism in some more detail. We
restrict ourselves first to spontaneous symmetry breaking in Minkowski
vacua, where one has @xmath and @xmath according to ( 3.35 ). At such a
point in the moduli space, the resulting scalar potential is zero as
required by a Minkowski vacuum. After the hypermultiplet scalar fields
take their vacuum expectation values, the lagrangian ( 2.1 ) contains a
mass term for some of the gauge fields, given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

There is no contribution to the mass matrix for the vector fields coming
from expectation values of the vector multiplet scalars, since the
gauging was chosen to be abelian. The number of massive vectors is then
given by the rank of @xmath , and as @xmath is positive definite, one
has @xmath . Hence, the massive vector fields are encoded by the linear
combinations @xmath . Similarly, some of the vector and hypermultiplet
scalars acquire a mass, determined by expanding the scalar potential to
quadratic order in the fields. Then one reads off the mass matrix, and
in general there can be off-diagonal mass terms between vector and
hypermultiplet scalars. Massive vector multiplets can then be formed out
of a massive vector, a massive complex scalar from the vector multiplet,
and 3 hypermultiplet scalars. The fourth hypermultiplet scalar is the
Goldstone mode that is eaten by the vector field. We will illustrate
this more explicitly in some concrete examples below.

Upon setting the massive fields to zero (or integrating them out), one
obtains a supergravity theory with only massless fields. Because of
@xmath , the mass matrix for the gravitinos is zero as follows from (
2.8 ). Therefore, the resulting theory is an ungauged supergravity
theory. Black hole solutions and other solutions of interest can then be
simply copied from already existing literature. By going through the
Higgs mechanism in reverse order, one can uplift this solution easily to
the gauged theory by augmenting it with the necessary expectation values
of the scalars. The original solution is not charged with respect to the
gauge fields that acquired a mass.

The situation for spontaneous symmetry breaking in an AdS vacuum is
similar. To generate a negative cosmological constant from the
potential, we must have a @xmath in the vacuum. The conditions for
unbroken @xmath supersymmetry are given in ( 3.34 ). After expanding the
fields around this vacuum, one can truncate the theory further to a
lagrangian with a bare cosmological constant, in which one can use
already known solutions of minimal gauged supergravity. We will discuss
explicit black hole examples both in Minkowski and AdS @xmath in the
next part of this thesis.

#### 4.2 Solution generating technique

We now elaborate on constructing solutions more explicitly. As explained
above, the general technique is to embed a (BPS) solution in ungauged
supergravity into a gauged supergravity. The considerations in this
section also apply for the more general case of non-abelian gaugings,
although explicit use of this technique will only be made in the abelian
case in following chapters. First, to illustrate the systematics of our
procedure, we analyze a simpler setup in which we embed solutions from
pure supergravity into a model with vector multiplets only. Then we
extend the models to include both hypermultiplets and vector multiplets,
i.e. the most general (electrically) gauged supergravities. We always
consider solutions with vanishing fermions, i.e. the discussion concerns
only the bosonic fields.

##### 4.2.1 Vector multiplets

We start from pure @xmath supergravity, i.e. only the gravity multiplet
normalized as @xmath . Let us assume we have found a solution of this
lagrangian, which we denote by @xmath . We can embed this into a
supergravity theory with only vector multiplets as follows. If we have a
theory with (gauged) vector multiplets we can find a corresponding
solution to it by satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the integrability condition following from @xmath is always
satisfied given the other constraints. We further have the relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The last equality is to be used for determining @xmath . Then we can
find the solution for our new set of gauge field strengths by @xmath
since we already know that @xmath .

The new configuration will, by construction, satisfy all equations of
motion of the theory and will preserve the same amount of supersymmetry
(if any) as the original one. This can be checked explicitly from the
supersymmetry transformation rules ( 2.3 ) and ( 2.4 ), combined with
the results from the previous chapter. Indeed, ( 4.2 ) comes from
imposing the vanishing of ( 2.4 ), while ( 4.3 ) is required by the
Einstein equations.

##### 4.2.2 Hypermultiplets

Given any solution of @xmath supergravity with no hypermultiplets, we
can obtain a new solution with (gauged) hypermultiplets preserving the
same amount of supersymmetry as the original one. We require the theory
to remain the same in the other sectors (vector and gravity multiplets
with solution @xmath ) and impose some additional constraints that have
to be satisfied in addition to the already given solution. We then
simply require the fields of our new theory to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

under the following restriction that has to be solved for the hypers.
Here we are left with two cases: the original theory was either with or
without Fayet-Iliopoulos (FI) terms (cosmological constant). In absence
of FI terms, a new solution after adding hypers is given by imposing the
constraints:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

while in the case of original solution with FI terms we have a solution
after adding hypers (thus no longer allowing for FI terms but keeping
@xmath the same) with:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The new field configuration (given it can be found from the original
data) again satisfies all equations of motion and preserves the same
amount of supersymmetry as the original one. This is true because the
susy variations of gluinos and gravitinos remain the same as in the
original solution, and also the variations for the newly introduced
hyperinos are zero.

##### 4.2.3 Vector and hypermultiplets

This case is just combining the two cases above. If we start with no FI
terms the new solution will be generated by imposing equations ( 4.5 )
and ( 4.2 ). If we have a solution with a cosmological constant we need
to impose ( 4.6 ) and ( 4.2 ). Then the integrability condition
following from @xmath is automatically satisfied in both cases, using
relations ( 4.3 ).

## Part II Black Hole Solutions

### Chapter 5 Asymptotically flat black holes

#### 5.1 Introduction

One of the interesting predictions of general relativity is the
existence of black hole solutions. It was followed by various
experimental indications for the presence of such objects in the
universe and even in our own galaxy. Black holes are places in spacetime
where gravity becomes strong enough to stop even light from escaping.
There is an event horizon, and particles that pass the horizon can
(classically) never return to the external spacetime.

In 1974, Stephen Hawking discovered that black holes do emit radiation [
85 ] , due to quantum effects. It was shown that black holes follow the
rules of thermodynamics, and one can derive their temperature and
entropy [ 86 , 85 ] . It is then a challenge for a theory of quantum
gravity to provide the microscopic description of black hole
thermodynamics.

From the point of view of this thesis, black holes are interesting for a
variety of reasons. They are solutions one finds in supergravity and can
often be embedded in the full-fledged string theory. If string theory is
a viable theory of quantum gravity, it should provide a complete,
microscopic description of a black hole. One can compare this with the
macroscopic description in supergravity, which is its low energy
effective action. For instance, in the macroscopic picture, one can
compute the entropy. In the microscopic picture, this corresponds to
counting the number of microstates, which was shown to exactly reproduce
the same entropy in a number of examples [ 10 ] .

Let us now briefly consider the basic black hole solutions that
asymptote to Minkowski spacetime.

###### The Schwarzschild solution

The simplest and best studied black hole solution is the Schwarzschild
spacetime. It is a solution of pure gravity without any matter, i.e. all
fields of @xmath supergravity except for the graviton are frozen to
zero. The Schwarzschild metric is typically written in spherical
coordinates due to its manifest spherical symmetry:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath an arbitrary parameter that corresponds to the
mass of black hole with respect to the ground state ( @xmath clearly
corresponds to Minkowski). In the limit @xmath one recovers flat
spacetime, while @xmath is a genuine point singularity of the solution.
Additionally, there is a coordinate singularity at @xmath , which is a
spherical shell and corresponds to the event horizon. One then typically
says that the black hole has a radius @xmath and area @xmath . Note that
in case @xmath , @xmath is negative and thus no horizon exists to shield
the singularity. The spacetime is then said to contain a naked
singularity and is typically no longer of physical interest. Such a
configuration will not form under gravitational collapse of a spherical
mass shell, see e.g. [ 87 ] .

From the rules of black hole thermodynamics it can be shown that the
Schwarzschild black hole has a temperature that is inversely
proportional to the mass, @xmath and an entropy proportional to the area
¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The entropy-area law holds for all black holes and other black
objects in any spacetime dimension, while the temperature is
proportional to the surface gravity and thus depends explicitly on the
metric that is considered. , @xmath .

The last thing we need to mention in this very brief review are the
symmetries of the Schwarzschild solution. The metric ( 5.1 ) has 4
Killing vectors, corresponding to time translations ( @xmath ) and space
rotations ( @xmath ). The full Lorentz symmetry @xmath is restored only
asymptotically as @xmath . The metric is therefore static, spherically
symmetric and asymptotically flat.

###### The Reissner-Nordström solution

The Reissner-Nordström solution describes a charged black hole solution
in the theory of general relativity with a Maxwell field. It can be then
directly embedded in minimal ungauged supergravity (with vanishing
gravitino expectation values), or more general lagrangians of the sort (
2.1 ) where the additional fields are frozen to zero or constant and the
moment maps are vanishing. The gauge field has non-vanishing components

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the electric and @xmath the magnetic charge of the black
hole. The metric can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the metric function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the limit as @xmath goes to infinity the metric approaches flat
Minkowski space and the electric and magnetic fields computed from ( 5.2
) vanish. Besides the point @xmath , which is a true singularity, there
are other possible values of @xmath where @xmath , corresponding to
event horizons. They follow from the equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which could have two, one or zero real solutions for @xmath depending
on:

 @xmath 

    
    In this case, there are two different roots of @xmath , given by
    @xmath . There is an inner and an outer horizon.

 @xmath 

    
    If the charge balances the mass, we call the black hole an extremal
    black hole. The real singularity is shielded by a single event
    horizon at @xmath .

 @xmath 

    
    If the charge exceeds the mass, there are no roots of @xmath , and
    any observer can travel to the real singularity at @xmath , which is
    not shielded by an event horizon. This is again a naked singularity
    and is deemed unphysical.

Note that the Reissner-Nordström solution is also static and spherically
symmetric (global symmetry group @xmath ), just as the Schwarzschild
one. However, it enjoys very different thermodynamic properties. The
temperature in this case is proportional to the difference between the
two horizons, @xmath , while the entropy is proportional to the area of
the outer horizon, @xmath . We see now that something very special
happens for extremal black holes when @xmath : the temperature vanishes
while keeping the entropy and event horizon non-zero. This was not
possible for Schwarzschild solutions and is generally a very rare
example of a physical system with vanishing temperature and macroscopic
disorder.

The extremal black hole is also very particular from the point of view
of supersymmetry. Supersymmetry is incompatible with temperature,
therefore only extremal black holes can potentially preserve some
amounts of supersymmetry in a theory of supergravity. This is also the
case with the example at hand - the extremal Reissner-Nordström solution
preserves half of the supercharges of @xmath supergravity, thus it is
1/2 BPS. Let us examine more closely the metric in this extremal case.
If we redefine the radial coordinate as @xmath , the metric is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The true singularity is now at @xmath , and the horizon is at @xmath .
Close to the horizon, we can approximate @xmath , and we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The metric becomes a product metric: we have an AdS @xmath space,
parametrized by @xmath and @xmath , and a sphere S @xmath , parametrized
by @xmath and @xmath . The mass @xmath determines the curvature of both
spaces, which are equal in magnitude; as AdS @xmath has negative
curvature and S @xmath positive, the total curvature at the horizon is
zero. The spacetime outside of the black hole therefore interpolates
between the fully supersymmetric configurations AdS @xmath @xmath and
flat Minkowski space, discussed in chapter 2 .

###### The Kerr-Newman solution

This is the most general asymptotically flat black hole solution of the
Einstein-Maxwell lagrangian. In addition to mass and charges, the
Kerr-Newman spacetime also possesses a constant angular momentum,
i.e. the black hole rotates around a given axis. The spacetime is
therefore stationary but not static, with a symmetry group @xmath (time
translations and axial symmetry). The metric of the Kerr-Newman
spacetime is typically written in the so called Boyer-Lindquist
coordinates and reads

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a genuine black hole with an event horizon, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can easily see that when the angular momentum parameter vanishes we
recover the Reissner-Nordström solution.

We postpone the discussion of the thermodynamic and supersymmetric
properties of the Kerr-Newman solution here since they are somewhat more
involved in comparison with the static cases. For the purposes of this
introductory section it is enough to mention that Kerr-Newman black
holes that satisfy ( 5.9 ) can never be supersymmetric, even in the
extremal limit. Additionally, the Kerr-Newman spacetime is somewhat
special in another aspect - it contains a closed timelike curve inside
its inner horizon, which is causality violating and often considered
very unphysical. Furthermore, due to the fact that the spacetime has a
constant rotation, it follows that the parts of the spacetime very far
from the black hole will need to move faster than the speed of light in
order to keep up with the rest. The solution therefore cannot be taken
seriously in its full domain, but can nevertheless be used as an
important example in this thesis. It often serves also as a good first
approximation to the physics of cosmological black holes.

###### Plan of this chapter

The plan of this chapter is as follows. We split the discussion of
asymptotically black holes in ungauged and gauged supergravity. There
are many general results in ungauged supergravity where the BPS black
hole solutions are fully understood and there exist various advances
towards full classification of extremal and non-extremal black holes. We
then move to the less well-explored topic of Minkowski black holes in
gauged supergravity, where we provide the first attempts of generalizing
the ungauged solutions.

First, in section 5.2.1 , we give a summary of the known supersymmetric
black hole solutions in ungauged @xmath supergravity with neutral
hypermultiplets. We then also briefly comment on the results concerning
non-BPS extremal and non-extremal black holes with non-trivial scalar
profiles ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 The classification of solutions without scalars was
already presented above, therefore from the spacetime point of view one
does not expect qualitatively new solutions to appear. We will however
see that this point of view is too naive when discussing asymptotically
AdS black holes in the next chapter. in section 5.2.2 .

Moving on to the black holes in gauged supergravity, in section 5.3.1 we
make use of the Higgs mechanism for spontaneous gauge symmetry breaking
explained in the previous chapter, in order to obtain effective @xmath
ungauged theories from a general gauged @xmath supergravity. We show how
this method can be used to embed already known black hole solutions into
gauged supergravities and explain the physical meaning of the new
solutions. We illustrate this with an explicit example of a static,
asymptotically flat black hole with the well-known STU model and one
gauged hypermultiplet (the universal hypermultiplet).

In section 5.3.2 we discuss in more general terms asymptotically flat,
stationary spacetimes preserving half of the supersymmetries. We analyze
the fermion susy variations in gauged supergravity after choosing a
particular ansatz for the Killing spinor. One finds two separate cases,
defined by @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Whereas the former case
contains only Minkowski and AdS @xmath solutions, the latter leads to a
class of solutions that generalize the standard black hole solutions of
ungauged supergravity. We analyze this in full detail and give the
complete set of equations that guarantees a half-BPS solution. We then
explain how this fits to the solutions obtained in section 5.3.1 .

Finally, in section 5.3.3 , we study asymptotically flat black holes
with scalar hair ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 By scalar hair, in this thesis, we mean a
scalar field that is zero at the horizon of the black hole, but non-zero
outside of the horizon. According to this definition, the vector
multiplet scalars subject to the attractor mechanism in @xmath ungauged
supergravity, do not form black holes with scalar hair. The solutions
that we discuss in section 5.3.3 , however, will have hair. . We find
two separate classes of such solutions. One is a purely bosonic solution
with scalar hair, but with the shortcoming of having ghost modes in the
spacetime. The other class of solutions has no ghosts but along with
scalar hair we also find fermionic hair, i.e. the fermions are not
vanishing in such a vacuum.

Some of the more technical aspects of this chapter, including explicit
hypermultiplet gaugings leading to Minkowski asymptotics, are presented
in the appendices.

#### 5.2 Ungauged theory

##### 5.2.1 Supersymmetric stationary solutions

Asymptotically flat and stationary BPS black hole solutions of ungauged
supergravity have been a very fruitful field of research in the last
decades. In absence of vector multiplets @xmath , with only the
graviphoton present, the supersymmetric solution is just the well-known
extremal Reissner-Nordström (RN) black hole ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 The Kerr-Newman
spacetime with @xmath and an arbitrary angular momentum is also a
supersymmetric solution, but it does not have an event horizon and is
therefore a naked singularity rather than black hole. . This solution
was later generalized to include a number of vector multiplets [ 88 ] .
The most general classification of the BPS solutions, including
multicentered black holes, was given by Behrndt, Lüst and Sabra [ 73 ]
and we will refer to those as BLS solutions. The hypermultiplet scalars
@xmath do not mix with the other fields (apart from the graviton) at the
level of the equations of motion, and it is therefore consistent to set
them to a constant value. We will briefly list the main points of the
solutions, as they will play an important role in what follows. For a
comprehensive review of these black holes solutions and their important
implications we refer the interested reader to [ 89 ] .

To characterize the black hole solutions, we first denote the imaginary
parts of the holomorphic sections by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We assume stationary solutions with axial symmetry ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Thus we do
not allow for multicentered solutions with more than two centers. It
this thesis we are mostly concerned with the general classification of
solutions and will not elaborate much on the multicentered case.
parametrized by an angular coordinate @xmath . The result of the BPS
analysis is that the metric takes the form ²¹ ²¹ 21 Note that all the
results are in spherical coordinates, see [ 73 , 75 ] for the coordinate
independent results.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Kähler potential ( 2.16 ) of special geometry. The
metric components and the symplectic vector @xmath only depend on the
radial variable @xmath and the second angular coordinate @xmath , and
the BPS conditions imply the differential equations on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (5.12)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

From this follows the integrability condition @xmath , where @xmath is
the 3-dimensional Laplacian.

What is left to specify are the gauge field strengths @xmath . First we
define (c.f. the discussion about electro-magnetic duality in chapter 2
) the magnetic field strengths

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that the Maxwell equations and Bianchi identities take the simple
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that @xmath transforms as a vector under electric-magnetic duality
transformations.

For the full solution it is enough to specify half of the components of
@xmath and @xmath , since the other half can be found from ( 5.13 ). In
spherical coordinates, the BPS equations imply the non-vanishing
components ²² ²² 22 The BPS conditions also imply @xmath due to axial
symmetry.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 5.14 ) it now follows that @xmath and @xmath are harmonic
functions. With the above identities we can always find the vector
multiplet scalars @xmath , given that we know explicitly how they are
defined in terms of the sections @xmath and @xmath . The integration
constants of the harmonic functions specify the asymptotic behavior of
the fields at the black hole horizon(s) (the constants can be seen to be
the black hole electric and magnetic charges) and at spatial infinity.

The complete proof that these are indeed all the supersymmetric black
hole solutions with abelian vector multiplets and no cosmological
constant was given in [ 75 ] . Note that the BLS solutions describe
half-BPS stationary spacetimes with (only in the multicentered cases) or
without angular momentum. The near-horizon geometry around each center
is always AdS @xmath S @xmath with equal radii of the two spaces,
determined by the charges of the black hole (see [ 90 ] for a more
general discussion of possible near-horizon geometries). All solutions
exhibit the so-called attractor mechanism [ 88 , 91 , 92 ] . This means
that the (vector multiplet) scalar fields get attracted to constant
values at the horizon that only depend on the black hole charges. As the
scalars can be arbitrary constants at infinity we also find the
so-called attractor flow, i.e. the scalars flow from their asymptotic
value to the fixed constant at the horizon.

##### 5.2.2 Non-supersymmetric black holes

The full classification of non-BPS black hole solutions and attractors
as opposed to the supersymmetric ones is much more involved and is still
in progress. The presence or absence of unbroken supercharges at
technical level results in a difference between solving first and second
order partial differential equations, respectively. Therefore it is not
a surprise to find that much less is known about the general structure
of black hole solutions and the microscopic theories behind them.

The simplest generalization from BPS to non-BPS black holes is of course
to still consider zero temperature solutions. They share some similar
features to the BPS solutions, notably the attractor phenomenon [ 93 ,
94 , 95 ] and the fact that in certain cases they can also be found from
first order differential equations after a suitable rewriting of the
action [ 96 ] . In contract to the BPS case, non-BPS attractors exhibit
flat directions, i.e. the scalars are not completely fixed at the
horizon by the values of the charges. A few examples have been found
where changing some of the signs in the BPS solutions result in non-BPS
extremal solutions [ 97 , 98 ] , but such examples are not generic
enough. The role of electro-magnetic duality is very prominent in the
attempts to find general classes of solutions, since full duality orbits
can be found just by having a single (generic enough) solution.

When discussing non-BPS solutions, we need to remember that there is
another symmetry that is allowed to be broken - the spherical symmetry.
There can be various extremal and non-extremal generalizations of the
Kerr-Newman black hole, usually referred to as overrotating black holes
(since the limit of vanishing angular momentum for these solutions leads
to a naked singularity). Their underrotating counterparts, on the other
hand, are rotating generalizations of the Reissner-Nordström solutions.
The organizing principle for the general structure of either classes is
unfortunately still unclear.

Recently, there has been some advance in simplifying the equations of
motion also for non-extremal black holes [ 99 ] , but results on this
topic are even more scarce and disorganized. Virtually all solutions of
asymptotically flat black holes can be embedded in supergravity
theories. We will therefore not go into details on the topic since it
extends very far from the techniques one can employ from supersymmetry
considerations. The situation at present is even more hopeless for
theories with gauging, where the equations of motion allow for even
broader classes of solutions than in the ungauged case. In what follows,
however, we only concentrate on solutions that can be analyzed purely
from a supersymmetric point of view.

#### 5.3 Gauged theory

##### 5.3.1 Solutions via spontaneous symmetry breaking

The simplest solutions one can have in gauged supergravity are the ones
that exist also in ungauged supergravity. As we saw above, there are
many results in the literature on the subject of black holes in ungauged
supergravity and via the method of spontaneous symmetry breaking they
can all be used in general classes of gauged supergravities. These, in a
way trivial, solutions follow directly from our discussion in chapter 4
and we find them easier to understand in the context of a canonical
example from BPS black holes in ungauged supergravity: the STU model.

###### The STU model with gauged universal hypermultiplet

Let us consider an @xmath theory with the universal hypermultiplet
(UHM). Its quaternionic metric and isometries are given in appendix D ,
and isometry 5 is chosen to be gauged. This allows for asymptotically
flat black holes, since we can find solutions of ( 4.5 ), as we shall
see below ²³ ²³ 23 A suitable combination of isometries 1 and 4 would
also do the job. Note that typically in string theory isometry 5 gets
broken perturbatively while 1 and 4 remain also at quantum level. For
the present discussion it is irrelevant which one we choose since we are
not trying to directly obtain the model from string theory. . The
quaternionic Killing vector and moment maps are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath arbitrary constants. In this chapter we will use @xmath to
denote the coordinate on the UHM, to avoid confusion with the radial,
spacetime coordinate @xmath .

In the vector multiplet sector we take the so-called STU model, based on
the prepotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with @xmath . The gauge group is @xmath , but it will be broken
to @xmath in the supersymmetric Minkowski vacua, in which we construct
the black hole solution. The conditions for a fully BPS Minkowski vacuum
require @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , with arbitrary constants
@xmath and @xmath . Moreover, from ( 4.5 ), the vector multiplets scalar
vevs must obey @xmath (which is an equation for the @xmath ’s). Then,
after expanding around this vacuum, the mass terms for the scalar fields
are given by the quadratic terms in the scalar potential ( 2.2 ). Now,
if we make the definition @xmath , we have @xmath . Expanding the first
term in ( 2.2 ) gives the mass term for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Expanding the second term to quadratic order gives the mass for three of
the hypers:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the third term vanishes at quadratic order and does not contribute
to the mass matrix of the scalars.

Therefore two of the six vector multiplet scalars become massive
(i.e. the linear combination given by our definition for @xmath ),
together with three of the hypers. The fourth hyper @xmath remains
massless and is eaten up by the massive gauge field @xmath (with mass
@xmath given by ( 4.1 )). Thus we are left with an effective @xmath
supergravity theory of one massive and two massless vector multiplets
and no hypermultiplets, which can be further consistently truncated to
only include the massless modes. One can then search for BPS solutions
in the remaining theory and the prescription for finding black holes is
again the one given by Behrndt, Lüst and Sabra and explained in section
5.2.1 .

We now construct the black hole solution more explicitly, following the
solution generating technique of chapter 4 . For this, we need to
satisfy ( 4.4 ) and ( 4.5 ). The condition @xmath fixes @xmath and the
remaining non-zero Killing vectors are @xmath . Now we have to satisfy
the remaining conditions @xmath and @xmath . To do so, we use the BLS
solution of the STU model. For simplicity we take the static limit
@xmath , discussed in detail in section 4.6 of [ 73 ] . The solution is
fully expressed in terms of the harmonic functions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

under the condition that one of them is negative definite. The sections
then read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

with metric function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case @xmath and the @xmath components (here @xmath are the
spatial indices) are expressed solely in terms of derivatives of @xmath
. After evaluating the period matrix we obtain @xmath and @xmath are
given in terms of derivatives of @xmath . Thus the equations @xmath and
@xmath lead to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution is qualitatively the same as the original one, but the
charges @xmath and the asymptotic constants @xmath are now related by (
5.24 ). So, effectively, the number of independent scalars and vectors
is decreased by one, consistent with the results from spontaneous
symmetry breaking. The usual attractor mechanism for the remaining
massless vector multiplet scalars holds while for the hypermultiplet
scalars we know that @xmath and @xmath is fixed to an arbitrary constant
everywhere in spacetime with no boundary conditions at the horizon. In
other words the hypers are not ‘attracted’.

Our construction can be generalized for non-BPS solutions as well. In
the particular case of the STU model, we can obtain a completely
analogous, non-BPS, solution by following the procedure described in [
98 ] . We flip the sign of one of the harmonic functions in ( 5.10 )
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

This solution preserves no supersymmetry, but it is extremal. By
following our procedure above, we can embed this solution into the
gauged theory.

##### 5.3.2 1/2 BPS solutions

In this section we will take a more systematic approach to studying the
supersymmetric solutions of the general gauged theory ( 2.1 ). We search
for a solution where the expectation values of the fermions are zero.
This implies that the supersymmetry variations of the bosons should be
zero. The vanishing of the supersymmetry variations ( 2.3 )-( 2.4 ) then
guarantees some amount of conserved supersymmetry. Depending on the
number of independent components of the variation parameters @xmath we
will have different amount of conserved supersymmetry. Here we will
focus on particular solutions preserving (at least) 4 supercharges, i.e.
half-BPS configurations. A BPS configuration has to further satisfy the
equations of motion in order to be a real solution of the theory, so we
also impose those. The fermionic equations of motion vanish
automatically, so we are left with the equations of motion for the
graviton @xmath , the vector fields @xmath , and the scalars @xmath and
@xmath . We will come to the relation between the BPS constraints and
the field equations in due course, but we first introduce some more
relations for the Killing spinors @xmath .

###### Killing spinor identities

We will make use of the approach [ 100 ] where one first assumes the
existence of a Killing spinor. From this spinor, various bilinears are
defined, whose properties constrain the form of the solution to a degree
where a full classification is possible. We use this method in @xmath ,
which is generalizing the main results of [ 75 , 76 ] to include
hypermultiplets in the description. As it later turns out, we cannot
completely use this method to classify all the supersymmetric
configurations, but the method nevertheless gives useful information.

We define @xmath to be a Killing spinor if it solves the gravitino
variation @xmath , defined in ( 2.3 ), and assume @xmath to be a Killing
spinor in the remainder of this article. Such spinors anti-commute, but
we can expand them on a basis of Grassmann variables and only work with
the expansion coefficients. This leads to a commuting spinor, which we
also denote with @xmath , and we define ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 We will be brief on
some technical points of the discussion, and refer to [ 75 , 76 ] for
more information.

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (5.26)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We now show that this implies that @xmath is a Killing vector. For its
derivatives we find

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (5.27)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The second and third term are traceless, so they vanish when we compute
@xmath . The other terms are antisymmetric in @xmath , so this proves

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus @xmath is a Killing vector. We make the decomposition @xmath and
using Fierz identities one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can show that @xmath , which shows that the Killing vector @xmath is
timelike or null. For the remainder of this chapter we restrict
ourselves to a timelike Killing spinor ansatz, defined as one that leads
to a timelike Killing vector. We make this choice, as our goal is to
find stationary black hole solutions, which always have a timelike
isometry. In this case, by definition, @xmath , so we can solve ( 5.29 )
for the metric as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

so @xmath . We define a time coordinate by @xmath , which implies @xmath
. We decompose @xmath , where the factor in front of @xmath follows from
@xmath and @xmath has no @xmath component. The metric is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are independent of time.

Now we are ready to make a relation between the susy variations ( 2.3
)-( 2.4 ) and the equations of motion, using an elegant and simple
argument of Kallosh and Ortin [ 101 ] that was later generalized in [ 75
, 76 ] . Assuming the existence of (any amount of) unbroken
supersymmetry, one can derive a set of equations relating the equations
of motion for the bosonic fields with derivatives of the bosonic susy
variations. For the theory at hand these read:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (5.33)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the equation of motion for the corresponding field in
subscript. More precisely, @xmath is the equation for the vielbein
@xmath (the Einstein equations), @xmath corresponds to @xmath (the
Maxwell equations), @xmath corresponds to @xmath and @xmath to @xmath .
Now, let us assume that the Maxwell equations are satisfied, @xmath . If
we multiply each of the remaining terms in the three equations by @xmath
and @xmath and use the fact that the Killing spinor is timelike such
that @xmath we directly obtain that the remaining field equations are
satisfied. So, apart from the BPS conditions, only the Maxwell equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

need to be satisfied.

###### Killing spinor ansatz

Contracting the gaugino variation ( 2.4 ) with @xmath we find the
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this to eliminate @xmath and plugging back into @xmath we find ²⁵
²⁵ 25 One could, as done in e.g. [ 75 , 76 ] , eliminate the gauge
fields @xmath to obtain an equivalent relation.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is here that we find an important difference with the ungauged
theories. In the latter case, @xmath , and the second term is absent.
Then, assuming that the gauge fields @xmath are non-zero, one can
rewrite equation ( 5.36 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We have thus derived the form of the Killing spinor,
which is not an ansatz anymore.

In gauged supergravity, @xmath , so there are various ways to solve
equation ( 5.36 ). One could, for instance, generalize ( 5.37 ) to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging this back into ( 5.36 ), one obtains BPS conditions on the
fields which one can then try to solve. While this is hard in general,
it has been done in a specific case. Namely, the ansatz used for the
AdS-RN black holes in minimally gauged supergravity (with a bare
cosmological constant), as analyzed by Romans [ 102 ] , fits into ( 5.38
), but not in ( 5.37 ). In fact, we will see later that with ( 5.37 )
one cannot find AdS black holes.

In the remainder of this section and chapter, we will use ( 5.37 ) as a
particular ansatz, hoping to find new BPS black hole solutions that are
asymptotically flat. The reader should keep in mind that more general
Killing spinors are possible. The search for BPS black holes that
asymptote to AdS @xmath , and their Killing spinors, is postponed for
the next chapter.

###### Metric and gauge field ansatz

We will further make the extra assumption that the solution for the
spacetime metric, field strengths and scalars, is axisymmetric, i.e.
there is a well-defined axis of rotation, such that @xmath lies along
the angle of rotation (we choose to call it @xmath ) in ( 5.32 ). For a
stationary axisymmetric black hole solution the symmetries constrain the
metric not to depend on @xmath and @xmath . These symmetries also
constrain the scalars and gauge field strengths to depend only on the
remaining coordinates, which we choose to call @xmath and @xmath . We
further assume @xmath , such that (after also using the gauge freedom)
we can set @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Gaugino variation

Plugging the ansatz ( 5.37 ) into the gaugino variation @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The latter condition can be simplified further, but we will see in what
follows that it automatically becomes simpler or gets satisfied in
certain cases, so we will come back to ( 5.40 ) later. We will make use
of condition ( 5.39 ) when solving the gravitino integrability
conditions.

###### Hyperino variation

With the ansatz ( 5.37 ), setting the hyperino variation to zero gives
the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the independence of the gamma matrices, one finds

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (5.42)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

Using axial symmetry and the gauge choice for the vector fields, @xmath
, it follows that @xmath and @xmath , and these both vanish from the BPS
conditions. Furthermore, the hypers cannot depend on @xmath and @xmath ,
because this would induce such dependence also on the vector fields and
complex scalars via the Maxwell equations ( 5.34 ). Thus the hypers
cannot depend on any of the spacetime coordinates, so they are constant.
This will be important when we analyze the gravitino variation.

###### Gravitino variation

The gravitino equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

We study the integrability condition which follows from this equation.
The explicit computation is presented in appendix B.3 . The main result
that we will first focus on is equation ( B.9 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

so that there are two separate cases: @xmath or @xmath . We will study
these two cases in different subsections.

###### Case 1: T@xmath

In this case the integrability conditions imply that the spacetime is
maximally symmetric with constant scalar curvature @xmath , as further
explained in appendix B.3.1 . This corresponds either to Minkowski space
when @xmath , or AdS @xmath when the scalar curvature is non-zero.
Although there might be interesting half BPS solutions here, they will
certainly not describe black holes.

###### Case 2: @xmath

The second case is @xmath . We combine this identity with @xmath from (
5.39 ). We now obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrix between brackets on the left hand side is invertible. This
follows from the properties of special geometry, and we used it also in
the characterization of the maximally supersymmetric vacua in [ 1 ] . We
therefore conclude that @xmath . Next, we show that in this case we have
enough information to solve the gravitino variation and give the metric
functions.

From the definition for @xmath , the quaternionic @xmath connection
@xmath vanishes, as the hypers are constant by the arguments in section
5.3.2 . Combining this with @xmath , we see that the gravitino
variation ( 2.3 ) is precisely the same as in a theory without
hypermultiplets and vanishing FI-terms. Thus our problem reduces to
finding the most general solution of the gravitino variation in the
ungauged theory. The answer, as proven by [ 75 , 76 ] , is that this is
the well-known BLS solution [ 73 ] for stationary black holes (or naked
singularities and monopoles in certain cases). Thus we can use the BLS
solution, which in fact also solves the gaugino variation ( 5.40 ). We
now only have to impose the Maxwell equations, which are not the same as
in the BLS setup, due to the gauging of the hypermultiplets.

The sections are again described by functions @xmath and @xmath , as
in ( 5.10 ), although not all of them are harmonic. The metric and field
strengths are given by ( 5.11 ), ( 5.15 ) and ( 5.16 ). In terms of our
original description ( 5.32 ), we have that @xmath is three dimensional
flat space and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the ungauged case the Maxwell equations have no source term and the
field strengths are thus described by harmonic functions, while now in
our case they will be more complicated. We can then directly compare to
the original BLS solution described in section 5.3.2 and see how the new
equations of motion change it. At this point we have chosen the phase
@xmath in ( 5.37 ) to vanish, just as it does in the BLS solution. We
can do this without any loss of generality since an arbitrary phase just
appears in the intermediate results for the symplectic sections ( 5.10
), but drops out of the physical quantities such as the metric and the
field strengths.

We repeat that the Maxwell equations are given by ( 5.34 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined as in  ( 5.13 ). Since our Bianchi identities are
unmodified, and the same as in BLS, we again solve them by taking the
@xmath ’s to be harmonic functions. The difference is in the Maxwell
equations.

We plug in the identities from ( 5.42 ), ( 5.11 ) and ( 5.16 ). The
components of ( 5.47 ) with @xmath are then automatically satisfied. The
only non-trivial equation follows from @xmath , and reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is again the three-dimensional Laplacian in flat space. The
left hand side is real, and so is the right hand side, as a consequence
of the last equation in ( 5.42 ) and the fact that we have chosen the
phase in @xmath (see ( 5.37 ) to vanish. In other words, @xmath is real,
and therefore also @xmath is real.

We furthermore have a consistency condition for the field strengths. The
gauge potentials appear in ( 5.42 ), but also in ( 5.16 ), and these
should lead to the same solution. These consistency conditions were not
present in the ungauged case, since in that case there are no
restrictions on @xmath from the hyperino variation. The constraints can
be easily derived from the integrability conditions of  ( 5.42 ), and
are given by

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (5.49)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The first condition can always be satisfied as it merely implies that
some of the harmonic functions @xmath depend on the others (remember
that the hypermultiplet scalars are constant, and therefore also the
Killing vectors @xmath ). In more physical terms, this constraint
decreases the number of magnetic charges by the rank of @xmath . The
other constraints have to be checked against the explicit form of the
field strengths ( 5.15 ) and ( 5.16 ). This cannot be done generically
and has to be checked once an explicit model is taken.

In chapter 4 , we explained how the vanishing of @xmath and @xmath led
to a BPS solution using spontaneous symmetry breaking. We can see that
also from the equations of this section. When @xmath , the right hand
side of ( 5.48 ) is zero. This equation is then solved by harmonic
functions @xmath . Furthermore, as @xmath is constant, we can move it
inside the derivatives in ( 5.49 ), so the right hand sides are zero.
The left hand sides are zero as well, as @xmath . Finally, the condition
@xmath is satisfied as @xmath is already real.

##### 5.3.3 Solutions with scalar hair

In this section, we search for solutions of the above BPS conditions
that do not fall in the class described in chapter 4 . They describe
asymptotically flat black holes and would have non-trivial profiles for
the massive vector and scalar fields, i.e. they would be distinguishable
by the scalar hair degrees of freedom outside the black hole horizon.
Remarkably, we could not find models with pure scalar hair solutions
without the need to introduce some extra features, such as ghost modes
or non-vanishing fermions. Below, we describe two examples of solutions
that lead to at least one negative eigenvalue of the Kähler metric. We
show that if we require strictly positive definite kinetic terms in the
considered models, one cannot find scalar hair solutions, but only the
ones described in chapter 4 . It is of course hard to justify these
ghost solutions physically. However, there have been cases in literature
where this is not necessarily a problem, e.g. in Seiberg-Witten theory [
103 , 104 ] one has to perform duality transformation such that the
kinetic terms remain positive definite. Whether a similar story holds in
our case remains to be seen. If such duality transformations exist they
will have to map the ghost black hole solutions of our abelian
electrically gauged supergravity to proper black hole solutions,
possibly of magnetically gauged supergravity. However, we cannot present
any direct evidence for such a possibility.

###### Ghost solutions

Before we present our examples, we start with a general comment. We can
obtain some more information from the Einstein equations. The trace of
the Einstein equations reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar, and we have defined

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the BPS conditions in ( 5.42 ), one quickly finds @xmath .
Furthermore, as @xmath , we find ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 Recall that our spacetime
signature convention is @xmath . @xmath , and @xmath by equations ( 2.2
) and the condition @xmath . We therefore find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

as long as the metric @xmath is positive definite. So the BPS conditions
forbid the Ricci scalar @xmath to become negative. In our examples
below, the metric components will show some oscillatory behavior, as a
consequence of the non-linear differential equation ( 5.48 ). Therefore,
their derivatives, and hence the Ricci scalar, will oscillate between
positive and negative values. This would contradict the positivity bound
( 5.52 ), unless the Kähler metric @xmath contains regions in which it
is not positive definite. We now discuss this in detail with two
examples.

###### Quadratic prepotential

We start with two simple models, which have only one vector multiplet.
They are described by the two prepotentials

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

These lead to the special Kähler metrics

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . With the upper sign, we therefore get a negative definite
Kähler metric and the vector multiplet scalar is a ghost field. With the
lower sign, we obtain a positive definite metric. We couple this to the
universal hypermultiplet, and gauge isometry 5 from appendix D , using
@xmath as the gauge field. The condition @xmath fixes @xmath and the
only non-vanishing component of the Killing vectors is then @xmath ,
where @xmath is a constant.

From the relations ( 5.10 ) follows that @xmath and @xmath . The Kähler
potential ( 2.16 ) is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we do not use @xmath for the gauging, @xmath remains harmonic, such
that even if the solution for @xmath is considerably different, we still
have hope of producing a black hole by having @xmath as a small
perturbation of the leading term @xmath in the metric function @xmath .
For simplicity, we restrict ourself to the spherically symmetric
single-centered case, so now our constraints ( 5.49 ) lead to @xmath and
@xmath . The latter eventually implies that @xmath is constant. Since we
can absorb this constant by rescaling @xmath , we will set @xmath . Thus
we are left with @xmath ( @xmath ), where we set the constant of the
harmonic function to @xmath to obtain canonically normalized Minkowski
space as @xmath .

The metric is given by ( 5.11 ), where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only undetermined function is @xmath , which is subject to the only
equation left to be satisfied, ( 5.48 ), which in this case is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

after setting @xmath . Besides the trivial solution @xmath (belonging to
the class solutions from chapter 4 ), we could not find an analytic
solution to these equations. We can analyze the differential equation as
@xmath and @xmath . As @xmath , we require @xmath , to obtain flat space
at infinity. Likewise, we require, as @xmath , that @xmath , to obtain
@xmath at the horizon. The constant @xmath (which is not necessarily
equal to @xmath ) determines the (equal) radii of @xmath and @xmath . If
we solve ( 5.57 ) for large values of @xmath , we have to solve @xmath ;
for small values of @xmath we have to solve @xmath .

-   With the upper sign (the ghost model), we find the general solution

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.58)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.59)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    As long as @xmath , all the asymptotics are fine.

-   With the lower sign (the non-ghost model), we find the general
    solution

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.60)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.61)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    When @xmath is nonzero, this violates the boundary condition that
    @xmath as @xmath , so we have to set @xmath . Likewise, we have to
    set @xmath . We will now prove that imposing such boundary
    conditions implies @xmath . To do this, we use the identity

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.62)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Using ( 5.60 ) and ( 5.61 ) one finds that, for @xmath , the
    boundary term vanishes. On the left-hand side, we use ( 5.57 ), and
    we obtain (using @xmath )

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.63)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The left-hand side is non-negative, whereas the right-hand side is
    non-positive, so this proves @xmath . This argument can easily be
    repeated for solutions with only axial symmetry.

We could plot the solution with the upper sign numerically with generic
starting conditions, and the result is that the scalar field @xmath
oscillates around zero in the region of interest. The metric function
also gets oscillatory perturbations, while having its endpoints fixed to
the desired values. This is due to the fact that the function @xmath
approaches zero as @xmath in an oscillatory fashion. To investigate the
behavior near the horizon at @xmath , we also checked that @xmath
approaches zero, and hence @xmath diverges slower than @xmath . Both are
in agreement with the asymptotic analysis above.

The numerics further show that the metric function for negative values
of @xmath yields the expected singularity at @xmath . We conclude that
this is indeed a black hole spacetime, having one electric charge @xmath
, and the fluctuations around the usual form of the metric are due to
the effect of the abelian gauging of the hypermultiplet.

Let us now try to give a bit more physical interpretation of this new
black hole spacetime. After more careful inspection of the solution, we
see that at the horizon and asymptotically at infinity we again have
supersymmetry enhancement, since the vector multiplet scalars are fixed
to a constant value. It is interesting that the electric charge,
associated to the broken gauge symmetry vanishes at the horizon, i.e.
the black hole itself is not charged with @xmath exactly as in the
normal case without ghosts. Yet there is a non-zero charge density for
this charge everywhere in the spacetime outside the black hole, which is
the qualitatively new feature of the ghost solutions. Clearly the fact
that there is non-vanishing charge density everywhere in spacetime does
not change the asymptotic behavior, but it seems that it is physically
responsible for the ripples that can be observed in the metric function
(of course this is all related to the fact that we have propagating
ghost fields). We should note that these are not the first rippled black
hole solutions, similar behavior is found in the higher derivative
ungauged solutions, e.g. in [ 105 ] , where one again finds ghost modes
in the resulting theory. The detailed analysis in section 4 of [ 105 ]
holds in our case, i.e. the main physical feature of the ripples is that
gravitational force changes from attractive to repulsive in some
spacetime points.

###### Cubic prepotential

The example above shows already the general qualitatively new features
of this class of black holes with ghost fields, but is still not
interesting from a string theory point of view, since Calabi-Yau
compactifications lead to cubic prepotentials of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The simplest case one can consider is the STU model of section 5.3.1 .
We coupled it to the universal hypermultiplet with a single gauged
isometry and found it impossible to produce any new solutions. However,
other choices of @xmath allow for interesting numerical solutions of (
5.48 ). For this purpose we consider a relatively simple model with
three vector multiplets:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

We again use the universal hypermultiplet and gauge the same isometry as
before, but we now use only @xmath for our gauging. Again, the condition
@xmath fixes @xmath , and the only non-vanishing component of the
Killing vector is @xmath . In parts of moduli space this model exhibits
proper Calabi-Yau behavior, i.e. the Kähler metric is positive definite,
but there are regions where @xmath has negative eigenvalues (or @xmath
becomes negative). There is no general expression for this so-called
positivity domain; one has to analyze an explicit model to find the
conditions.

For simplicity, we set @xmath , so the non-vanishing functions are
@xmath and @xmath . Inverting ( 5.10 ) we obtain for the Kähler
potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that, as is commonly encountered in these models, one has to
choose the signs of the functions @xmath and @xmath such that this gives
a real and positive quantity. With these we satisfy all conditions in (
5.49 ) and are left to solve ( 5.48 ) that explicitly reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are harmonic functions, and we have set @xmath
for convenience.

We impose the same boundary conditions, so as @xmath , we require @xmath
, to obtain flat space at infinity. Likewise, we require, as @xmath ,
that @xmath , to obtain AdS @xmath S @xmath at the horizon. Using ( 5.66
), we then find that we have to solve

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      @xmath      (5.68)
     @xmath   @xmath      @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is also a constant, specified by the asymptotics of @xmath
and @xmath . We therefore again find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -- --------

These functions are oscillating; therefore the Kähler potential ( 5.66 )
will also oscillate. This causes the Ricci scalar to become negative,
which is in violation of the bound ( 5.52 ). Therefore, there is always
a negative eigenvalue of the metric, corresponding to a ghost mode.

We could only find a numerical solution to this equation, and the
results are qualitatively the same as the ones with quadratic
prepotential, so we will not elaborate the details for this model.

It is therefore possible to find black hole solutions in these
Calabi-Yau models, but they do contain regions in which some of the
scalars become ghost-like.

###### Fermionic hair

There is a different way of generating scalar hair with properly
normalized positive-definite kinetic terms. As such, we can thereby
avoid the ghost-like behavior of the previously discussed examples. The
idea is simple and works for any solution that breaks some
supersymmetry. By acting with the broken susy generators on a bosonic
solution, we will turn on the fermionic fields to yield the fermionic
zero modes. These fermionic zero modes solve the linearized equations of
motion and produce fermionic hair. In turn, the fermionic hair sources
the equations of motion for the bosonic field, and in particular, the
scalar field equations will have a source term which is bilinear in the
fermions. The solution of this equation produces scalar hair and can be
found explicitly by iterating again with the broken supersymmetries.
This iteration procedure stops after a finite number of steps and
produces a new solution to the full non-linear equations of motion. By
starting with a BPS black hole solution of the type discussed in chapter
4 , one therefore produces new solutions with both fermionic and scalar
hair. For a discussion on this for black holes in ungauged supergravity,
see [ 106 ] .

The explicit realization of this idea is fairly complicated since it
requires to explicitly find the Killing spinors preserving
supersymmetry. This can sometimes be done also just by considering the
possible bosonic and fermionic deformations of the theory, as done in
e.g. [ 107 , 108 ] for black holes in ungauged supergravity. The
extension of this fermionic-hair analysis to gauged supergravities would
certainly be an interesting extension of our work.

### Chapter 6 Asymptotically AdS black holes

#### 6.1 Introduction

Compared to their Minkowski relatives, black holes in AdS @xmath have
been somewhat neglected in the literature. This is understandable, since
such solutions seem not to be relevant for describing observable objects
in our universe. However, due to the AdS/CFT correspondence, solutions
in AdS presently enjoy a great deal of attention. The thermal black
objects in AdS turn out to be relevant for describing the effective
physics in quark-gluon plasmas and various condensed matter phenomena at
strong coupling, such as high temperature superconductivity and quantum
Hall effect. The problem of constructing and classifying solutions in
AdS is therefore more pressing than ever.

Before going into a more technical discussion, it is important to
explain that the usage of the term “black hole” in AdS has a much
broader meaning than in Minkowski. Unlike the case for asymptotically
flat static black holes, the topology of the horizon of AdS @xmath black
holes is not unique. The horizon can be a Riemann surface of any genus
as explained in [ 109 ] . The black holes can thus be divided into three
classes - spherical, or ordinary, black holes, toroidal black holes or
black branes in the infinite volume limit, and higher genus black holes.
All these objects share the same thermodynamics properties, like the
entropy-area law.

In this zoo of black objects it is fairly easy to lose track of the
discussion. In order to ease the presentation, we relegate the analysis
of the three major types of black holes to separate sections. The focus
of this work falls on spherical black holes, which are very thoroughly
analyzed, but the interested reader can find a comprehensive (although
much shorter) discussion of the other two cases.

###### Plan of this chapter

Section 6.2 is devoted to a literature review on spherical black holes
in AdS with an emphasis on supersymmetric results. After a general
introduction to the basic types of black hole solutions in minimal
gauges supergravity, section 6.2.1 and 6.2.2 aim at generalizing these
results in order to allow for additional matter multiplets. Section
6.2.1 exemplifies the solution generating technique of chapter 4 , while
section 6.2.2 is devoted to the static electric Reissner-Nordström-AdS
solutions with nontrivial scalars [ 110 ] .

Section 6.3 is entirely focused on a new type of static spherically
symmetric BPS black holes with magnetic charges. These solutions require
non-constant scalar profiles in order to develop event horizons. As we
will see in the following chapters, these black holes define a separate
vacuum solution that is topologically disconnected from AdS @xmath .
Still, their spacetime asymptotics provide a good evidence that a
version of the gauge/gravity correspondence should be applicable.

Sections 6.4 and 6.5 discuss the cases of black branes and higher genus
black holes, respectively. Many analogies are drawn with the spherically
symmetric solutions, while the differences are clearly emphasized and
pursued.

#### 6.2 Spherical solutions

The main types of spherically symmetric black holes in AdS @xmath
closely resemble their flat analogs, with one additional parameter
corresponding to the cosmological constant, or radius of AdS. As a
start, we consider the solutions embeddable in minimal gauged
supergravity, i.e. Einstein-Maxwell theory with a bare cosmological
constant. As a consequence of the gauging, there is an additional
subtlety in this theory. Recall that in minimal gauged supergravity the
@xmath symmetry of the gravitinos is promoted to a local one via the
graviphoton. Although not explicitly given as a formula, this naturally
means that the kinetic term of the gravitinos in the lagrangian acquires
a gauge covariant derivative, with the term @xmath in it, i.e. the
gravitinos become charged under the graviphoton with an electric charge
@xmath , which is also giving the bare cosmological constant, @xmath .
Due to this electric charge (the gauging is electric, therefore the
gravitinos remain with a vanishing magnetic charge), a Dirac
quantization condition is imposed on every solution of the theory: each
object needs to have a magnetic charge @xmath that obeys @xmath . Since
the magnetic charge of the gravitinos is zero, the electric charge of
the solutions remains a continuous parameter, at least a priori. This
subtlety of the quantum theory might on first sight be of little
relevance for the topic of classical solutions, but we will soon find
that supersymmetry is not oblivious to these issues. Without further
delay, we can now discuss the different types of static and stationary
solutions in minimal gauged supergravity.

###### Static solutions

First we focus on static spherically symmetric spacetimes with metrics
of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some functions @xmath and @xmath to be determined from the BPS
conditions and/or the equations of motion.

For Minkowski spacetime, we had @xmath and @xmath , and for
four-dimensional anti-de Sitter spacetime, one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is related to the cosmological constant of AdS @xmath
through the scalar curvature relation @xmath . So, in the standard
conventions the cosmological constant is @xmath . The simplest
generalization of AdS is to Schwarzschild-AdS, with mass @xmath and
vanishing charges:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Just as in the asymptotically flat case, there is no extremal
Schwarzschild-AdS black hole and only positive masses result in an event
horizon. From the point of view of the AdS/CFT correspondence, a
Schwarzschild-AdS with positive mass corresponds to a thermal field
theory on the boundary.

We then move to the more interesting (from the supersymmetry point of
view) case when we allow for non-vanishing graviphoton field strength.
For the Reisnner-Nordström black hole solution in AdS @xmath (RN-AdS),
with mass @xmath and electric and magnetic charges @xmath and @xmath ,
we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Imposing BPS conditions leads to exactly two different possibilities in
pure supergravity without vector multiplets, as analyzed long ago in [
102 ] . One solution is usually referred to as ”extreme RN-AdS electric
solution”, it is half-BPS and it requires @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The function @xmath has no zeroes and therefore no event horizon exist.
The point @xmath is then a naked singularity. The other solution is
referred to as an ”exotic AdS solution” and is only quarter-BPS,
imposing @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This case has no flat space limit for @xmath and is therefore very
different in behavior from the first solution. Still, the solution has a
naked singularity.

The aim of the following sections is to find generalizations of these
BPS solutions that include vector and hypermultiplets. The extension of
the extreme RN-AdS solutions for many vector multiplets and non-trivial
scalars has been investigated in [ 110 ] with the outcome of nakedly
singular spacetimes once again, which will be discussed in detail in
section 6.2.2 . Some generalizations of the exotic solution also exist
in the literature, e.g. in [ 111 ] , but these set the scalars to
constants and are thus not general enough to resolve the naked
singularity. Our strategy will be to replace the cosmological constant
with a nontrivial potential for the vector multiplet scalars that
contains Fayet-Iliopoulos terms, see more in section 6.3 .

###### Kerr-Newman-AdS

The Kerr-Newman-AdS (KN-AdS) spacetime is the most general stationary
solution in AdS @xmath . Just as the KN black hole in Minkowski, KN-AdS
has a mass parameter @xmath , electric and magnetic charges @xmath and
@xmath (with @xmath ), and angular momentum parameter @xmath . The
metric is axisymmetric and is written in Boyer-Lindquist-type
coordinates,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the metric we can see that the spacetime is well-defined only when
@xmath , i.e. the angular momentum is bounded from above.. This comes
from the requirement that the angular velocity at the conformal AdS
boundary ( @xmath ) does not exceed the speed of light, see [ 112 ] .
The analysis of KN-AdS black hole thermodynamics and extremality
conditions is slightly more involved and can be found in [ 109 , 112 ]
.The conditions imposed from supercharge conservation on the parameters
@xmath will be discussed in details in the next part of this thesis.
Here we just note that the BPS KN-AdS solution is the only
supersymmetric configuration in minimal gauged supergravity with a
genuine horizon, corresponding to a black hole with a finite entropy.

##### 6.2.1 Solutions via spontaneous symmetry breaking

The simplest solutions in gauged supergravity are the of course the ones
where the scalars are just constants. Because of the non-trivial scalar
potential of the gauged lagrangian ( 2.1 ), however, the scalars cannot
be just frozen to arbitrary constants. In principle one can try to find
all minima of the scalar potential in a given solution, but this is
often an impossible task if the number of scalars is too big. A way out
is provided by our analysis in chapter 4 which essentially provides a
way of finding the supersymmetric minima of the scalar potential.

Here we give a simple but yet qualitatively very general example of how
to apply the procedure outlined above to find asymptotically anti-de
Sitter black hole solutions with gauged hypers, starting from already
known black hole solutions without hypers. In this case we start from a
solution of pure supergravity and add abelian gauged vector multiplets
and hypermultiplets. Alternatively, one can think of it as breaking the
gauge symmetry such that all hyper- and vector multiplets become
massive, and one is left with a gravity multiplet with cosmological
constant. Here we already know the full classification of black hole
solutions, as described above.

An already worked out example in section 3.4.2 is the case of the gauged
supergravity, arising from a consistent reduction to four dimensions of
M-theory on a Sasaki-Einstein @xmath manifold [ 70 ] . The resulting
low-energy effective action has a single vector multiplet and a single
hypermultiplet (the universal hypermultiplet). The special geometry
prepotential is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , where @xmath is the vector multiplet scalar, and the
isometries on the UHM are given by

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

which is combination of isometries 1 and 4 from appendix D . The
corresponding moment maps, see appendix D , are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Maximally supersymmetric AdS @xmath vacua were found in section 3.4.2 .
The condition ( 4.6 ) fixes the values of the vector multiplet scalar
@xmath and two of the four hypers @xmath . The third ungauged hyper,
which is the dilaton, is fixed to the constant non-zero value @xmath .
The remaining hypermultiplet scalar is an arbitrary constant @xmath .
All the gauge fields have vanishing expectation values at this fully
supersymmetric AdS @xmath vacuum. If we now expand the scalar field
potential ( 2.2 ) up to second order in fields we obtain the following
mass terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can see that three of the hyperscalars and the (complex) vector
multiplet scalar acquire mass. There is also a mass term @xmath for the
gauge field @xmath , this field thus eats up the remaining massless
hyperscalar @xmath . So we observe the formation of a massive @xmath
vector multiplet consisting of one massive vector and five massive
scalars, and we can consistently set all these fields to zero. The
resulting Lagrangian is that of pure @xmath supergravity with a
cosmological constant @xmath . Using the static class of black hole
solutions in minimal gauged supergravity, it is straightforward to
provide a solution of the gauged supergravity theory. All the solutions
described in the beginning of this section will also be solutions in our
considered model as they obey the Einstein-Maxwell equations of pure
supergravity.

##### 6.2.2 1/2 BPS solutions

Here we briefly summarize the solutions of Sabra, [ 110 ] , which
generalize the extreme-electric RN-AdS configurations of minimal gauged
supergravity. In short, the solutions of are in gauged supergravity with
an arbitrary number of vector multiplets and @xmath FI parameters @xmath
. The solutions are purely electric with arbitrary charges @xmath . The
metric and symplectic sections are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.11)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

These solutions represent nakedly singular spacetimes that preserve 4 of
the original 8 supercharges. They seem to be the most general static
supersymmetric solutions with spherical symmetry that strictly asymptote
²⁷ ²⁷ 27 The solutions presented in the following section have
non-vanishing magnetic charge coming from the graviphoton and will not
be counted as asymptotically AdS. This is explained carefully in the
coming chapters. to AdS @xmath . It is natural to expect that
supersymmetry preserving generalizations of the KN-AdS spacetimes with
non-constant scalars should exist, but these have not been constructed
yet.

#### 6.3 Static magnetic spherical BPS black holes

This section deals with a BPS extension of the exotic AdS @xmath nakedly
singular solution discussed briefly in the previous section. Recall that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will see that there exist generalizations of this within @xmath
gauged supergravity such that this naked singularity is resolved due to
non-trivial scalar behavior.

Anticipating our results, we now briefly explain how the exotic solution
is modified to make a proper black hole in AdS @xmath . We set the
electric charges to zero but allow for non-trivial scalars, which will
in the end result in changing the metric function @xmath to be ²⁸ ²⁸ 28
Here, the discussion is only schematic in order to underline the main
point, the actual solution is more involved as we explain in section
6.3.3 . There we also comment further on the other function in the
metric, @xmath . :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a constant @xmath that depends on the explicit running of the
scalars. The important outcome from this is that in certain cases we
will have @xmath , and then a horizon will appear at @xmath to shield
the singularity. In this way, one can find a static quarter-BPS
asymptotically AdS @xmath black hole with nontrivial scalar fields and
magnetic charges.

##### 6.3.1 Gauged supergravity with Fayet-Iliopoulos parameters

In this section we focus on abelian gauged @xmath supergravity in four
dimensions in the absence of hypermultiplets. We consider @xmath vector
multiplets and briefly recall some already discussed facts about @xmath
gaugings with FI parameters. This will be needed to make a distinction
later when discussing lagrangians with magnetic FI parameters. Recall
that as the gauge group is abelian, the vector multiplet scalars are
neutral, and the only charged fields in the theory are the two
gravitinos. The gauge fields that couple to the gravitinos appear in a
linear combination of the graviphoton and the @xmath vectors from the
vectormultiplets, @xmath , with @xmath . The bosonic part of the
Lagrangian for such a system is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the scalar potential. The supercovariant derivative of the spinor
reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for the gravitino’s

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fact that only @xmath appears in the supersymmetry transformation
rules and covariant derivatives reflects the fact that the @xmath
symmetry is broken to @xmath .

We have to stress that the above theory is gauged only electrically,
since we have used only electric fields @xmath for the gauging of the
gravitino. Thus the FI parameters can be thought of as the electric
charges @xmath of the gravitino fields, with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fact that the gravitinos have opposite electric charge finds its
origin from the eigenvalues of @xmath . Generically in such a theory one
encounters a Dirac-like quantization condition in the presence of
magnetic charges @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

as explained already in the previous section. Clearly, ( 6.19 ) is not a
symplectic invariant, due to the choice of the gauging. Later, in
section 6.3.4 , we generalize this to include also magnetic gaugings.

##### 6.3.2 Black hole ansatz and Killing spinors

As already stated above, we look for a supersymmetric solution similar
to the “exotic AdS solution” of [ 102 ] , but with nonconstant scalar
fields. We start with the general static metric ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and corresponding vielbein

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-vanishing components of the spin connection turn out to be:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

We further assume that the gauge field strengths are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

or alternatively

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are needed in the BPS equations below. If we allow also electric
charges, we then should use an electromagnetic basis @xmath ²⁹ ²⁹ 29
Recall that the magnetic field strengths can be defined from the
lagrangian to be

@xmath

, and require

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

These automatically solve the Maxwell equations and Bianchi identities
in full analogy to the case of ungauged supergravity ³⁰ ³⁰ 30 Notice
that the vector field part of the lagrangian ( 6.14 ) is the same as in
the ungauged theory, so they have the same equations of motion.The only
difference appears in the coupling to the gravitinos. [ 73 ] . However,
we start with a purely electric gauging ( 6.14 ) and we set the electric
charges of the black hole to zero since otherwise we cannot directly
solve for the gauge fields @xmath that are needed for the BPS equations.
This is a particular choice we make at this point in view of the BPS
conditions we derive below. In section 6.3.4 we will explain how to
explicitly find a solution also with electric charges in a more general
electromagnetic gauging frame.

###### Killing spinor ansatz

With the gamma matrix conventions spelled out in appendix A we make the
following ansatz for the (chiral) Killing spinors:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant phase, and the choice of sign in
the second condition will lead to two distinguishable Killing spinor
solutions with corresponding BPS equations. This Killing spinor ansatz
corresponds (in our conventions for chiral spinors) to the Killing
spinor projections derived in [ 102 ] for the exotic solutions. Note
that the choice of phase @xmath is irrelevant due to @xmath symmetry,
i.e. any value of @xmath leads to the exact same physical solution. It
will nevertheless amount to putting the symplectic sections of the
vector multiplet moduli space in a particular frame, as we explain in
more detail in the next subsection. Furthermore, from the above
equations one can deduce that the Killing spinor can be parametrized as
follows. Using our convention from App. A , one finds that, @xmath , for
the upper sign (which we call type @xmath ) in ( 6.26 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the negative sign (type II) one finds,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This type of Killing spinors explicitly break @xmath of the
supersymmetry. The two degrees of freedom of the complex function @xmath
give the remaining two supercharges.

We look for spacetimes that are static and spherically symmetric, so in
particular invariant under the rotation group. This rotation group acts
on spinors, and can in general leave or not leave our Killing spinor
ansatz invariant. It will be a check on our explicit solution for the
Killing spinors that they should be also rotationally invariant, just as
in the original case for exotic solutions [ 102 ] .

Note that our choice of Killing spinors makes them timelike, i.e. they
give rise to a timelike Killing vector (see [ 101 , 75 , 76 ] for more
details about Killing spinor identities). It was already shown in
section 5.3.2 that, to obtain a supersymmetric solution, one needs to
check only the Maxwell equations and Bianchi identities in addition to
the BPS conditions. The equations of motion for the other fields then
follow, due to the timelike Killing spinor.

###### BPS conditions and attractor flow

With the above ansätze for the spacetime and the Killing spinors one can
show that the gaugino and gravitino variations ( 2.4 ), ( 2.3 ) simplify
substantially but do not yet vanish identically.

From the gaugino variation we obtain the following radial flow equations
for the scalar fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the two different signs correspond to the two types of Killing
spinors in the given order.

If we require the gravitino variation ( 2.3 ) to vanish, we derive four
extra equations that need to be satisfied (one for each spacetime
index). The equations for @xmath and @xmath determine the radial
dependence of the metric components,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath component of the gravitino variation further constrains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the radial part gives a differential equation for the Killing
spinor, solved by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

the @xmath Kähler connection. These results are in agreement with
rotational symmetry since the Killing spinor is only a function of
@xmath . The solution is 1/4 BPS and has two conserved supercharges,
corresponding to the two free numbers of the complex constant @xmath .
We further see that ( 6.33 ) does not give an extra constraint on the
fields, but can be used to determine the explicit radial dependence of
the Killing spinor parameter @xmath . One can always evaluate the
integral of @xmath for a given solution and thus the Killing spinor can
be explicitly found once the BPS equations ( 6.29 )-( 6.32 ) are
satisfied.

Notice also that ( 6.32 ) is in accordance with the generalized Dirac
quantization condition ( 6.19 ) with the smallest non-zero integer
@xmath . It will be interesting to understand how one can generate other
solutions with higher values of @xmath or whether supersymmetry always
strictly constrains @xmath as in the present case. Furthermore, it is
easy to see that in the limit @xmath where the gauging vanishes one
recovers the well-known first order attractor flow equations of black
holes in ungauged @xmath supergravity [ 88 , 91 , 92 ] . The presence of
the extra terms due to the gauging is precisely where the difference
between ungauged and gauged black holes lies. Thus we believe the BPS
equations are now written in a simpler and more suggestive form compared
to [ 21 ] (see also [ 22 ] where the above BPS equations are derived
from a different perspective by a smart rewriting of the original
lagrangian).

A short comment on the phase @xmath is in order. One can see in eqs. (
6.30 ), ( 6.31 ) that the quantities @xmath must always be real. Thus,
if e.g. @xmath then @xmath will need to be real, while if @xmath ,
@xmath have to be imaginary. This @xmath symmetry of the BPS conditions
is of course well understood in the ungauged case and there are
generally two ways of proceeding. One can just fix the phase to a
particular value and go on to write down the solutions, as originally
done in [ 73 ] , or one can also put explicitly the phase factor in the
definition of the sections as done in [ 96 ] . Here we choose to fix
@xmath for the rest of the section as it will minimize the factors of
@xmath in what follows (note that [ 73 ] makes the opposite choice and
thus the solutions are given for the imaginary instead of the real parts
of the sections). It should be clear how one can always plug back the
factor of @xmath and choose a different phase if needed in different
conventions. In particular this choice implies that (after adding ( 6.30
) and ( 6.31 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 6.3.3 Black hole solutions

Now we would like to find explicit solutions to eqs. ( 6.29 )-( 6.31 ).
We already know (by assumption) the solution for the vector field
strengths ( 6.23 ), so we search for solutions of the metric functions
@xmath and the symplectic sections @xmath that determine the scalars. We
propose the following form for the solution of the BPS equations in the
electric frame (for the choice of phase @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Kähler potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath some constant. The line element of the spacetime is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant @xmath above is not specified yet and depends explicitly on
the chosen model. This is also the case for the constants @xmath that
may eventually be expressed in terms of the FI parameters @xmath and the
magnetic charges @xmath . We give some explicit examples in section
6.3.5 . Here we just use the above results to show how the BPS equations
simplify to a form where they can be explicitly solved given a
particular model with a prepotential (we further assume that ( 6.36 )
implies @xmath in accordance with ( 6.35 )). Eqs. ( 6.30 )-( 6.31 ),
together with ( 6.36 )-( 6.37 ), lead to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Multiplying ( 6.29 ) with @xmath we eventually obtain

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.42)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We chose to rewrite it in this form in order to have equations only for
the symplectic sections, as standardly done also in ungauged black holes
literature [ 73 ] . In principle however @xmath is non-invertible and
thus ( 6.42 ) does not strictly speaking imply ( 6.29 ). Practically
this never seems to be an issue since in fact ( 6.42 ) gives one extra
equation. In all cases we solved explicitly the equations, we found that
the condition coming from the gaugino variation is already automatically
satisfied after solving ( 6.40 ) and ( 6.41 ). Unfortunately, we were
not able to prove that it must vanish identically with the above ansatz.

Using ( 6.36 ) it is straightforward to prove that the Kähler connection
( 6.34 ) vanishes identically (c.f. Eq.(29) of [ 73 ] ). Thus the
functional dependence of the Killing spinors becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

just as in the original solution without scalars [ 102 ] .

Note that with ( 6.36 ) one can now also show that the field strengths (
6.23 ) identically solve the Bianchi identities and the Maxwell equation
as they fall in the form ( 6.25 ) with @xmath . Thus any solution of (
6.40 )-( 6.42 ) will be a supersymmetric solution of the theory with no
further constraints.

One particular solution (the only one in absence of vector multiplets)
of the above equations that is always present, is when @xmath , @xmath ,
for all @xmath , and @xmath . This solution is in fact the one
discovered in [ 111 ] with constant scalars ( @xmath is constant when
@xmath ). However, this solution has a naked singularity, since @xmath .
A horizon is not present in this case, since generally it will appear at
@xmath and thus only for @xmath . We will see in section 6.3.5 that
indeed there exist solutions of the above equations in which @xmath ,
such that a proper horizon shields the singularity. These solutions
however necessarily have nonzero @xmath ’s. Thus a proper black hole can
only form in the presence of some sort of attractor mechanism for the
scalar fields.

##### 6.3.4 Black holes with electric and magnetic charges

We now explain how one can restore the broken electromagnetic duality
invariance of the theory ( 6.14 ). As discussed in section 6.3.1 , the
electric gaugings break electromagnetic invariance, i.e. performing
symplectic rotations leads us to a new lagrangian that will be of
different form from ( 6.14 ). One then needs to allow for both electric
and magnetic gaugings and change the form of the scalar potential in
order to recover the electromagnetic invariance of the ungauged theory.
There have been various proposals in literature for extending it to
gauged supergravity [ 63 , 113 , 46 ] . It turns out that the correct
approach to introducing real magnetic gaugings is the embedding tensor
formalism, and we closely follow the analysis of [ 47 , 50 ] . It
restores full electromagnetic duality invariance of the gauge theory
(when the electric and magnetic charges are mutually local) by
introducing additional tensor fields in the Lagrangian. Unfortunately
the theory is not yet fully developed in general for supergravity (for
rigid @xmath supersymmetry, see [ 48 ] ), but we will nevertheless be
able to write down particular solutions due to the fact that we can do
duality transformations on the solutions of the electrically gauged
theory.

Even though we cannot give the most general lagrangian and susy
variations for the theory with electric and magnetic gaugings, we know
how the bosonic part of the Lagrangian should look like in this very
special case of FI gaugings. It is most instructive to integrate out the
additional tensor field that has to be introduced, following the
procedure of section 5.1 of [ 47 ] . Exactly half of the gauge fields
(we will originally have both electric and magnetic gauge fields, @xmath
) will also be integrated out in this process. One first splits the
index @xmath in two parts, @xmath , for the non-vanishing electric and
magnetic gauge fields respectively. The lagrangian will then consist
only of @xmath , while @xmath are integrated out together with the
additional tensor field. Thus the linear combination of fields used for
the @xmath FI gauging is @xmath . The @xmath ’s are the magnetic charges
of the gravitinos, and the new generalized Dirac quantization condition
for electric and magnetic charges @xmath of any solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with electric and magnetic gravitino charges @xmath and @xmath . The
scalar potential is then of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The main point about electromagnetic invariance is that the equations of
motion are now invariant under the group @xmath , which at the same time
rotates the lagrangian from a purely electric gauging frame to a more
general electromagnetic gauging. The symplectic vectors transforming
under the symmetry group are the sections @xmath and the FI parameters
@xmath , as well as the vector field strengths @xmath (which come from
the respective electric and magnetic gauge potentials @xmath ). One can
then see how natural equations ( 6.44 ),( 6.45 ) are if we start from a
purely electric frame with only @xmath nonzero and then perform an
arbitrary symplectic transformation. The important message is that once
we have found a solution to the purely electric theory we can always
perform any symplectic transformation of the theory to see how the
solution looks like in a more general electromagnetic setting.

It is in fact easy to guess how the solution looks like in a more
general theory with electric and magnetic gaugings. We have not proven
the existence of such a BPS solution due to the lack of a properly
defined lagrangian and supersymmetry variations, but we can nevertheless
indirectly find it by symplectic rotations. This procedure leads to a
solution, where the metric is again given by ( 6.39 ), together with

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.46)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

and harmonic functions that determine the sections

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.47)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The above should give solutions provided that the following identities
(coming from the BPS conditions) are satisfied,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with the symplectic invariant version of ( 6.42 ) coming from
contraction with @xmath . This expression becomes lengthy and cumbersome
to check and we will not write it down explicitly. In this case it will
be easier to explicitly check the symplectic invariant version of ( 6.29
) by first defining the complex vector multiplet scalars from the
sections. Of course in case of confusion one can always take a model and
rotate it to the electric frame where the susy variations are clearly
spelled out (( 2.3 )-( 2.4 )).

##### 6.3.5 Explicit black hole solutions

###### @xmath with @xmath

This is the simplest prepotential in the ordinary electrically gauged
theory that leads to a black hole solution. We have one vector multiplet
with the prepotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus one finds @xmath from ( 6.36 ). This theory exhibits an AdS @xmath
vacuum at the minimum of the scalar potential (corresponding to the
cosmological constant)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

at @xmath (defining @xmath ). This can be easily deduced using the
results of the previous chapters. Going through the BPS equations ( 6.40
)-( 6.41 ), we can fix all the constants of the solution in terms of the
FI parameters @xmath apart from one free parameter (here we leave @xmath
to be free for convenience, but it can be traded for one of the magnetic
charges or for @xmath ). We obtain that the magnetic charges are given
by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

for spinor I and II respectively. The other constants in the solution
are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the definition of the gravitino charges ( 6.18 ), @xmath , these
relations imply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

and one can check that the complete solution is a function of the
variables @xmath and @xmath . Note that in fact the dependence on @xmath
is artificial since it can always be absorbed in the definition of the
coordinates. In particular, the rescaling @xmath makes the metric and
the scalar flow dependent only on @xmath as is also the form of the
solution presented in [ 21 ] .

Interestingly, one can verify that the condition coming from the gaugino
variation, ( 6.42 ), is automatically satisfied with no further
constraints. One can see that the two spinor types in the end amount to
having opposite magnetic charges and to flipping some signs for the
solution of the sections.

We now analyze the physical properties of the solution. In this case it
is important to give explicitly the metric function in front of the
@xmath term. Using the form of the line element in ( 6.39 ), the
specific form of the sections with constants given in ( 6.54 ), one can
explicitly compute:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The leading terms of the (infinite) asymptotic expansion of the metric
for @xmath are then

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.57)
  -- -- -- --------

Clearly, the metric has the correct AdS @xmath asymptotics. Although the
constant term of the asymptotic expansion is not exactly @xmath when we
compare to the RN-AdS metric, we are still tempted to think that the
coefficient in front of the @xmath term determines the physical mass of
the black hole,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The issue of defining the mass is a bit more subtle in asymptotically
AdS spacetimes and we address it more carefully in the following
chapters, where we show that this naive expectation is in fact wrong.

One can also notice that there are some subtleties for the radial
coordinate that usually do not appear for black hole spacetimes. In
particular, @xmath is neither a horizon (where @xmath ), nor a
singularity (where @xmath ). In fact the point @xmath is never part of
the spacetime, since the singularity is always at a positive @xmath ,
where the space should be cut off. Thus the @xmath coordinate does not
directly correspond to the radial coordinate from the singularity. The
horizon for both signs is at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

while genuine singularities will appear at @xmath . The spacetime will
then continue only until the first singularity is encountered. If we
want to have an actual black hole spacetime we must insist that the
horizon shields the singularity, i.e. @xmath , otherwise we again have a
naked singularity and the sphere at @xmath will not be part of the
spacetime. This requirement further sets the constraints @xmath , with
@xmath for solution I (upper sign) and @xmath for solution II (lower
sign). Since the parameter @xmath is at our disposal, it can always be
chosen to be within the required range, thus the singularity can be
shielded by a horizon in a particular parameter range for @xmath . So,
putting together both solutions, we know that a proper black hole with a
horizon will form in case @xmath , with the corresponding relations
given above between the magnetic charges and @xmath for the two
intervals. In between, we are dealing with naked singularities, which
are of no interest for us at present. The constant @xmath is always
negative, and satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

which reflects again the existence of a horizon, as announced in section
2.

Let us now investigate further the properties of these new black holes.
Their entropy is proportional to the area of the black hole at the
horizon,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the entropy is effectively a function of @xmath , which can be
rewritten in terms of the FI-terms and magnetic charges. Thus the
entropy is a function of the black hole charges @xmath and the gravitino
charges @xmath . One can further observe that in case of fixed gravitino
charges @xmath , the entropy scales quadratically with the parameter
@xmath and thus linearly with the charges @xmath or @xmath in the limit
of large charges. The opposite limit of fixed magnetic charges shows
that the entropy remains constant for large gravitino charge.

It is interesting to note that the fact that the scalars at the horizon
are fixed in terms of the gravitino and black hole charges is not
directly obvious from the general form of the solution. The scalars
depend on the constants @xmath that might not always be fully determined
by @xmath . One example of this is for the prepotential @xmath where the
magnetic black hole charges are fully fixed in terms of FI parameters
and either @xmath or @xmath can be freely chosen. However, one can show
that in this case there is no parameter range for the @xmath ’s where
the singularity is shielded by the horizon, thus black holes do not
exist. In all the cases for which we checked that a black hole is
possible we could verify that indeed the scalar values at the horizon
can be expressed in terms of the charges and FI parameters, but we have
no general proof of this ³¹ ³¹ 31 The BPS equations ( 6.40 )-( 6.42 )
can be relatively easily solved in full generality for a prepotential of
the form @xmath . The outcome is that black holes exist for @xmath . The
solution for general @xmath is in full analogy to the one presented
here. There is only certain @xmath dependence in the way the various
constants depend on each other, which does not lead to any qualitative
differences. Here we chose to explicitly describe the case with @xmath
since it is the most relevant case from a string theory point of view as
we will see in the next section. .

Another interesting question is what the near-horizon geometry of this
black hole is. It is natural to expect that a static four dimensional
BPS black hole has a near-horizon geometry of AdS @xmath S @xmath and
this is indeed the case. The radii of the two spaces are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it can be shown that @xmath from the constraints on having a
horizon. As the radii are inversely proportional to the scalar curvature
of these spaces, it follows that the overall AdS @xmath S @xmath space
has a negative curvature, as expected for asymptotically AdS @xmath
black holes. Thus it is clear that near the horizon we do not observe a
supersymmetry enhancement to a fully BPS vacuum as is the case for the
asymptotically flat static BPS black holes ³² ³² 32 We already saw that
AdS @xmath S @xmath is maximally supersymmetric only for @xmath .
Nevertheless, there is still a supersymmetry enhancement from a 1/4 BPS
overall solution to a 1/2 BPS vacuum near the horizon, as shown in [ 50
] .

###### @xmath in a mixed electromagnetic frame

In order to give an example of black hole solutions in a more general
electromagnetic frame, one can rotate the sections and FI parameters of
the previous example by the symplectic matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that the prepotential after rotation corresponds to the
well-studied in ungauged supergravity @xmath model with prepotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the non-vanishing FI parameters are @xmath . The theory will then be
electrically gauged with @xmath and magneticaly gauged with @xmath .
This prepotential cannot lead to an AdS BPS black hole in the purely
electric gauging, because it does not exhibit a supersymmetric AdS
@xmath vacuum. However, in this mixed electromagnetic gauging, the
@xmath model does have a proper fully supersymmetric AdS vacuum.

Now we can follow the more general procedure outlined in section 6.3.4 .
In this case it turns out that @xmath . The black hole solution will
then have one magnetic charge @xmath and one electric charge @xmath .
Going through the BPS equations ( 6.48 )-( 6.50 ), we can fix all the
constants of the solution in terms of the FI parameters @xmath , apart
from one free parameter which we choose to be @xmath . The charges are
given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

for spinor I and II respectively. The other constants in the solution
are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and one can see that the metric and scalar profile in this case are
analogous to the example in the previous subsection, as expected. This
confirms the consistency of the results in section 6.3.4 . The entropy
of the black hole is now a function of the electric and magnetic
gravitino charges, @xmath and @xmath , and the black hole charges @xmath
and @xmath .

Note that we could have for instance rotated the frame from a fully
electric to a fully magnetic frame, by the symplectic matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it turns out that the prepotential @xmath is in fact invariant under
this transformation. The resulting solution will be the same, but there
will be two electric instead of two magnetic charges.

##### 6.3.6 M-theory lift

An explicit string theory example of abelian gauged @xmath , @xmath
supergravity with FI terms was found by a consistent truncation of
M-theory on @xmath in [ 114 , 115 ] . A standard Kaluza-Klein
compactification on @xmath leads initially to an @xmath gauged @xmath
supergravity in four dimensions. To avoid some of the complications of
non-abelian gauge fields, the authors of [ 114 , 115 ] further defined a
consistent truncation of this theory to an @xmath gauged @xmath
supergravity. The 11-dimensional metric ansatz is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with the @xmath ’s satisfying @xmath . They can be
parameterized by the angles on the 3-sphere as explained in more detail
in [ 114 , 115 ] . The remaining 4 angles @xmath together with the
@xmath describe the internal space, while @xmath are coordinates of the
four-dimensional spacetime on which the resulting @xmath gauged
supergravity is defined. The factors @xmath depend on the
four-dimensional axio-dilaton scalars @xmath (defined below) and the
gauge fields @xmath are exactly the ones appearing in the
four-dimensional theory. Note that if all the gauge fields are vanishing
and the scalars are at the minimum of the potential, the internal space
becomes exactly @xmath . Apart from the metric, the field strength of
the 11-dimensional three form field is given by:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.69)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

with @xmath the Hodge dual with respect to the four-dimensional metric
@xmath , and @xmath the corresponding volume form.

With these identifications, the four-dimensional @xmath bosonic
lagrangian, written in our conventions, reads

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.70)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

One can then check explicitly (using also the particular result for the
matrix @xmath given in [ 114 , 115 ] ) that the above Lagrangian is
indeed of the form of ( 6.14 ) with prepotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sections @xmath define the three scalars @xmath by @xmath .
The FI parameters take the particularly simple form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this theory one can find a black hole solution in analogy to the
example in section 6.3.5 . Following the general results in section
6.3.3 , @xmath , and from ( 6.40 )-( 6.41 ) one can find the full
solution with @xmath and three arbitrary parameters @xmath (or
equivalently @xmath ). We will not write down the full solution as the
expressions for the constant @xmath and the magnetic charges in terms of
the @xmath ’s are very long and do not lead to further insight. It is
clear that the particular solution when we choose @xmath in fact
coincides precisely with the solution in section 6.3.5 and this means
that in any case a genuine black hole of the M-theory reduction exists
particularly when the three complex scalars are equal. In the full
solution of course there is a wider range of values for @xmath that will
lead to a black hole, but this will suffice for our purposes here.

We now comment on the meaning of these four-dimensional black holes from
the point of view of M-theory as a first step towards constructing the
corresponding microscopic theory. It is notable that the particular
M-theory reduction we have leads to an electrically gauged @xmath
supergravity and thus the resulting solution has only magnetic charges.
This in fact makes the higher dimensional interpretation a bit more
involved. There are two main points one can notice about the full
11-dimensional geometry from the form in ( 6.68 ). First, due to the
nonconstant scalars @xmath , the full space is a warped product of the
internal seven-dimensional space with the AdS @xmath black hole
spacetime. Second, due to the non-vanishing gauge fields @xmath , there
is an explicit mixing between the four angles @xmath of the internal
space and the four-dimensional angle @xmath . This leads to four
topological charges of the 11-dimensional spacetime, in analogy to NUT
charges. Note that in case the charges were only electric, i.e. @xmath ,
the time coordinate would mix with the internal angles and we would
obtain four angular momenta, leading to the interpretation of the
spacetime as arising from the decoupling limit of rotating M2-branes as
explained in detail in [ 114 , 115 ] . In the present case however the
interpretation of the four-dimensional black holes from M-theory is more
involved because apart from M2-branes we need to have some Kaluza-Klein
monopoles in the M-theory solution, in order to account for the
topological charge coming from the magnetic charges in four dimensions.
Unfortunately we were not able to find an explicit example for this type
of solutions in the literature, which probably is also related to the
fact that they would break almost all supersymmetry ³³ ³³ 33 The black
hole solutions in four dimensions preserve only two supercharges, i.e.
they are 1/4 BPS in @xmath . In @xmath , they are 1/16 BPS. This means
that at least 30 of the original 32 supercharges in the original
11-dimensional supergravity will have to be broken for the conjectured
bound state of M2-branes and Kaluza-Klein monopoles. .

#### 6.4 Black branes and toroidal black holes

Many of the above results considering spherically symmetric black holes
in fact can easily be extended to objects with a flat horizon, namely
toroidal black hole and black brane solutions. A very good reference for
such solutions in minimal gauged supergravity is [ 109 ] . Here we will
concentrate on the static solutions with charges, which already exhibit
the similarity between toroidal and spherical solutions, and allow us to
also point out the major differences. We will then explain how the BPS
solutions can be extended to include non-constant scalars in matter
coupled supergravity.

##### 6.4.1 Static solutions in minimal gauged supergravity

We start from the minimal @xmath @xmath gauged supergravity and consider
static metrics of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a toroidal area element (with @xmath the volume of the torus and
@xmath the complex structure)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The electromagnetic 1-form (the graviphoton) and its corresponding field
strength are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The range of the coordinates is restricted to @xmath , @xmath with
periodic boundary conditions. The case of black branes can be obtained
by decompactifying the torus, e.g. by considering a rectangular torus
with @xmath and sending the radii @xmath and @xmath to infinity. Doing
so, we can use the volume as a regulator for black branes, and mass and
charge densities will therefore be finite and well-defined.

The above metric describes a class of static charged toroidal black hole
solutions with compact horizons. They asymptote at @xmath to the vacuum
configuration with @xmath , which is a quotient of AdS @xmath , due to
the identifications on @xmath and @xmath . This spacetime is sometimes
referred to in the literature as Riemann-anti-de Sitter (RiAdS) [ 116 ]
. Supersymmetric toroidal solutions with magnetic charge do not exist,
as shown in [ 21 , 109 ] from the analysis of the integrability
condition. The conditions to have a supersymmetric solution of the form
( 6.73 )-( 6.75 ) that asymptotes to RiAdS are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

for arbitrary electric charge. The resulting spacetime has a naked
singularity whenever @xmath , which is often considered unphysical. In
minimal gauged supergravity there is therefore no genuine BPS black
brane solution. To make the situation more appealing, we now turn to
general gauged supergravities. We will see that turning on matter
couplings allows us to generate non-zero central charge and mass for the
BPS configurations, which also leads to the existence of supersymmetric
black brane solutions with horizon.

##### 6.4.2 Magnetic BPS black branes with scalars

A class of BPS solutions with genuine horizons, corresponding to black
branes and toroidal black holes in abelian gauged supergravity with FI
terms, can be derived from the example in [ 21 ] and following the steps
in [ 3 ] . The solutions are in complete analogy to the ones found in
section 6.3 with the only exception that the flat horizon forces the
magnetic charge carried by the graviphoton to vanish, @xmath , as
already mentioned above ³⁴ ³⁴ 34 The solution holds in gauged
supergravity with FI parameters @xmath . See section 6.3 for all
technical details. . In short, one can find a class of 1/4 BPS
solutions, given by

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (6.77)
  -- -- -- -- --------

under the restriction @xmath , with the toroidal area element given by (
6.74 ).

#### 6.5 Higher genus black holes

The story of higher genus black holes is very similar in spirit to the
cases with spherical and toroidal topology. We will therefore be very
brief in this section, just marking some small differences. We again
refer the interested reader to [ 109 ] and [ 21 ] for more details on
higher genus black holes in minimal and non-minimal gauged supergravity.

In order to outline the main differences, we again consider minimal
gauged supergravity and metrics of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

this time with a hyperbolic plane area element

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The electromagnetic 1-form (the graviphoton) and its corresponding field
strength are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to have a compact horizon, one again needs to periodically
identify @xmath and @xmath just as in the toroidal case. The main
difference here is that the function @xmath includes the term @xmath ,
which makes it much more easier for these solutions to develop event
horizons. It turns out that the supersymmetry in this case requires

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

with an arbitrary electric charge @xmath . For vanishing electric
charge, this becomes a higher genus BPS black hole with a genuine event
horizon and finite entropy. This is the only example of static
supersymmetric black hole in minimal gauged supergravity. Again, these
configurations have a generalization to non-constant scalars in gauged
supergravity with vector multiplets, following precisely the same steps
as in section 6.3 .

## Part III Superalgebras and BPS Bounds

### Chapter 7 Conserved supercharges

#### 7.1 Introduction

In this short chapter we outline a novel procedure for determining the
superalgebra of a given background solution in supergravity ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 To
a certain extent this procedure was already used in [ 117 ] , but we
further extend it for the purpose of finding superalgebra commutation
relations. . This procedure relies on the Noether theorem and is
completely general. There is no assumption about the supergravity theory
or the background of interest. In the scope of this thesis we are going
to apply our method to @xmath @xmath supergravity, focusing on the
asymptotically Minkowski and AdS solutions of the previous chapters. We
will see that our approach leads not only to unique answer for the
superalgebra, but also to explicit expressions for the asymptotic
charges in a given vacuum. These turn out to be automatically finite and
well-defined, something previously not known to be obvious. In fact,
there exists an explicit procedure for holographic renormalization [ 23
, 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] of quantities on the boundary of
AdS, developed for AdS/CFT applications. In our analysis such
renormalization is shown to be superfluous.

Before going into details, it is worth explaining that a well-defined
and algorithmic procedure for determining superalgebras was already
developed in [ 118 ] (see also [ 55 ] ). It relies on finding the
Killing vectors, @xmath , and spinors, @xmath , of a given vacuum
solution, which correspond to the spacetime and fermionic isometries.
Each isometry has its corresponding abstract symmetry generator in the
superalgebra, @xmath or @xmath . The commutator algebra of the Killing
vectors and spinors directly gives the superalgebra structure constants,

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

This is similarly extended to include any other internal bosonic
symmetries, such as gauge invariance.

While our proposed method is of course in full agreement with (and to a
certain extent relying on) the procedure of [ 118 , 55 ] , we extend the
known results and make them more explicit. The improvement is that we
provide a more direct way of including possible central charges in the
supercharge anticommutator. There is no longer need to use more general
arguments and knowledge of the possible solutions (e.g. the historic
path to finding the extension of the M-algebra via the M2 and M5
solutions can be substantially simplified). Furthermore, our method
allows for very explicit evaluation of the anticommutator on given
states, which to our best knowledge was not possible earlier.

In the next section we will therefore explain carefully our procedure.
We keep discussion fully general and minimize notational details that
will inadvertently depend on the explicit supergravity theory of
interest.

#### 7.2 Supercurrents and charges from the Noether theorem

Given a lagrangian @xmath , depending on fields collectively denoted by
@xmath , we have that under general field variations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath vanishes upon using the equation of motion of @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Under a symmetry variation, parametrized by @xmath , the lagrangian must
transform into a total derivative, such that the action is invariant for
appropriate boundary conditions,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Combining this with ( 7.2 ) for symmetry variations, we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the previous expression we see that the quantity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the (on-shell) conserved current associated with symmetry
transformations. For the case of supersymmetry, we call @xmath the
supercurrent. It depends on the (arbitrary) parameter @xmath and is
defined up to improvement terms of the form @xmath where @xmath is an
antisymmetric tensor, as usual for conserved currents. The associated
conserved supercharge is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This supercharge should also generate the supersymmetry transformations
of the fields,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

via the classical Poisson (or Dirac in case of constraints) brackets.
Since the supercurrent and correspondingly the supercharge are defined
up to improvement terms and surface terms respectively, it is not
directly obvious that the Noether procedure will lead to the correct
supersymmetry variations using ( 7.8 ). In practice, one always has the
information of the supersymmetry variations together with the
supergravity lagrangian. It is then possible to cross check the answers
and thus derive uniquely the correct expression of the supercharge.

The supercharge @xmath as derived above is unique for each different
theory, i.e. every supersymmetric lagrangian leads to a different @xmath
. For any background solution of a given theory, the supercharge will be
a conserved quantity evaluated as a surface integral at the boundary of
spacetime. However, at this stage @xmath is a bosonic quantity,
containing in its definition the supersymmetry transformation parameter
@xmath . Thus, in order to evaluate @xmath on a given background
solution (let @xmath denote the collection of fields), one also needs to
know the parameter @xmath that corresponds to the field configuration
@xmath . Since @xmath is evaluated asymptotically, it turns out that we
only need the asymptotic value of @xmath , in fact the parameter @xmath
needs not exist anywhere else except on the boundary of spacetime. This
asymptotic spinor is the Killing spinor of the asymptotic background. It
must satisfy the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The solution for the Killing spinor @xmath is always of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a general spacetime dependent matrix, possibly carrying
spinor and other types of indices, and @xmath an arbitrary constant
spinor. Since we need only the asymptotic Killing spinor, it will turn
out that there are large classes of different field configurations with
the same @xmath . To give a simple example, all asymptotically Minkowski
solutions will have @xmath . It is crucial therefore that the asymptotic
vacuum preserves some supersymmetry such that a corresponding @xmath
indeed exists. One can therefore define supercharges for every different
vacuum configuration @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This definition keeps the field configuration @xmath arbitrary, as long
as it asymptotes to the given vacuum. Therefore at this stage @xmath is
a field dependent scalar quantity, whose dependence on the spinor @xmath
is fixed by the asymptotic vacuum. We can also define its spinorial
analog that typically appears in the superalgebra by stripping off the
constant spinors @xmath in ( 7.10 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The abstract supercharge @xmath in the superalgebra of the vacuum @xmath
can act explicitly on the state @xmath whose fields asymptote to the
vacuum via the eigenvalue equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In explicit calculations one needs to know the Killing spinors of the
asymptotic vacuum and the field configuration at hand to be able to
evaluate @xmath .

It is then clear how the calculation of the supercharge anticommutators
proceeds. The quantity @xmath can be explicitly found via the Poisson
(Dirac) brackets of the fundamental fields. It will result in a field
dependent boundary integral that again includes the supersymmetry
parameters @xmath and is fixed by the lagrangian. For a given asymptotic
vacuum with known Killing spinor, one can then evaluate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The (bosonic) matrix @xmath now depends on the asymptotic vacuum and on
the field configuration at hand. Every vacuum defines its own different
superalgebra, where the anticommutator of the abstract quantities @xmath
is given in terms of bosonic conserved charges, coming from the bosonic
symmetries of the lagrangian. The eigenvalue equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

produces a matrix of bosonic symmetry eigenvalues @xmath for each field
configuration @xmath . Since it is a square of a hermitean operator, we
further require @xmath to be positive definite for each field
configuration that asymptotes to the given vacuum. The inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the BPS bound for the corresponding vacuum. It projects out all
negative norm states and keeps the states that are stably asymptotic to
the vacuum state.

### Chapter 8 BPS bounds in minimal gauged supergravity

#### 8.1 Introduction

The procedure described in the previous chapter might seem somewhat
abstract at this moment, but here and in the next chapter we will see
very explicitly how to perform it both for minimal and non-minimal
gauged supergravity for the Minkowski and AdS vacua. In this chapter we
realize the general procedure outlined above in the case of minimal
gauged supergravity. Due to some technical reasons, e.g. the form of the
Killing spinors, we use slightly different conventions from the rest of
the thesis. This simplifies substantially the discussion and allows us
to concentrate on the physical meaning of our analysis.

The main motivation for our analysis comes from the following paradox.
Similarly to BPS states in asymptotically flat spacetimes, the authors
of [ 119 ] provided a BPS bound in asymptotically anti-de Sitter
spacetime that in the static case reduces to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Supersymmetric configurations would have to saturate the bound with
@xmath , for a given mass @xmath , electric charge @xmath , and magnetic
charge @xmath in appropriate units. However, in @xmath minimal gauged
supergravity, Romans [ 102 ] found two supersymmetric solutions, one of
which does not saturate the BPS bound, and therefore an apparent paradox
arises. The main aim of this chapter is to resolve this conflict. The
resolution of the paradox will lie in understanding the BPS ground
states of gauged supergravity, the associated superalgebras, and in a
proper definition of the mass in asymptotically AdS @xmath spacetimes,
as we will explain in the coming sections.

Minimally gauged supergravity has only two bosonic fields, the metric
and the graviphoton @xmath . Shortly repeating our analysis from the
previous part of the thesis to ease the reading, the most general static
and spherically symmetric solution of Einstein’s equation with a
negative cosmological constant and an electromagnetic field is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and with nonvanishing components of the graviphoton

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this class, there are two solutions that preserve some fraction of
supersymmetry [ 102 ] . The first one is the so-called AdS “electric
Reissner–Nordström (RN)” solution, for which the magnetic charge @xmath
is set to zero and @xmath so that the factor @xmath has the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This solution preserves one half of the supersymmetries (it is 1/2 BPS).
Clearly, it saturates the BPS bound ( 8.1 ). Notice that the function
@xmath has no zeros. Therefore, there is no horizon and the point @xmath
is a naked singularity ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 In AdS spacetimes, supersymmetry does
not seem to provide a cosmic censorship, contrary to most cases in
asymptotically flat spacetimes [ 120 ] . Whether cosmic censorship in
AdS @xmath can be violated is still an open problem, see e.g. [ 121 ] .
This issue however has nothing to do with the paradox or contradiction
mentioned above. . Asymptotically, for @xmath , the solution is that of
pure AdS @xmath , with cosmological constant @xmath in standard
conventions.

The second supersymmetric solution is the so-called “cosmic dyon”,
having zero mass @xmath but nonzero fixed magnetic charge @xmath . Such
a solution will never satisfy the BPS bound ( 8.1 ). Moreover, the
electric charge @xmath can take an arbitrary value:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again, there is a naked singularity at @xmath . However, asymptotically,
when @xmath , the solution does not approach pure AdS @xmath , due to
the presence of the magnetic charge. Instead, the solution defines
another vacuum, since @xmath , but this vacuum is topologically distinct
from AdS @xmath in which @xmath . For this reason ³⁷ ³⁷ 37 One may argue
that ground states should not have naked singularities. Clearly, this
discussion is related to cosmic censorship in AdS, which we mentioned in
the previous footnote. It is important to disentangle this discussion
from the derivation of the BPS bounds. In fact, we already know that in
matter coupled supergravity there is a magnetic ground state without
naked singularities, c.f. chapter 6.3 . , we call this vacuum magnetic
anti-de Sitter, or mAdS @xmath .

The cosmic dyon solution is 1/4 BPS, i.e. it preserves two out of eight
supercharges. For both the electric RN-AdS and the cosmic dyon, the
Killing spinors were explicitly constructed in [ 102 ] . The fact that
the BPS bound ( 8.1 ) is not satisfied for the cosmic dyon leads to a
contradiction since states that admit a Killing spinor should saturate
the BPS bound.

In this chapter we show that the cosmic dyon in fact satisfies a
different BPS bound that follows from a superalgebra different from the
usual AdS @xmath superalgebra. We will determine the new BPS bound
starting from the explicit calculation of the supercharges and computing
the anticommutator ³⁸ ³⁸ 38 An alternative approach based on the
Witten-Nester energy was proposed in an unpublished paper by Izquierdo,
Meessen and Ortín, leading to similar conclusions. . In summary, to
state the main result of this chapter, for stationary configurations,
the new BPS bounds are:

-   For asymptotically AdS @xmath solutions with vanishing magnetic
    charge, @xmath , the BPS bound is

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the angular momentum.

-   For asymptotically magnetic AdS @xmath solutions with @xmath , the
    BPS bound is simply

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    with unconstrained electric charge @xmath and angular momentum
    @xmath .

Other values for the magnetic charges are not considered. The
quantization condition requires it to be an integer multiple of the
minimal unit, @xmath , but it is not known if any other supersymmetric
vacua can exist with @xmath .

The meaning of the BPS bound is not that all solutions to the equations
of motion must automatically satisfy ( 8.7 ) or ( 8.8 ). Rather, one
constructs a physical configuration space consisting of solutions that
satisfy a BPS bound like ( 8.7 ) or ( 8.8 ), as mentioned in the
previous chapter.

Our procedure also provides a new way of defining asymptotic charges in
AdS @xmath backgrounds with automatically built-in holographic
renormalization, somewhat different than the procedure developed in [ 23
, 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] . The same technique can also be
applied to non-minimal gauged supergravity, which will be the topic of
the next chapter.

Additional motivation to study more closely the magnetic AdS @xmath case
and its superalgebra is provided by the AdS/CFT correspondence. There
are suggestions in the literature [ 19 ] that excitations of the dual
theory are relevant for condensed matter physics in the presence of
external magnetic field, e.g. quantum Hall effect and Landau level
splitting at strong coupling. A better understanding of the mAdS
superalgebra could then provide us with more insights about the dual
field theory.

###### Plan of this chapter

First, in section 8.2 , we explain our conventions about the minimal
gauged supergravity we consider. We follow the procedure of chapter 7
and derive the form of the asymptotic supercharges and their
anticommutator. We then take special interest in deriving explicitly the
form of the anticommutator for spherically symmetric AdS configurations,
showing how the difference between AdS and magnetic AdS arises. We then
extend the results to include the solutions with non-spherical symmetry
in section 8.4 . We see that for toroidal topology we find somewhat
different results compared to both the AdS and the mAdS cases, while the
hyperbolic solutions are in complete analogy to the spherical mAdS. In
the last section of this chapter we take a more abstract approach and
write down the full superalgebra for all the asymptotic vacua that are
discussed. Some of the intermediate calculations that facilitate the
discussion in this chapter are left for the appendices and referred to
when needed.

#### 8.2 Minimal gauged supergravity

First we compute the supercurrent from the lagrangian of minimal @xmath
@xmath gauged supergravity following the conventions of [ 55 ] (which is
written in 1.5-formalism):

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.11)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The spin connection satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a given vielbein @xmath . The @xmath -term in the Lagrangian is
related to the presence of a negative cosmological constant @xmath .

In most of our calculations, such as in the supercurrents and
supercharges, we only work to lowest order in fermions since higher
order terms vanish in the expression of the (on shell) supersymmetry
algebra, where we set all fermion fields to zero. The supersymmetry
variations are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath gauge transformations act on the gauge potential and on the
spinors in this way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the conventions in which all the spinors are real Majorana ones
³⁹ ³⁹ 39 In conventions here, the two real gravitini in the gravity
multiplet are packaged together in the notation:

@xmath (8.18)

where each gravitino is itself a 4-component Majorana spinor. Similar
conventions are used for the supersymmetry parameters. In other words,
the @xmath indices are completely suppressed. , and the gamma matrix
conventions and identities of appendix A .

The quantities @xmath and @xmath for this theory are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the supercurrent has the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression is gauge invariant due to the cancelation between the
variation of the gravitino, the vector field and the supersymmetry
parameter. Furthermore we can show that the supercurrent is conserved

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

if we enforce the equation of motion for @xmath and use the antisymmetry
of the Levi-Civita symbol.

The Dirac brackets defined for the given theory read (we only need those
containing gravitinos):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now check if ( 7.8 ) holds with the above form of the
supercurrent. It turns out that, up to overall normalization, we indeed
have the right expression without any ambiguity of improvement terms. We
only need to rescale, since the factor of @xmath in ( 8.21 ) does not
appear in the supersymmetry variations ( 8.13 )-( 8.15 ). The
supercharge is then defined as the volume integral ⁴⁰ ⁴⁰ 40 For volume
and surface integrals in this chapter, we use the notation that

@xmath (8.26)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second equality follows from the Gauss theorem via the
equations of motion (in what follows we will always deal with classical
solutions of the theory). The Dirac bracket of two supersymmetry charges
is then straightforwardly derived as the supersymmetry variation of (
8.27 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is again a boundary integral.

The above formula is reminiscent of the expression for the Witten-Nester
energy [ 122 , 123 ] , which has already been implicitly assumed to
generalize for supergravity applications [ 124 , 125 ] (see also [ 30 ]
). Thus, the correspondence between BPS bounds and positivity of
Witten-Nester energy is confirmed also in the case of minimal gauged
@xmath supergravity by our explicit calculation of the supercharge
anticommutator.

#### 8.3 Two different BPS bounds with spherical symmetry

In this section, we derive two BPS bounds based on the two BPS sectors
that we consider. What is relevant for the BPS bound are the properties
of the asymptotic geometries and corresponding Killing spinors. The
Killing spinors of AdS @xmath and magnetic AdS @xmath (“cosmic
monopole”) are given in App. E , see also [ 102 ] . Since only the
asymptotics are important, we can set @xmath in the cosmic dyon
solution. The AdS @xmath solution is characterized by @xmath , while
mAdS @xmath by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The corresponding Killing
spinors take a very different form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a doublet of constant Majorana spinors, carrying @xmath
arbitrary parameters. From here we can see that AdS @xmath is fully
supersymmetric and its Killing spinors show dependence on all the four
coordinates. mAdS @xmath on the other hand is only @xmath BPS: its
Killing spinors satisfiy a double projection that reduces the
independent components to @xmath and there is no angular or time
dependence. We will come back to this remarkable fact in section 8.5 .

The form of the Killing spinors is important because the bracket of two
supercharges is a surface integral at infinity ( 8.28 ). Writing out the
covariant derivative in ( 8.28 ), one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it depends on the asymptotic value of the Killing spinors of the
solution taken into consideration. Therefore the superalgebra will be
different in the two cases and there will be two different BPS bounds.

The procedure to compute the BPS bound is the following. From ( 8.27 )
we have a definition of the supercharges @xmath and @xmath . We will
then make use of the following definition for the fermionic supercharges
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. any spacetime and gamma matrix dependence of the bosonic
supercharges @xmath is left into the corresponding fermionic @xmath . We
are thus able to strip off the arbitrary constant @xmath in any explicit
calculations and convert the Dirac brackets for @xmath into an
anticommutator for the spinorial supercharges @xmath that is standardly
used to define the superalgebra. Therefore now we compute the surface
integrals ( 8.28 ) for the Killing spinors of AdS @xmath and mAdS @xmath
respectively. After stripping off the @xmath ’s, we find the
anticommutator of fermionic supercharges given explicitly in terms of
the other conserved charges in the respective vacua. The BPS bound is
then derived in the standard way by requiring the supersymmetry
anticommutator to be positive definite, see e.g. [ 126 ] for details.

##### 8.3.1 Asymptotically AdS@xmath states

We now derive the resulting supersymmetry algebra from the asymptotic
spinors of AdS @xmath . For this we use the general expression ( 8.31 )
for the Dirac brackets of the supersymmetry charges, together with the
asymptotic form of the Killing spinors, ( 8.29 ). Inserting the Killing
spinors @xmath of ( 8.29 ) in ( 8.31 ), we recover something that can be
written in the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the charges @xmath can be written down explicitly from the surface
integral ( 8.31 ). They will define the electric charge ( @xmath ),
momentum ( @xmath ), angular momentum ( @xmath , with @xmath spatial
indices), and boost charges ( @xmath ). The charge @xmath would
correspond to a magnetic charge, which we assumed to vanish by
construction. Without the charge @xmath , the above bracket will fit in
the @xmath superalgebra (see more below). We will therefore take as
definition of asymptotically AdS solutions the ones for which @xmath
vanishes. This choice of fall-off conditions is similar to the case of
@xmath supergravity, where the asymptotic charges are required to
generate the @xmath superalgebra [ 127 ] . Extensions of the @xmath
superalgebra where the charges @xmath and @xmath are non-zero have been
discussed in [ 128 ] .

From the previous expression we see that conserved charges like @xmath ,
@xmath et cetera will arise as surface integrals of the five terms (or
their combinations) appearing in the supercovariant derivative. We are
going to see how this works analyzing each term in the supercovariant
derivative, explicitly in terms of the ansatz of the metric ( 8.2 ) and
vector fields ( 8.4 ). This will provide us with a new definition of the
asymptotic charges in AdS @xmath with no need to use the holographic
renormalization procedure anywhere. As an explicit example one can
directly read off the definition of mass @xmath from the explicit form
of the asymptotic Killing spinors. In the stationary case,

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.34)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We are going to take into consideration both static and rotating
solutions, but we will carry out our procedure and explain the
calculation in full detail only the case of the electric RN-AdS black
hole and comment more briefly on the rotating generalizations.

-   Electric RN-AdS

    Here we take into consideration solutions of the form ( 8.2 ) - (
    8.4 ) with zero magnetic charge, @xmath . We now evaluate the
    various terms in ( 8.31 ).

    To begin, it is easy to determine the piece concerning the field
    strength, namely

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Inserting the Killing spinors for AdS @xmath described in ( 8.29 ),
    and exploiting the Clifford algebra relations we get

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with the definition of the electric charge

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

    From here we can identify the term @xmath appearing in ( 8.33 ).

    Next we consider the term containing the “bare” gauge field @xmath .
    This gives a possible contribution to the charge @xmath in ( 8.33 ).
    As we mentioned above, we assumed this contribution to vanish for
    asymptotically AdS solutions. One can explicitly check this for the
    class of electric RN-AdS solutions given in ( 8.2 ), since the only
    nonzero component of the vector field is @xmath (see ( 8.4 )), hence

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The term with the partial derivative @xmath in ( 8.31 ) in the
    supercovariant derivative gives nonvanishing contributions for
    @xmath and it amounts to the integral:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Clearly, this term will contribute, together with other terms, to
    the mass.

    The integral containing the spin connection is:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.40)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where we have used

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and the value of the spin connection:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.42)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Also ( 8.40 ) will contribute to @xmath , and therefore to the mass.

    The last contribution of the supercovariant derivative, the term
    proportional to @xmath , yields

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.43)
      -- -------- -- --------

    In deriving this we have used the formula @xmath . Again, this term
    contributes to the mass formula.

    Collecting all the terms that contribute to the mass (the derivative
    term ( 8.39 ), the sum of the spin connection term ( 8.40 ), and the
    gamma term ( 8.43 )) gives rise to:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.44)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The integral has to be performed on a sphere with @xmath . Taking
    this limit one can see that in this expression all the positive
    powers of @xmath are canceled. Hence all possible divergences cancel
    out, and we are left with a finite contribution. In this sense, our
    method provides a holographic renormalization of the mass. In the
    cases we can compare, our method agrees with previously known
    results.

    Performing the integral on the remaining finite part we find:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.45)
      -- -------- -- --------

    To sum up, for the electric RN-AdS solution, the brackets between
    supercharges read:

      -- -------- -- -- --------
         @xmath         (8.46)
      -- -------- -- -- --------

    Now we can strip off the constant linearly independent doublet of
    spinors @xmath on both sides of the above formula to restore the
    original @xmath and spinor indices:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.47)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This expression coincides with the one expected from the algebra
    @xmath (see ( 8.75 ) in the next section) if we identify @xmath and
    @xmath .

    The BPS bound for the electric RN-AdS solution is then ⁴¹ ⁴¹ 41 See
    e.g. [ 126 ] for details on the general procedure of deriving of BPS
    bounds from the superalgebra. :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.48)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The state that saturates this bound, for which @xmath , preserves
    half of the supersymmetries, i.e. it is half-BPS. It is the ground
    state allowed by ( 8.48 ) and represents a naked singularity. All
    the excited states have higher mass and are either naked
    singularities or genuine black holes.

    It is interesting to look at the case of extremal black holes, in
    which inner and outer horizon coincide. This yields a relation
    between the mass and charge, which can be derived from the solution
    given in ( 8.2 ). Explicit calculation gives the following result [
    109 ] :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.49)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This lies above the BPS bound unless @xmath , in which case we
    recover the fully supersymmetric AdS @xmath space. Thus,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.50)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   Kerr-AdS
    The Kerr-AdS black hole is an example of a stationary spacetime
    without charges but with non-vanishing angular momentum. It is most
    standardly written in Boyer-Lindquist-type coordinates and we refer
    to [ 109 ] for more details. More details on how to calculate the
    angular momenta from the anticommutator of the supercharges can be
    found in App. F . The BPS bound is straightforward to find also in
    this case, leading to

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.51)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where the BPS state satisfies @xmath and in fact corresponds to a
    singular limit of the Kerr-AdS black hole because the AdS boundary
    needs to rotate as fast as the speed of light [ 112 ] . Note that in
    general for the Kerr black hole we have @xmath , where @xmath is the
    rotation parameter appearing in the Kerr solution in standard
    notation. Thus @xmath implies @xmath , which is exactly the singular
    case. All the excited states given by @xmath are however proper
    physical states, corresponding to all the regular Kerr-AdS black
    holes, including the extremal one. Thus the BPS bound is always
    satisfied but never saturated by any physical solution of the
    Kerr-AdS type,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.52)
      -- -------- -- --------

    as is well-known.

-   KN-AdS
    The BPS bound for Kerr-Newman-AdS (KN-AdS) black holes ⁴² ⁴² 42 See
    again [ 109 ] for more detailed description of the KN-AdS black
    holes. is a bit more involved due to the presence of both electric
    charge and angular momentum. We will not elaborate on the details of
    the calculation which is straightforward. The resulting BPS bound is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.53)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and the ground (BPS) state is in fact quarter-supersymmetric. The
    BPS bound in general does not coincide with the extremality bound,
    which in the case of the KN-AdS black holes is a rather complicated
    expression that can be found in [ 109 , 112 ] . Interestingly, the
    BPS bound and the extremality bound coincide at a finite non-zero
    value for the mass and charge (with @xmath ),

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.54)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Now we have two distinct possibilities for the relation between the
    BPS state and the extremal KN-AdS black hole depending on the actual
    value for the electric charge (there is exactly one BPS state and
    exactly one extremal black hole for any value of charge @xmath ):

      -- -------- -- -- --------
         @xmath         (8.55)
      -- -------- -- -- --------

    So for small or large enough electric charge the BPS solution will
    be a naked singularity and the extremal black hole will satisfy but
    not saturate the BPS bound, while for the critical value of the
    charge the extremal black hole is supersymmetric and all
    non-extremal solutions with regular horizon will satisfy the BPS
    bound.

##### 8.3.2 Magnetic AdS@xmath

Unlike the standard AdS @xmath case above, the Killing spinors of
magnetic AdS @xmath already break @xmath of the supersymmetry, c.f. (
E.9 ). The projection that they obey is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

for either the upper or lower sign, depending on the sign of the
magnetic charge. Furthermore, one has the following properties of the
projection operators,

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.57)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

and all remaining quantities of the form @xmath vanish, where @xmath
stands for any of the other twelve basis matrices generated by the
Clifford algebra.

These identities allow us to derive, from ( 8.31 ), the bracket

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

provided that the mass is given by

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.59)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

This expression simplifies further if we choose to put the vielbein
matrix in an upper triangular form, such that we have nonvanishing
@xmath and the inverse vielbein has only components @xmath . The mass is
then

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Notice that this mass formula is different from the one for
asymptotically AdS @xmath spacetimes.

Stripping off the parameters @xmath in ( 8.58 ), leaves us with a matrix
equation in spinor space. Due to the projection operators, one is
effectively reducing the number of supercharges to two instead of eight.
These two supercharges are scalars, since the Killing spinors are
invariant under rotation as they don’t depend on the angular coordinates
(see also in the next section). Denoting them by @xmath and @xmath , the
anticommutator then becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the BPS bound is just

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Saturating the bound leads to a quarter-BPS solution. None of the other
conserved charges, i.e. the electric charge and (angular) momentum,
influences the BPS bound due to the projection relation ( 8.57 ). Thus
@xmath and @xmath can be completely arbitrary.

In particular, for the case of of the Reissner-Nordström solution ( 8.2
) with fixed magnetic charge @xmath and @xmath arbitrary, the mass
integral ( 8.59 ) yields

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is exactly the mass parameter @xmath appearing in ( E.13 ). The
supersymmetric solutions found by Romans (the so-called cosmic
monopole/dyons) have vanishing mass parameter hence indeed saturate the
BPS bound ( 8.62 ).

Of course in the context of a rotating black hole vanishing mass results
in vanishing angular momentum due to the proportionality between the
two, i.e. an asymptotically mAdS Kerr-Newman with non-zero angular
momentum spacetime can never saturate the BPS bound ( 8.62 ).
Nevertheless, excitations over the magnetic AdS @xmath include all
Reissner-Nordström and Kerr-Newman AdS black holes that have fixed
magnetic charge @xmath and arbitrary (positive) mass, angular momentum
and electric charge. All these solutions satisfy the magnetic AdS @xmath
BPS bound.

#### 8.4 Non-spherical BPS bounds

As explained in the previous part of the thesis, the situation with
supersymmetric asymptotically AdS solutions with toroidal and hyperbolic
symmetry is slightly different. Magnetic ground states as mAdS @xmath ,
considered above for spherical symmetry, do not appear in the case of
toroidal topology. Contrary to this, in the case of hyperbolic topology
the only BPS ground state has non-vanishing magnetic charge, i.e. pure
hyperbolic AdS does not admit Killing spinors. Thus, apart from the two
cases with spherical symmetry discussed above, we have only two AdS-like
ground states with non-spherical symmetry. Their corresponding Killing
spinors can be found in appendix E . We now turn to each of them
separately, keeping the discussion short since it is very similar in
spirit and outcome to the previous section.

##### 8.4.1 Toroidal AdS@xmath

As explained in chapter 6 , the AdS ground state with flat topology is
called RiAdS and has vanishing mass, electric and magnetic charges. Its
Killing spinor breaks half of the supersymmetry due to the toroidal
compactification of coordinates. It is derived in details in appendix E
and reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result agrees with the one found in [ 109 ] . The toroidal black
holes can be seen as excitations over the background characterized by
these Killing spinors. To find the BPS bound, we plug the spinors ( 8.64
) in the formula for the Dirac bracket of two supercharges ( 8.31 ). We
first note the relations involving the projector ( E.14 ):

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.65)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

All the other gamma matrices between two projectors give zero: this
strongly limits the number of terms present in the superalgebra. The
anticommutator between two supercharges can now be computed. Due to the
projection identities ( 8.65 ) and the symmetries of the gamma matrices
⁴³ ⁴³ 43 @xmath are symmetric in their spinor indices, while @xmath is
antisymmetric (see App. A for our gamma matrix conventions). The four
terms in ( 8.66 ) are therefore the only non-vanishing contributions
from ( 8.31 ). only four terms appear, and the result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass @xmath has the following expression:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the central charge @xmath reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the vector field strength written as a two-form. The
above formulas are valid after choosing an upper triangular vielbein, as
in ( E.11 ). We omit the formulas for the momenta @xmath and @xmath ,
which are straightforward to derive from ( 8.31 ) and ( 8.64 ), but are
not particularly insightful since they vanish for static solutions.

The main outcome of our analysis is therefore that for static black
branes and toroidal black holes the BPS bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

must be satisfied.

To give an explicit example how the BPS bound constrains the solutions
space, we now restrict our attention to static solutions of the form (
6.73 ) with zero magnetic charge. The above mass formula can be
explicitly evaluated:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.70)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We see that the divergent part cancels (notice that the dependence on
@xmath drops out, as a consequence of the modular symmetry) and we are
left with the finite quantity @xmath for the mass density @xmath .
Furthermore, the formula for the central charge ( 8.68 ) gives zero when
computed on the ansatz ( 6.73 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

since @xmath is forced to vanish for asymptotically RiAdS solutions. We
then have @xmath , @xmath for these solutions. Consequently, the BPS
bound is just:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the BPS bound does not involve the electric charge, similarly
to the mAdS case. Moreover, this bound also holds in the
decompactification limit for black branes, where the mass density @xmath
is a finite number even if the mass @xmath is infinite. The BPS bound is
saturated for @xmath with an arbitrary electric charge @xmath . The
resulting spacetime has a naked singularity whenever @xmath , as already
explained in chapter 6 .

##### 8.4.2 Hyperbolic mAdS@xmath

For completeness sake, this short subsection is devoted to the
hyperbolic version of the magnetic AdS vacuum. From the explicit
calculation of the Killing spinor of the vacuum solution, with vanishing
mass and electric charge and magnetic charge @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can see that the situation is very much analogous to the spherical
mAdS case. The supersymmetry commutator and BPS bound trivially follow
from the same steps taken in section 8.3.2 . The bound is again

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 8.5 Superalgebras

##### 8.5.1 AdS@xmath

The procedure we used to find the BPS bound determines also the
superalgebras of AdS @xmath and mAdS @xmath , which are found to be
different. In fact, given the Killing spinors and Killing vectors, there
is a general algorithm to determine the superalgebra, see [ 118 ] and
chapter 13 in [ 55 ] .

For what concerns the pure AdS @xmath , in @xmath gauged supergravity
the superalgebra is @xmath , which contains as bosonic subgroup @xmath :
the first group is the isometry group of AdS @xmath and the second one
corresponds to the gauged R-symmetry group that acts by rotating the two
gravitinos. The algebra contains the generators of the @xmath group
@xmath ( @xmath ), and @xmath , the generator of @xmath . Furthermore,
we have supercharges @xmath with @xmath that are Majorana spinors. The
non-vanishing (anti-)commutators of the @xmath superalgebra are:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.75)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath , the gamma matrices are @xmath , and @xmath . @xmath does
not have the role of a central charge, as it does not commute with the
supercharges. Nevertheless it is associated to the electric charge ⁴⁴ ⁴⁴
44 If we perform a Wigner–Inönü contraction of the algebra, @xmath gives
rise to a central charge in the Poincaré superalgebra. See [ 55 ] for
further details. . The isometry group of AdS @xmath is @xmath ,
isomorphic to the conformal group in three dimensions, whose generators
are 3 translations, 3 rotations, 3 special conformal transformations
(conformal boosts) and the dilatation.

##### 8.5.2 mAdS@xmath

In the case of mAdS @xmath , the symmetry group is reduced. Spatial
translations and boosts are broken, because of the presence of a
magnetic monopole. There are 4 Killing vectors related to the invariance
under time translations and rotations. The isometry group of this
spacetime is then @xmath . Furthermore, we have also gauge invariance.
The projector ( 8.56 ) reduces the independent components of the Killing
spinors to 1/4, consequently the number of fermionic symmetries of the
theory is also reduced. We have denoted the remaining two real
supercharges with @xmath ( @xmath ). To sum up, the symmetry generators
of mAdS @xmath are:

-   the angular momentum @xmath , @xmath ,

-   the Hamiltonian @xmath ,

-   the gauge transformation generator @xmath ,

-   the two supercharges @xmath where @xmath .

From ( 8.61 ) the anticommutator between two supercharges is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since mAdS @xmath is static and spherically symmetric, we have the
commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following commutators are then determined by imposing the Jacobi
identities:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we add the gauge generator @xmath to the algebra. Because of gauge
invariance, we have the commutators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the Jacobi identities one now derives that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a fixed normalization of @xmath . This commutator also follows from
the observation that gauge transformations act on the supersymmetry
parameters in gauged supergravity, together with the fact that @xmath
commutes with the projection operator @xmath defined in the previous
section.

The first commutator in ( 8.78 ) implies that the supercharges @xmath
are singlet under rotations. This is a consequence of the fact that the
mAdS @xmath Killing spinors have no angular dependence [ 102 ] . Group
theoretically, this follows from the fact that the group of rotations
entangles with the @xmath symmetry, as explained in [ 50 ] .

##### 8.5.3 RiAdS@xmath

The full superalgebra of RiAdS can be most clearly presented as follows.
After the projection we have only 4 real supercharges present, which we
label @xmath . The non-vanishing supercharge anticommutators can then be
read from ( 8.66 ):

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (8.81)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

and the action of the gauged @xmath symmetry leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other commutators vanish due to the form of the Killing vectors, the
fact that gauge transformations commute with translations and
compatibility with the super Jacobi identities. This shows that indeed
@xmath is a central charge, similar to the magnetic central charge in
the Poincaré superalgebra.

Due to the toroidal compactification, the theory is endowed also with
modular invariance. The metric and the Killing spinor are invariant
under transformations that act on both the parameter @xmath and the
coordinates @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the condition @xmath , i.e. @xmath . For a finite volume of the
torus, the superalgebra can be interpreted as corresponding to a modular
invariant quantum mechanics theory in one dimension, since one can
further reduce the @xmath theory, dual to RiAdS, on the two compact
spatial dimensions. This interpretation is no longer valid in the
infinite volume limit where the boundary is an infinite flat plane.

##### 8.5.4 Hyperbolic mAdS@xmath

As explained above, the situation for hyperbolic mAdS is fully analogous
to the one of spherical mAdS. This also holds for their superalgebras,
the only difference of course being that spherical symmetry encoded in
the structure constants for the angular momenta commutator changes into
hyperbolic symmetry. We will therefore not elaborate further on
hyperbolic mAdS @xmath solutions as their behavior is already captured
in our analysis of spherical mAdS. This remains being true in the next
chapter when we consider more complicated solutions allowing for running
scalars.

### Chapter 9 BPS bounds in the matter-coupled theory

#### 9.1 Introduction and general results

We continue our analysis of BPS bounds in the most general case of
matter coupled electrically gauged supergravity, i.e. coming back to the
lagrangian ( 2.1 ) and our original notation. After understanding more
clearly the vacuum structure of gauged supergravities in the previous
chapter, here we concentrate more on black hole solutions with
non-trivial scalar profiles. We find an unexpected similarity between
BPS solutions with very different asymptotics.

As we show in the following, the superalgebra structure does not change
when considering more general matter couplings in the theory. However,
the explicit definition of the asymptotic charges ( @xmath etc.) of a
given solution depends directly on the field content. We first derive
the form of the supersymmetry anticommutator for all possible solutions
of gauged supergravity with vectors and hypers. Then we focus on the
special cases of Minkowski, AdS, mAdS, and RiAdS asymptotics where we
evaluate the anticommutator explicitly. These calculations show that the
hypermultiplets do not produce additional central charges in the
superalgebra. We are also able to formulate renormalized expressions for
the mass in AdS and mAdS. Our results in AdS are in exact agreement with
the techniques of holographic renormalization [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ,
28 , 29 , 30 ] . On the other hand, the mAdS mass takes a different form
and in some examples leads to qualitatively different results that have
no analog in previous literature.

From our knowledge of the minimal case and with the help of the susy
variations we can derive explicitly the supercharge, as done in appendix
G . The original expression for the supercharge is somewhat lengthy and
non-suggestive. However, using the equations of motion for the
gravitinos we can cast the supercharge into a much simpler form as a
surface integral (see the appendix for the technical details).

The important quantity for our purposes here is the Dirac bracket of two
supercharges. It can be derived from the supercharge ( G.10 ) and takes
the remarkably simple form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the main general result of this chapter. It can be explicitly
evaluated on every spacetime that has an asymptotic Killing spinor.

Compared with the corresponding expression in the minimal case, ( 9.1 )
is just a straightforward generalization. A priori, one could expect
some more radical changes due to the presence of vector and
hypermultiplets, but this is not the case. We already see that the main
conclusions of the previous chapter remain the same, with the difference
that the definition of the asymptotic charges will generalize to
accommodate for the possibility of non-constant scalars ⁴⁵ ⁴⁵ 45 Note
that for a solution with constant scalars (both in the vector and in the
hypermultiplet sector) ( 9.1 ) is equivalent with the result for the
minimal case. Thus, the only difference between the asymptotic charges
in minimal and non-minimal supergravity lies in the possibility for
non-constant scalar profiles. . In order to give more precise
statements, we need to plug in the explicit Killing spinors of interest
in the general Dirac bracket ( 9.1 ).

In the following sections we consider more carefully the cases of
Minkowski, AdS @xmath , mAdS @xmath , and RiAdS @xmath asymptotics,
paying special attention to the asymptotic charges in stationary
solutions. In each of the cases we give an explicit example from the
study of black holes as an application of our results. Somewhat
surprisingly, we are able to find a very simple unified formula for the
mass of supersymmetric black hole spacetimes in all spherically
symmetric cases. This also leads to a better conceptual understanding of
the difference in the mass in AdS and mAdS spacetimes. We conclude with
some remarks on the connection of our results to alternative approaches
in literature.

#### 9.2 Asymptotically flat solutions

##### 9.2.1 General analysis

Here we will be interested in the superalgebra and asymptotic charges of
Minkowski spacetime. In the context of electrically gauged supergravity
with vector and hypermultiplets the necessary conditions for a Minkowski
vacuum were derived in chapter 3 ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

together with constant scalars, vanishing field strengths and flat
@xmath metric. These are now the conditions that asymptotically flat
solutions will have to satisfy as @xmath (we always work in spherical
coordinates in this section).

The Majorana Killing spinors of Minkowski in spherical coordinates are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are two arbitrary and linearly independent constant
Majorana spinors. We will use the notation @xmath for Majorana spinors
and @xmath for the positive/negative chirality Weyl spinors that are
used in our notation. The chiral spinors are related to the Majorana
ones through

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Having the Killing spinors we can now in principle plug ( 9.3 ) in ( 9.1
) and derive the supercharge anticommutator directly. Of course, we
already know the general answer from the Poincaré superalgebra,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the charge conjugation matrix, @xmath is the momentum
operator, and @xmath is the complex central extension of the
superalgebra. The explicit eigenvalues of the operators @xmath and
@xmath for any asymptotically flat solution can be computed now from (
9.1 ). The additional @xmath and @xmath connections in ( 9.1 ) from the
matter multiplets can potentially lead to contributions to the
supersymmetry anticommutator that are not of the type ( 9.5 ). Since we
know that Minkowski asymptotics will necessarily lead to the Poincaré
superalgebra it follows that these additional connections must fall off
fast enough so that they do not contribute. ( 9.5 ) can in fact be taken
as a definition for asymptotically flat spacetimes. In practice, the
condition for the fall off of the connections will be equivalent with
imposing the metric to approach Minkowski space. This will be
illustrated more clearly with an explicit example.

In the next subsection we give the explicit expressions for @xmath in (
9.5 ) for the stationary case, but one can straightforwardly derive the
asymptotic charges in full generality if needed.

##### 9.2.2 Stationary solutions

For stationary solutions we find that the supersymmetry anticommutator
takes the following form ⁴⁶ ⁴⁶ 46 We rescale the central charges for
convenience. :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the complex central charge is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

as derived in detail in [ 129 ] ⁴⁷ ⁴⁷ 47 Note that the charges @xmath
and @xmath in ( 9.7 ) are the standard electric and magnetic charges as
commonly defined in literature. The electric charges come from the dual
field strengths @xmath . See chapter 2 for more details. . The
derivation of the central charge from ( 9.1 ) is a bit subtle and uses
the fact that @xmath contains a @xmath term, while @xmath contains
@xmath . This eventually leads to @xmath . This calculation picks out
the electric and magnetic charge carried by the graviphoton, which
explicitly depend on the asymptotic values of the vector multiplet
scalars.

The mass, on the other hand, remains unaffected by scalars,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

just as in the minimal case.

The BPS bound, as always for stationary asymptotically flat solutions,
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the hypermultiplet sector seems to be completely decoupled
from the above calculations since the hypers do not influence the
asymptotic charges. This suggests that the stabilization of the hypers
at a particular supersymmetric point in moduli space as described in
chapter 4 might be the generic situation in this case.

##### 9.2.3 Black hole example

As a standard example we can just briefly glance through the
single-centered supersymmetric black holes of chapter 5 , c.f. [ 73 ] .
First we take the most standard case of a static black hole as a warm up
for the static examples in AdS and mAdS. We then also explain the case
of a rotating BPS saturated Kerr-Newman metric, which provides a
non-trivial test of the BPS bound ( 9.9 ).

The metric and symplectic sections in spherical coordinates are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.10)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath are arbitrary constants that decide the asymptotic value of
the scalars, usually chosen such that @xmath asymptotes exactly to
@xmath ⁴⁸ ⁴⁸ 48 One does not really need to stick to a particular choice
for @xmath . We can always perform a coordinate transformation to make
sure that we have the correct asymptotics at @xmath . This has exactly
the same effect. . The rotation @xmath is present only when the Kähler
connection ( 3.18 ) is non-vanishing.

Let us consider as a first simple example the prepotential @xmath with
non-vanishing magnetic charge @xmath and electric charge @xmath (also
non-vanishing @xmath ). This implies that @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath
connection vanishes and therefore the metric is static, @xmath . To
normalize the Kähler potential we choose @xmath and find for the central
charge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass can be calculated from ( 9.8 ) with the metric ( 9.10 ) and
spin connection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This illustrates that the above spacetime is supersymmetric since @xmath
.

A slightly more challenging example is provided if we take the
supersymmetric Kerr-Newman spacetime from section 4.2 of [ 73 ] . We
will literally consider the same solution, taken in minimal supergravity
with a prepotential @xmath , such that @xmath . In oblate spheroidal
coordinates (c.f. (59) of [ 73 ] ), the harmonic functions that give the
solution are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Solving for the vector field strengths from this, we find that @xmath .
This means that

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.13)
  -- -- -- --------

The Kähler connection (c.f. ( 3.18 )) in this example is in fact
non-vanishing,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, it goes as @xmath as @xmath and therefore does not contribute
to the supercharge anticommutator and keeps the Minkowski asymptotics.
If we further perform a redefinition @xmath , we obtain a stationary
supersymmetric metric in the familiar form

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.14)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

which is the Kerr-Newman metric with equal mass and charge, leading to a
nakedly singular rotating asymptotically flat spacetime. The mass can be
again found by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

after converting back to spherical coordinates ⁴⁹ ⁴⁹ 49 Eq. ( 9.15 )
holds also in the given set of Boyer-Lindquist coordinates, but in order
to use ( 9.8 ) one needs to first convert the relevant asymptotic
quantities in spherical coordinates. . This confirms that the
Kerr-Newman metric ( 9.14 ) is supersymmetric and that the angular
momentum, @xmath , indeed does not enter in the BPS bound ( 9.9 ) and
remains unconstrained by supersymmetry.

#### 9.3 AdS@xmath asymptotics

##### 9.3.1 General analysis

The necessary conditions for AdS @xmath vacuum, derived in chapter 3 ,
are:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.16)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

with constant scalars, vanishing field strengths @xmath and AdS @xmath
metric with cosmological constant ⁵⁰ ⁵⁰ 50 @xmath is the cosmological
constant of pure AdS @xmath with constant scalars. The curvature of all
asymptotic AdS solutions will approach this value as @xmath . The reason
for defining @xmath is because the AdS Killing spinors explicitly
contain this constant instead of the gauge coupling constant @xmath .
@xmath . ( 9.16 ) will have to hold at @xmath for all asymptotically AdS
spacetimes, together with the usual conditions on the metric. Note that
we do not allow for asymptotic magnetic charge for the graviphoton, i.e.
@xmath . Unlike in the minimal case, this does not rule out the
existence of magnetic charges but only restricts them.

The last condition in ( 9.16 ) tells us that the @xmath ’s are
restricted in a certain way. We will assume that they are aligned in one
particular direction asymptotically ⁵¹ ⁵¹ 51 @xmath rotates under @xmath
and can always be put in a particular direction. This however does not
mean that existing solutions in literature are automatically written in
such a way. (direction @xmath ), i.e. only @xmath . The Majorana Killing
spinors for AdS were derived in App. E ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where it was implicitly assumed that @xmath for the gauging in the
minimal case. The end result for the supercharge anticommutator will of
course not depend on which direction for the moment maps is chosen, but
when @xmath the Killing spinors (the chiral ones can again be found
using ( 9.4 )) take the simplest form. In the explicit formulas for the
asymptotic charges it is clear how to leave the choice for the direction
@xmath completely arbitrary. The basic anticommutator for asymptotically
AdS solutions can be again derived directly using the chiral version of
( E.5 ) in ( 9.1 ). The result takes the expected form from the @xmath
superalgebra,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

as discussed in detail in the case of minimal gauged supergravity. Here
we also require that the @xmath and @xmath gauged conections in ( 9.1 )
fall off fast enough as @xmath in order to precisely recover the above
expression. ( 9.18 ) can be taken as a definition of asymptotically AdS
spacetimes. Any spacetime, whose Dirac bracket ( 9.1 ) does not simplify
to ( 9.18 ) is therefore not asymptotically AdS. In the explicit example
that follows the fall off will already be of the correct type, but in
principle one needs to always make sure that the spacetime in question
really is asymptotically AdS in the sense of ( 9.16 ) and ( 9.18 ). Each
of the asymptotic charges @xmath and @xmath can be explicitly derived,
but we will again concentrate on the mass and charge in the stationary
case.

##### 9.3.2 Stationary solutions

For asymptotically AdS solutions with vanishing magnetic charge @xmath ,
the supersymmetry anticommutator is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with ⁵² ⁵² 52 Note that the following expression includes both the gauge
coupling constant @xmath and the asymptotic cosmological constant @xmath
.

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.20)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The angular momenta @xmath remain exactly as given in App. F ,
unaffected directly by the scalars. The BPS bound is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the scalars enter explicitly in the definition of the mass (
9.20 ), unlike for the asymptotically flat solutions.

##### 9.3.3 Static example

Here we will explicitly consider the static supersymmetric spacetimes
with non-constant scalars constructed by Sabra in [ 110 ] ⁵³ ⁵³ 53 As
explained in chapter 6 , they do not correspond to black holes but
rather to naked singularities due to the absence of an event horizon. .
Unlike in the asymptotically flat case, one cannot easily find what the
mass is just from looking at the metric.

Briefly summarized, the solution is in gauged supergravity with constant
FI parameters @xmath and an arbitrary number of vector multiplets. The
metric and symplectic sections are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.23)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

It is immediately clear that the charge @xmath of this configuration
will be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denote the corresponding asymptotic values that will only
depend on the gauge parameters via the second row of ( 9.23 ). Since the
solutions are supersymmetric and static ( @xmath ) it follows that the
mass takes the exact same value as the charge @xmath . We can show this
explicitly for any given solution.

Let us for simplicity take the prepotential @xmath with electric charges
@xmath and FI parameters @xmath . The sections are therefore @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath . The asymptotic charge @xmath from ( 9.24 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to find the mass of this configuration we first need to perform
a simple coordinate rescaling to make sure that the metric asymptotes to
AdS in spherical coordinates (equivalently we could insist that @xmath
asymptotes to @xmath ). Transforming @xmath , with @xmath we achieve

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

which exactly asymptotes to AdS with cosmological constant @xmath in
spherical coordinates. The functions that further define the metric now
take the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The relevant spin connection components in this case are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we can use ( 9.20 ) to find the mass of this configuration:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

as expected. This is a rather non-trivial check that ( 9.20 ) gives the
correct expression for the AdS mass, and therefore reproduces correctly
results from holographic renormalization [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 ,
29 , 30 ] . Interestingly, we note that in the process of simplifying
the above formula, in “ @xmath ” one finds the mass to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. picking the first subleading term of the Kähler potential after
normalizing it to asymptote to @xmath . This simple formula turns out to
give the mass for the static solutions both in Minkowski (c.f. ( 9.12 )
and ( 9.15 )) and in AdS. We now turn to magnetic AdS asymptotics and
show that the same formula effectively gives the mass also for
supersymmetric solutions in mAdS.

#### 9.4 mAdS@xmath asymptotics

##### 9.4.1 General analysis

Here the asymptotic conditions on the spacetime remain as in ( 9.16 )
with constant scalars, only now the magnetic field strengths are @xmath
under the restriction @xmath coming from Dirac quantization. As before,
we have the redefinition of the cosmological constant to be @xmath and
assume the moment map in direction @xmath to be non-zero.

For @xmath , the Killing spinors of mAdS @xmath were given App. E . Here
we can give the projections obeyed by the chiral Killing spinors as
straightforward generalization of the analysis in chaper 6.3 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant phase, and the choice of sign of
the second projection corresponds to the choice of sign for the charge
quantization condition. We choose to set @xmath , which can be done
without any loss of generality. However, some explicit solutions in
literature might implicitly use @xmath or other choices, which results
in rotation of the symplectic sections @xmath by @xmath in all the
equations that follow. The functional dependence of the Killing spinors
is only radial, @xmath . This can be seen explicitly by analyzing the
Killing spinor equation @xmath . Solving it also forces all
asymptotically mAdS spacetimes to satisfy @xmath as @xmath .

For asymptotically mAdS solutions with non-vanishing magnetic charge,
the supersymmetry anticommutator is just

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with only two supercharge singlets as discussed above. The mass is given
by explicitly plugging ( 9.29 ) in ( 9.1 ) for any asymptotically mAdS
solution. It again turns out that the expression takes more convenient
form if we choose an upper triangular vielbein ⁵⁴ ⁵⁴ 54 Note that the
mass can only be defined upto an overall multiplicative constant, since
one can always rescale the asymptotic Killing spinor by @xmath ,
changing the mass by @xmath . For Minkowski and AdS, there are already
well-established conventions that fix @xmath , but this is not the case
for mAdS. :

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.31)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The BPS bound in this case is simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that there is a crucial difference between the AdS and the mAdS
masses since the scalars enter differently in the expressions, e.g. in
the first term on the r.h.s. of ( 9.31 ). We will see in the next
subsection that this ultimately leads to a different notion of the mass
in the two cases and that the standard holographic renormalization
technique is equivalent to the mass definition ( 9.20 ), but does not
reproduce correctly ( 9.31 ). Note however that one can define another
conserved charge for asymptotically mAdS spacetimes, in analogy to the
central charge that appears in the Riemann AdS superalgebra (see section
9.5 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is always finite, since we have the identity @xmath . In this case
@xmath does not play any role in the superalgebra, but seems to be
relevant when one computes masses via the holographic renormalization
procedure (see more later).

##### 9.4.2 Black hole example

Here we concentrate on the static supersymmetric black holes with
magnetic charges of chapter 6.3 . The theory is again gauged
supergravity with an arbitrary number of vector multiplets and FI
gaugings @xmath . The magnetic charges are restricted by the equation
@xmath ⁵⁵ ⁵⁵ 55 We just choose the positive sign here without any loss
of generality. , and the metric and scalars are given by

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (9.34)
  -- -- -- -- --------

If we evaluate the mass of this solutions from ( 9.31 ) we get the
supersymmetric value @xmath .

To see this in some detail, let us again consider the simplest case of
prepotential @xmath that was also discussed carefully in chapter 6.3 .
We have @xmath @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and magnetic charges

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We again need to rescale @xmath and @xmath in order to have the metric
asymptote to mAdS in spherical coordinates just as above: @xmath , with
@xmath and cosmological constant coming from @xmath . The metric is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath . Evaluating ( 9.31 ) now gives

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (9.38)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We are now in position to compare this result with the one obtained via
the holographic renormalization techniques of [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ,
28 , 29 , 30 , 130 ] . As found in section 9 of [ 3 ] , the mass of the
above black holes is non-vanishing if one uses the explicit formulas
provided in [ 130 ] based on the procedure of holographic
renormalization [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 ] . In fact
these formulas give the same result as if ( 9.20 ) were used, i.e. the
holographic renormalization procedure does not consider the case of
magnetic AdS asymptotics separately. More precisely, the holographically
renormalized energy of asymptotically mAdS spacetimes is given by @xmath
, i.e. one needs to combine ( 9.31 ) and ( 9.33 ) in a quantity that
cannot be directly associated with the time-translation symmetry.

Remarkably, the effective formula that worked in the static cases for
Minkowski and AdS (see ( 9.12 ) and ( 9.28 )) turns out to give the
correct result once again,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although the fundamental mass formulas ( 9.8 ),( 9.20 ) and ( 9.31 ) are
a priori considerably different, it turns out that the corresponding
supersymmetric solutions have such properties that in each case the mass
reduces to exactly the same simple formula.

#### 9.5 RiAdS@xmath asymptotics

##### 9.5.1 General analysis and static solutions

Here yet again the asymptotic conditions on the spacetime remain as in (
9.16 ) with constant scalars and vanishing electromagnetic field
strength. As before, we assume the moment map in direction @xmath to be
non-zero. Analogously to the cases above, the superalgebra remains
exactly the same as in the minimal case in the previous chapter so we
directly focus on the definition of the asymptotic charges, which
changes accordingly. They can be derived by realizing that the RiAdS
Killing spinor, derived in appendix E , in the standard conventions
adopted in this thesis, obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant phase.

We are mostly interested in describing objects with vanishing @xmath
like static black holes and branes. The relevant asymptotic charges in
this case are the mass @xmath and the central charge @xmath . In the
general case with arbitrary vector and hypermultiplets, they are defined
as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the anti-selfdual part of the graviphoton field
strength.

Compared to ( 8.67 ), the expression for the mass with vector and
hypermultiplets is changed only slightly in order to accommodate for the
cosmological constant, which is now dependent on the scalar fields via
the expression @xmath .

The expression for the central charge is reminiscent of the expression
for the magnetic charge caused by the graviphoton field strength ⁵⁶ ⁵⁶
56 @xmath are the electric and magnetic charge densities of the vector
field strengths appearing in the lagrangian. , just as in ( 8.71 ). The
magnetic charge, @xmath , is forced to vanish due to supersymmetry of
the vacuum as proven in [ 21 ] . @xmath is in fact the first subleading
term in the expression for the magnetic charge due to the extra @xmath
factor and is automatically finite in the limit @xmath . For constant
scalars, ( 9.42 ) clearly reduces to ( 8.71 ) and the central charge
vanishes. For non-constant scalar profiles, however, it is now possible
to generate a non-zero @xmath , which turns out to be crucial for
generating massive BPS black brane with an event horizon of chapter 6.4
.

The BPS bound for static asymptotically RiAdS solutions when a central
charge is allowed is therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

as already predicted. In case when both @xmath and @xmath vanish we
recover a 1/2 BPS solution like the ones in the previous section, while
in case @xmath we have a 1/4 BPS excitation. All other cases result in
non-supersymmetric excitations over RiAdS.

##### 9.5.2 Black brane example

As already explained in chapter 6.4 , one can find a class of 1/4 BPS
solutions, given by

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (9.44)
  -- -- -- -- --------

under the restriction @xmath , with the toroidal area element given by (
6.74 ). These solutions satisfy the BPS bound @xmath , where both
asymptotic charges are non-vanishing. Thus, unlike their spherical
analogs, the magnetic black branes have a non-vanishing mass.

To see this in some detail, consider the simple case of a prepotential
@xmath . We have @xmath and @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and magnetic charges

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this solution is in almost complete analogy to the one
discussed above in the spherical case. It has a double horizon at @xmath
, which shields the singularity for any positive value of the arbitrary
parameter @xmath . Just as in the spherical example, we have to rescale
the radial coordinate @xmath with @xmath in order to have the proper
asymptotics. Evaluating ( 9.41 ) and ( 9.42 ) eventually leads to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This proves that the mass is equal to the central charge. The solution
is a 1/4 BPS toroidal black hole in RiAdS for any finite value of @xmath
and black brane in AdS as @xmath . Note that, unlike the spherically
symmetric examples, the mass of the BPS black branes is not given by (
9.39 ).

From the form of the superalgebra it is clear that one should in
principle be able to add arbitrary electric charges to these solutions
and still keep them supersymmetric. To our best knowledge, such
solutions have not been yet constructed (see however [ 131 , 132 ] for
supersymmetric and extremal electric black branes that do not strictly
asymptote to AdS).

#### 9.6 Final remarks

To summarize, the main results of this chapter are the general mass
formulas ( 9.8 ), ( 9.20 ), ( 9.31 ), and ( 9.41 ) for asymptotically
flat, AdS, mAdS, and RiAdS spacetimes, respectively. We confirmed the
well-known result [ 129 ] for the central charge in Minkowski, showing
that the hypermultiplets do not alter it. We also showed that
supergravity does make a clear distinction between masses in AdS and
mAdS. Our analysis in AdS generalizes some previous works that did not
allow for non-trivial scalars, e.g. [ 133 ] . The results for
asymptotically AdS solutions are in fact equivalent to performing the
procedure of holographic renormalization [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 ,
29 , 30 , 130 ] , i.e. ( 9.20 ) can be directly used in AdS/CFT
applications. In the asymptotically mAdS case, to our best
understanding, ( 9.31 ) is the relevant mass formula that needs to be
used. Physically, the mass formula in mAdS might seem a bit
counter-intuitive as it allows for black hole solutions with vanishing
mass. However, from the point of view of the superalgebra this is the
only possibility for BPS objects in mAdS. Therefore @xmath should not
come as a surprise for the static magnetic black holes.

It is important to observe that the scalar profiles as functions of the
radial coordinate enter explicitly in the mass formulas ( 9.20 ) and (
9.31 ). Thus, the AdS and mAdS masses not only depend on the asymptotic
values of the scalars, but also on how the scalars approach these
values. This feature provides a new point of view towards the attractor
mechanism in AdS/mAdS. It shows that scalars are much more restricted to
behave in a particular way in comparison with the Minkowski case.
Nevertheless, for the spherically symmetric supersymmetric solutions it
turned out that the mass can be described by the same formula in all
three asymptotic vacua,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is usually chosen to be @xmath . This essentially means
that the mass is the first subleading term of the Kähler potential
expansion, no matter what the details of the solution and its
asymptotics are. It is interesting to understand the physical reasons
behind this.

### Chapter 10 Black hole superalgebras

#### 10.1 Introduction

In this chapter we are going to discuss a simple application of the
analysis of superalgebras, which results in a no-go theorem for static
supersymmetric black holes in AdS @xmath in theories without
hypermultiplets. The theorem is based purely on superalgebras and holds
very generally for @xmath @xmath supergravity, including possible higher
derivative theories. In the case of hypermultiplet gaugings, we give
(very constraining) conditions on the gauging that must be met in order
for a genuine BPS black hole in AdS @xmath to exist. Additionally, we
prove that the attractors for BPS black holes in Minkowski and mAdS are
unique. There are no possibilities for near-horizon geometries, other
than the ones already known from chapters 5 and 6 . We also briefly
comment on @xmath black hole superalgebras as these turn out to be very
closely related to their four-dimensional analogs and the main
conclusions about non-rotating BPS black holes and rings in AdS @xmath
are the same.

The proof is based on a simple observation: a supersymmetric black hole
interpolates between two different supersymmetric vacua. One is the
asymptotic spacetime which is typically at an infinite distance away
from the black hole itself, while the other is the near-horizon geometry
right outside the black hole horizon. These two vacua are solutions of
the equations of motions by themselves (in the static case) and need to
necessarily preserve some supersymmetry if the full solution is to be
supersymmetric. The full black hole solution thus approaches these two
vacua in the corresponding limits (usually in spherical coordinates
@xmath corresponds to the vacuum at infinity, e.g. Minkowski or AdS, and
@xmath to the near-horizon geometry, e.g. AdS @xmath S @xmath ). This
leads to a very simple mathematical relation between the superalgebras
of the asymptotic spaces - if the superalgebra of the vacuum at infinity
is denoted by @xmath and the near horizon superalgebra as @xmath , then
the full black hole symmetry algebra @xmath is a sub(super)algebra of
both asymptotic superalgbras, @xmath and @xmath . Since we want the full
solution to preserve some supersymmetry, @xmath must include some
fermionic charges. This discussion can be repeated in a similar manner
for all solutions in supergravity that interpolate between two distinct
BPS vacua, e.g. different kinds of black objects and M/D-branes (see [
134 , 135 ] ). Inverting the argument, it is clear that if two different
superalgebras do not have a common subsuperalgebra, there can never be a
supersymmetric solution that interpolates between the two corresponding
vacua.

We use this observation in the context of gauged @xmath @xmath
supergravity to show that there is no static near-horizon geometry (with
spherical symmetry) that can match to the AdS superalgebra in absence of
hypermultiplets, preserving a number of supercharges. There are two
major steps in this proof that have already been accomplished in
previous literature. The authors of [ 90 ] proved that in four
dimensional supergravities the only allowed near horizon geometry for
spherically symmetric static black holes in Minkowski or AdS is the
product spacetime AdS @xmath S @xmath . This result holds in full
generality, including possible higher derivative terms. The other
important step was achieved in [ 50 ] , where all possible
supersymmetric AdS @xmath S @xmath solutions were analyzed in the
context of general gauged @xmath @xmath supergravities with possible
vector, hyper-, and tensor multiplets. It was shown that only two
different classes exist, the fully BPS Bertotti-Robinson spacetime, and
a half BPS solution where the radii of the AdS @xmath and S @xmath are
different. These two solutions define their own distinct superalgebras.
The important point is that, even though particular details of the
solution might change depending on the theory, superalgebras remain the
same in supergravity, i.e. no matter how many additional higher
derivative corrections we consider they cannot influence the abstract
superalgebra charges and structure constants. This ensures that there
exist only two versions of @xmath which one can choose from in order to
find a supersymmetric black hole with Minkowski or AdS asymptotics in
four dimensions.

Our remaining job is therefore clear. We first need to consider
carefully the two near horizon superalgebras, @xmath , which is done in
section 10.2 . Then we list the possible asymptotic vacua at infinity,
Minkowski, AdS @xmath , and magnetic AdS @xmath , and their
corresponding superalgebras in section 10.3 . In section 10.4 we analyze
the possible black hole subalgebras, showing how the two near-horizon
geometries match to the Minkowski and mAdS superalgebras. We then show
that the AdS @xmath superalgebra has no common (spherically symmetric)
subsuperalgebra with the half-BPS near-horizon solution, while
explicitly constructing the common @xmath algebra inside the AdS @xmath
and the Bertotti-Robinson superalgebras. We remind the reader of the
conditions for existence of these two different vacua in the same
theory, thus completing the proof that static supersymmetric solutions
in AdS can never develop an event horizon and form black holes in the
absence of hypermultiplets.

Note that we discuss only static spherically symmetric solutions. Thus
all considered near-horizon and asymptotic geometries possess time
translation and 3d rotation symmetries. Every superalgebra in
consideration therefore includes the bosonic charges @xmath and @xmath ,
obeying the commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

We require these generators and commutation relations, corresponding to
the group @xmath (or @xmath when time is compact as in AdS), to be
present also in the black hole superalgebra, @xmath . We are therefore
looking for a common subalgebra, @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath
includes at least one fermionic symmetry.

In the end of this chapter, section 10.5 includes a short review of the
known results about BPS black objects in @xmath supergravity and we show
that the existence of non-rotating solutions in AdS @xmath is again
related to the realization of some very particular hypermultiplet
gaugings.

#### 10.2 Near-horizon superalgebras

In this section we consider more carefully the two available choices for
supersymmetric near-horizon geometries. One is the fully BPS, i.e.
@xmath conserved supercharges, Bertotti-Robinson solution, while the
other one is a 1/2 BPS solution which we choose to call magnetic AdS
@xmath S @xmath . The spacetime in both cases is a direct product of AdS
@xmath and S @xmath , but their corresponding superalgebras @xmath are
very distinct.

##### 10.2.1 Bertotti-Robinson superalgebra

The superalgebra of the fully BPS AdS @xmath S @xmath , @xmath , was
analyzed in detail in, e.g. [ 55 , 136 ] . Since this is the
near-horizon geometry of static asymptotically flat black holes (c.f. [
73 ] ), the superalgebra is very well known. We therefore do not go into
much depth here, just mentioning that the bosonic symmetry group is
@xmath which includes as a subgroup @xmath . There are eight
supercharges that are organized into two spinors @xmath . The relevant
commutation relations for our purposes here are ⁵⁷ ⁵⁷ 57 Note that we
keep the gamma matrix conventions of appendix A . In particular, all
gamma matrices are imaginary, and the charge conjugation matrix is
@xmath . :

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.2)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The charges @xmath and @xmath that appear in the supercharge
anticommutator come from the @xmath symmetry of AdS @xmath . They are
always broken in the full black hole solution. But the superalgebra
(anti-)commutators can only produce symmetries on the right hand side.
This means that the black hole superalgebra has to necessarily include
only those supercharges whose anticommutator does not produce the broken
symmetries @xmath and @xmath . We will see explicitly how this happens
in section 10.4 .

##### 10.2.2 Magnetic AdS@xmathS@xmath

The magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath , analyzed carefully in [ 50 ] , is the
near-horizon geometry of the static magnetic black holes in AdS @xmath
that were described in chapter 6.3 . These black holes do not asymptote
to the usual fully supersymmetric AdS @xmath solution, but rather to
magnetic AdS - a topologically distinct vacuum preserving two of the
original eight supercharges and distinguished by its non-vanishing
magnetic charges (in the electrically gauged theory). This is the reason
why we also choose to use the terminology magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath .
Unlike its fully supersymmetric analog, the superalgebra of the magnetic
AdS @xmath S @xmath is not generally known. It can be straightforwardly
derived via the procedure of chapter 7 (knowing that half of the Killing
spinors components are projected out by the matrix @xmath ) and the use
of super-Jacobi identities, but it will not be needed for our purposes
here. It is enough to note the observation in [ 50 ] that the Killing
spinors do not transform under rotations, i.e. the supercharges flip
spin and become @xmath scalars. It is easiest to denote the four scalar
supercharges by @xmath . The important commutator for us here is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this makes the superalgebras of the Bertotti-Robinson and the
magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath very different. From ( 10.2 ) we can see
that spatial rotations do not leave any invariant spinor components,
while ( 10.3 ) shows the opposite behavior.

#### 10.3 Asymptotic superalgebras

Here we concentrate on the asymptotic superalgebras, @xmath . We analyze
the three BPS asymptotic vacua that are subject to the theorem of [ 90 ]
, i.e. we know that in these spacetimes all static black holes with
spherical symmetry become AdS @xmath S @xmath near the horizon. These
are the fully supersymmetric Minkowski and AdS @xmath solutions from
chapter 3 and the quarter-BPS magnetic AdS @xmath , analyzed in appendix
E .

##### 10.3.1 Poincaré superalgebra

The best known example of a superalgebra is of course the Poincaré
superalgebra. In @xmath @xmath , it consists of eight fermionic charges
packed in two spinors @xmath and ten bosonic symmetries from the
Poincaré group in four dimensions - one time translation @xmath , space
translations @xmath , spatial rotations @xmath , and boosts @xmath (
@xmath ). The important relations of the superalgebra for us are:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.4)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the complex central charge that accommodates for
electric and magnetic charges in asymptotically flat solutions.

##### 10.3.2 AdS@xmath superalgebra

A full account of the AdS @xmath superalgebra, @xmath , was already
presented in chapter 8 . Here we just selectively repeat some of the
facts needed for the purposes of the present chapter. The spacetime
symmetries of AdS @xmath have their exact counterparts in the Poincaré
group, although translations no longer commute with each other. Unlike
in the Poincaré case however, @xmath does not allow for central charges.
The gauge group generator, @xmath , corresponds to the R-symmetry group
and thus rotates the supercharges between each other. The relevant parts
of the superalgebra here are:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.5)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

##### 10.3.3 mAdS@xmath superalgebra

The superalgebra of magnetic AdS @xmath was also derived in chapter 8 .
It is very simple due to the fact that it consists of only two
supercharges, time translations, rotations, and the gauge group
generator @xmath . The supercharges in this case are @xmath scalars,
which we denote by @xmath , @xmath . The important commutators are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.6)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

#### 10.4 Black hole superalgebras and a no-go theorem

We finally turn into analysis of the superalgebras @xmath , belonging to
the full black hole solutions. We give the superalgebras of the known
supersymmetric black holes in Minkowski (c.f. chapter 5 ) and magnetic
AdS (c.f. chapter 6.3 ). We then search for possible black hole
superalgebras in AdS, proving a no-go theorem and showing how it can be
potentially circumvented.

##### 10.4.1 Asymptotically flat black holes

###### Bertotti-Robinson horizon

The most general static supersymmetric black holes in ungauged
supergravity are half-BPS and interpolate between the maximally
supersymmetric Bertotti-Robinson solution near the horizon and Minkowski
at infinity. The superalgebra of these black holes can be found by
projecting out half of the supersymmetries in ( 10.2 ) and ( 10.4 ). At
the horizon, it turns out the remaining supercharges obey @xmath .
Asymptotically, the four relevant supercharges from the black hole point
of view are given by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . The black hole
superalgebra is therefore

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.7)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where only four of the spinor components @xmath are linearly
independent. The time translations generator of the black hole
superalgebra, @xmath , has a different meaning when embedded in the two
bigger superalgebras. Near the horizon, @xmath from ( 10.2 ), while
asymptotically @xmath from ( 10.4 ). The rotation generators @xmath
remain exactly the same in ( 10.7 ), ( 10.2 ), and ( 10.4 ), while the
remaining bosonic generators, @xmath in the Bertotti-Robinson
superalgebra and @xmath in the Poincaré superalgebra, are broken ⁵⁸ ⁵⁸
58 Of course one needs to make sure that the remaining commutation
relations close under the super-Jacobi identities when breaking a given
bosonic or fermionic symmetry. In other words, not every way of
projecting out some symmetries from ( 10.2 ) and ( 10.4 ) leads to a
consistent (sub)superalgebra. This is however the case at hand, due to
the fact that @xmath commutes with the rotations and the remaining
supercharges in the Bertotti-Robinson superalgebra and @xmath is a
central charge in the Poincaré superalgebra. . The black hole
superalgebra can be rewritten in a more suggestive and clear form if we
write the remaining four supercharges in two complex parameters, @xmath
and @xmath . The superalgebra then takes the form

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (10.8)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We will soon discover that the @xmath superalgebra in fact admits
another subalgebra that consists of the exact same fermionic and bosonic
charges with different structure constants.

These facts are all well-understood and expected for the case of
ungauged BPS black holes, yet they provide a clear and straightforward
realization of the general idea in section 10.1 . This is an example
where @xmath , i.e. the superalgebra of the full black hole solutions is
smaller than the corresponding superalgebras of the two limiting
spacetimes between which it interpolates. This need not be necessarily
the case as we discuss next.

###### Magnetic AdS@xmathS@xmath horizon

One can show that Minkowski and magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath do not
share a common subalgebra that includes rotations and supercharges. The
rigorous proof follows the same considerations as will be presented in
detail for the case of @xmath superalgebra. If one considers all
possible projections and combinations of supercharges that exist in the
Poincaré superalgebra, ( 10.7 ) is the only consistent subalgebra that
follows the requirements of @xmath symmetry and broken spatial
translations and boost charges. It is clear that the supercharges in
this case are not rotationally invariant and therefore magnetic AdS
@xmath S @xmath cannot be a near-horizon geometry for any asymptotically
flat BPS solution.

##### 10.4.2 Magnetic AdS black holes

###### Magnetic AdS@xmathS@xmath horizon

The static BPS black holes in magnetic AdS, constructed originally in [
21 ] , are an example of supersymmetric solutions that interpolate
between magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath near the horizon and mAdS @xmath at
infinity, as shown in [ 50 ] . The black holes are quarter-BPS and their
corresponding Killing spinors in fact obey the same projections as the
ones of pure mAdS @xmath . This means that the black hole superalgebra
is exactly the same as its asymptotic superalgebra, @xmath . On the
other hand, there is still a supersymmetry enhancement near the horizon,
where the solution preserves four instead of only two supercharges. The
projection that relates ( 10.3 ) to ( 10.6 ) corresponds to @xmath if we
would have kept the spinor indices. Observe that the supercharges are
scalars under rotations everywhere in spacetime, something that seems to
distinguish magnetic solutions in gauged @xmath @xmath supergravity. We
thus find that @xmath with no need to repeat again the black hole
superalgebra, ( 10.6 ).

###### Bertotti-Robinson horizon

Magnetic AdS does not share a common superalgebra with the
Bertotti-Robinson solution. This can be most easily seen when
considering the possible subalgebras of @xmath that have a bosonic group
@xmath . It turns out there are two such superalgebras (one was given in
( 10.7 ) and the other will be discussed in the coming subsection), but
neither of them has rotationally invariant supercharges. Therefore,
supersymmetric black holes in mAdS can never have a Bertotti-Robinson
horizon.

##### 10.4.3 Black holes in AdS@xmath?

Now we want to show that ( 10.5 ) has no common subalgebra with ( 10.3 )
under the requirement that the common subalgebra must include some
fermionic charges, as well as time translations and rotations. It is
clear that @xmath is a priori different from @xmath and the magnetic AdS
@xmath S @xmath superalgebra, thus the only way of finding common
subalgebras is to project away at least some of the supercharges. The
AdS @xmath superalgebra is written with two four-component spinors,
@xmath . Out of this eight supercharges, one can choose an arbitrary
linear combination to be preserved. The remaining supercharges in any
case will obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The projection operator @xmath consists generally of combinations of the
basis @xmath matrices @xmath , @xmath and the @xmath spinor space
matrices spanned by @xmath . However, the requirements that @xmath is a
projection operator and that we only consider rotation invariant
subalgebras limits substantially the allowed choices for projection. An
additional requirement for a potential black hole superalgebra in this
case is that no space translations or boost charges are allowed, since
these are certainly not present in the near-horizon superalgebras ( 10.2
) and ( 10.3 ). These have to be then taken out of the AdS superalgebra,
and the choice of projection has to guarantee that the remaining
supercharges do not produce @xmath and @xmath in the new supercharge
anticommutator.

More technically speaking, the requirement of rotation invariant
superalgebra means that the projection operator must include @xmath and
@xmath in a symmetric way, as otherwise some of the angular momentum
generators will be broken. A simple example is if one chooses a
projection of the type @xmath , which results in a closed subalgebra
only if @xmath and @xmath are absent. This means that the projection may
only include combinations of matrices @xmath . However, matrices @xmath
and @xmath will not be able to project out the charges @xmath in the
supercharge anticommutator since they do not anticommute with @xmath .
On the other hand, @xmath and @xmath do not anticommute with @xmath and
will not project the translations @xmath out of the supercharge
anticommutator. We are therefore left only with @xmath as a potential
candidate for a projection that leads to a consistent rotationally
invariant superalgebra with broken spatial translations and boosts. Thus
we are left with four supercharges that obey the relation @xmath . The
resulting superalgebra commutators are

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (10.10)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

where @xmath from ( 10.5 ) and the @xmath and @xmath are indeed broken.
This is the @xmath superalgebra of the electric Reissner-Nordström-AdS
(RN-AdS) solutions, described in [ 102 ] . These solutions, and their
generalizations for arbitrary couplings with vector multiplets, [ 110 ]
, are static supersymmetric asymptotically AdS @xmath solutions that
represent nakedly singular spacetimes. This can be now more easily
understood from the superalgebra point of view from the following
argument.

Clearly, the @xmath superalgebra relations above do not correspond to a
subalgebra of the magnetic near-horizon geometry ( 10.3 ). More
importantly, no additional rotationally symmetric projections of the
supercharges in ( 10.10 ) can ever make the supercharges singlets under
the angular momentum generators. Therefore, there does not exist a
common rotationally invariant subsuperalgebra of @xmath and the magnetic
AdS @xmath S @xmath superalgebras. This could also be expected from the
fact that AdS @xmath and magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath are topologically
distinct for their magnetic charge. Interestingly, a common subalgebra
of the AdS @xmath and the Robonson-Bertotti superalgebras does exist,
since @xmath . This can be seen by considering ( 10.2 ) and imposing the
breaking of the @xmath symmetries, together with the projection @xmath
for the supercharges. This again leads to the @xmath superalgebra,
although written in a different basis for the fermionic supercharges and
angular momentum parameters. This is therefore the superalgebra that
static BPS black holes in AdS @xmath must obey. The most intuitive form
of the superalgebra is written with two complex supercharges, @xmath and
@xmath , similarly to the case of flat black holes:

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (10.11)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

Now that we have established a possibility for a black hole in AdS
@xmath with a fully BPS near-horizon geometry, we need to remind
ourselves the algebraic conditions for existence of the two fully BPS
asymptotic vacua (AdS @xmath and AdS @xmath S @xmath ). From chapter 3
we know that the AdS @xmath S @xmath solutions require

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while the AdS @xmath vacuum is realized when

  -- -------- -- -- ---------
     @xmath         (10.13)
  -- -------- -- -- ---------

We therefore need to have a theory where both of these vacua are
allowed, i.e. where @xmath and @xmath can be realized in field space.
Clearly, this cannot happen in a theory where the moment maps are
constant. This is however conceivable for theories with hypermultiplets
(although we are not aware of explicit examples), where the moment maps
may vary in different points of spacetime via their dependence on the
hypers. This concludes our proof that static supersymmetric black holes
in AdS @xmath cannot exist in theories without hypermultiplets,
confirmed by the explicit solutions of [ 102 ] and [ 110 ] . It remains
to be seen whether explicit constructions of black holes with @xmath
superalgebra in theories with gauged hypermultiplets can be found.

#### 10.5 A glance at black objects in @xmath

Although slightly more complicated, the story of supersymmetric objects
with event horizon in five-dimensional supergravity is not dissimilar.
Due to the extra spatial dimension, in @xmath event horizons can have
both spherical (S @xmath ) topology (black holes) and ring-shaped (S
@xmath S @xmath ) topology (black rings). The previous discussion in
this chapter about static BPS black holes in @xmath has a natural
extension to “non-rotating” black holes and rings in @xmath . A common
term in @xmath literature, non-rotating refers to solutions whose
rotation vanishes at the event horizon. The near-horizon geometry is
therefore again static and described by a product spacetime with AdS and
spherical factors. For a good overview of the main results in this field
one can read the introductory chapters of standard references, e.g. [
137 , 138 , 139 , 140 , 141 , 142 ] .

In the asymptotically flat case, the non-rotating BPS black holes are
given by the supersymmetric limit of the BMPV solutions [ 143 ] with
near-horizon geometry AdS @xmath S @xmath (here S @xmath is a squashed
sphere for the generic cases with non-vanishing angular momentum,
becoming the maximally symmetric sphere in the static case). On the
other hand, the BPS black rings [ 144 ] in Minkowski have a near-horizon
geometry AdS @xmath S @xmath . Similarly to the static solutions in AdS
@xmath , at present there are no known non-rotating BPS black objects
(i.e. solutions with event horizon) in AdS @xmath .

Unlike in @xmath , the classification of near-horizon geometries in
@xmath (see e.g. [ 142 ] ) is a much more involved and still ongoing
research direction, so one cannot use the same arguments as above to
formulate a no-go theorem for AdS solutions. However, we can again show
that the flat near-horizon superalgebras can fit to the asymptotical
superalgebra of AdS @xmath , @xmath in @xmath @xmath gauged supergravity
⁵⁹ ⁵⁹ 59 In @xmath dimensions, @xmath supergravity has a total of @xmath
supercharges and is the theory most closely related to @xmath @xmath .
This is however not of special importance for us here, since it is
trivial to extend the discussion to theories with more supersymmetry
without changing the final outcome. The AdS @xmath superalgebra in
general @xmath -extended @xmath supergravity theories is @xmath (see,
e.g. [ 145 ] ). .

The flat near-horizon superalgebras were carefully considered in [ 139 ]
, where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath -dimensional near-horizon
geometries were connected to each other in a very suggestive manner ⁶⁰
⁶⁰ 60 This also implies that similar consideration will hold even in
@xmath . We will however not pursue this subject further in this thesis.
. The relevant superalgebras turn out to be the following (table 1 of [
139 ] ). The static AdS @xmath S @xmath exhibits @xmath where one of the
rotation groups ( @xmath ) is entagled with the supercharges and the
other one is not. The rotating BMPV solution still preserves @xmath on
the squashed sphere, which arrange themselves to preserve the same
number of supercharges in the superalgebra @xmath . The AdS @xmath S
@xmath of the black ring curiously gives rise to @xmath , where the
extra bosonic symmetries @xmath that decouple from the supercharges this
time arise from the AdS @xmath symmetry group.

Now it becomes clear that our discussion in section 10.2 of the group
@xmath becomes equally relevant in @xmath , where all of the possible
near-horizon geometries share the same fermionic symmetry, together with
some extra bosonic symmetries that are equally simple to understand and
handle. It is also easy to see that the spherically symmetric way of
breaking the AdS @xmath symmetry @xmath leads to the group @xmath @xmath
@xmath (see e.g. [ 137 ] for more details), which can obviously be
broken further to @xmath @xmath @xmath . From our previous discussion in
@xmath it is also clear that @xmath @xmath @xmath and/or @xmath @xmath
@xmath are subalgebras of the three different near-horizon
superalgebras. Therefore we conclude that on the level of superalgebras
it is allowed to have BPS black holes and rings and AdS @xmath with flat
horizons. One again needs to make sure that these vacua exist within the
same theory, which once more leads to the requirement of some specific
hypermultiplet gaugings in @xmath @xmath supergravity. To our best
knowledge, such examples are not excluded from existence, but also not
explicitly known at this moment.

### Chapter 11 Discussion and Outlook

#### 11.1 Lessons

What are the lessons to be learned and the conclusions to be drawn from
the case-study of @xmath -dimensional @xmath supergravity? I will try to
answer this broad question in the context of each separate direction in
theoretical physics as outlined in chapter 1 .

###### General Relativity

From the point of view of GR, @xmath @xmath supergravity is a particular
supersymmetric way of coupling matter to gravity. However, supergravity
does have to tell something about general GR solutions that are not
necessarily supersymmetric. We saw that the concept of BPS bounds, which
in the case of @xmath is equivalent with the Witten-Nester energy,
provides a stability criterion for very large classes of solutions. This
ensures that vacua such as Minkowski and AdS are stable and cannot decay
into negative mass states such as (nakedly singular) Schwarzschild
spacetimes. Our analysis in @xmath enriches this to include
Einstein-Maxwell theories with or without cosmological constant. This is
clearly related with the cosmological censorship conjecture. In fact,
for static solutions in Minkowski, we see that the BPS bound projects
all nakedly singular solutions. This is however no longer the case with
rotations in Minkowski and with asymptotically AdS spacetimes, where a
well-defined version of the cosmological censorship is still missing.
Often, for AdS and other interesting nontrivial solutions in GR,
physical intuition can be misleading and one needs to use all available
mathematical tools to gain further insight. In this respect, I think
that the study of classical solutions in supergravity can provide new
ideas and better understanding of the vacuum structure in General
Relativity.

###### Quantum gravity

We already connected the study of superalgebras and BPS bounds to the
classical theory of gravity. However, superalgebras are even more
interesting for their implications about the quantum aspects of gravity.
Due to supersymmetry, superalgebras do not renormalize after considering
quantum corrections. Thus, although explicitly derived from a particular
classical solution, the abstract (super)symmetry algebras remain the
same even if the original solution is deformed substantially in the
quantum theory. This has been used to provide the microscopic
description of entropy for the BPS black holes in chapter 5 . The same
principle should allow us to describe the black holes in chapter 6 on a
quantum level (see more ideas in this direction in the following
section). As seen in chapter 10 , we are able to prove that certain
classical solutions in AdS can never develop an event horizon even in
the full quantum regime. This means that they remain fundamental objects
(pure states with zero entropy) in the theory of quantum gravity,
whatever it is. Such examples already show that one does not necessarily
need to have the knowledge of a complete quantum theory in order to
understand the nature of quantum gravity. In this sense, much remains to
be learnt from classical (BPS) solutions of supergravity.

###### String theory

Although we did not directly touch the topic of string theory in this
work, we provided some string motivated examples, e.g. in sections 3.4 ,
5.3.1 , 6.3.6 . We saw that de Sitter space is not a supersymmetric
background and therefore it does not enjoy any nice stability properties
from BPS bounds. This is in a sense bad news for string theory and
supergravity as candidates to describe the real world around us, but
more research effort is needed before making any conclusive statements.
On the other hand, string theory does improve some of the supergravity
implications in this thesis. We saw that any effective @xmath @xmath
supergravity action coming from string theory includes at least one
hypermultiplet. This is enough to (potentially) evade the no-go theorem
for black holes in AdS of chapter 10 . This may be an indication that
string theory selects the more physically relevant supergravities, since
we expect the real world black holes to have non-zero entropy.

###### AdS/CFT correspondence

For the applications of the AdS/CFT correspondence, this work is
providing some new gravitational backgrounds that might have interesting
field theory duals. Although the usual version of AdS/CFT would only
apply to the asymptotically AdS @xmath solutions of previous chapters,
it is not hard to imagine that magnetic AdS has its own distinct dual
theory, waiting to be discovered (see the next section for more explicit
ideas in this direction). Additionally, our explicit method for finding
conserved charges in AdS from chapters 7 , 8 , 9 can be used for
explicit AdS/CFT calculations instead of the procedure of holographic
renormalization for quantities at the AdS boundary. It would also be
interesting to find BPS black holes in AdS with nontrivial scalar
profiles (e.g. the ones suggested in chapter 10 ), since those are
relevant for the understanding of superconductors and quantum phase
transitions in condensed matter physics.

###### Supersymmetry and supergravity

In the broad area of supersymmetry and supergravity, this work of course
mainly concentrates on a particular version of supergravity and its BPS
vacuum structure. However, the methods used in our analysis can be
easily applied in all other types of supergravity theories. In
particular, the reasoning in chapters 3 , 4 can be used to classify BPS
solutions in general, while some of the techniques in chapters 5 , 6
have their analogs in searching for higher dimensional black holes in
different supergravities. Furthermore, the method of chapter 7 and the
main idea of chapter 10 are immediately relevant for every other theory
with supersymmetry. As we will see in the next section, the study of
superalgebras can be particularly insightful when applied to @xmath
-dimensional supergravity. This unique highest dimensional theory is in
a way the meeting point of supergravity and string/M-theory. The
complete understanding of its classical solutions, which can be
facilitated in many ways by the contents of this thesis, might have a
profound physical meaning.

#### 11.2 Future directions

There is a host of open questions left for future exploration: some old
ones that were partially understood in the various chapters of this
work, and some new ones this thesis has uncovered. The following is just
a small list of topics of interest for me and some ideas on how to
approach them.

###### Classification of (BPS) black hole solutions with arbitrary
gaugings

The classification of black holes is one of the main motifs in this
thesis. Still, many things about black holes remain unexplored and
presently a full understanding of solutions does not seem a realistic
goal. On the other hand, the proper classification of BPS black objects
seems well under way. With the technical results in chapters 5 , 6 and
the superalgebra perspective of chapters 9 , 10 , we made a reasonable
progress towards the understanding of static BPS black holes. We can
briefly summarize a few important advances:

-   BPS black holes in Minkowski
    In the static case we proved our expectations from chapter 5 that
    the attractor mechanism and general form of the solutions in
    ungauged supergravity remain unchanged in the gauged theories. This
    is due to the fact that the near-horizon geometry of the
    Bertotti-Robinson spacetime is the only one allowed for static
    asymptotically flat BPS black holes. We further saw that one cannot
    find rotating black holes in Minkowski, since the BPS requirement
    @xmath leads to naked singularities whenever @xmath .

-   Spherical BPS black holes in AdS
    We proved that no static black holes can exist in absence of
    hypermultiplets. Furthermore, in case of an appropriate
    hypermultiplet gauging, we predicted the existence of a black hole
    with a fully BPS near-horizon geometry, resulting in the same
    attractor mechanism as for asymptotically flat black holes.

-   Spherical BPS black holes in mAdS
    We explicitly constructed a general class of static solutions in
    mAdS in chapter 6 and showed that they have a vanishing mass and a
    half-BPS magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath near-horizon geometry. We
    proved that no rotating BPS solutions can exist, since the BPS bound
    restricts @xmath to vanish and the angular momentum is proportional
    to the mass, @xmath .

-   Toroidal black holes/black brane in RiAdS
    We presented a general class of solutions in RiAdS and showed that
    they obey the BPS criterion, @xmath . We further showed that no BPS
    solutions can exist if the graviphoton carries a magnetic charge.

-   Higher genus black holes in magnetic hyperbolic AdS
    In this case the BPS solutions share the properties of their
    spherical analogs. We thus showed that supersymmetric higher genus
    black holes always carry a non-vanishing magnetic charge of the
    graviphoton.

What remains to be done in order to fully understand BPS black holes in
@xmath @xmath supergravity is the following:

-   Investigate more carefully multicentered black hole solutions in
    Minkowski and potential rotating solutions with non-constant vector
    and hypermultiplet scalars.

-   Find explicitly static BPS black holes in AdS @xmath . It seems that
    the correct Killing spinors are already available [ 102 , 110 ] and
    one only needs to find a suitable hypermultiplet gauging to write
    down the complete solution. Alternatively, if an example of such a
    theory cannot be found, it would be desirable to extend the no-go
    theorem to any supergravity action.

-   Understand better rotating black holes in AdS and how rotating
    attractors differ from their static analogs. Construct examples of
    rotating black holes with non-constant scalars.

-   Analyze in more detail the attractor mechanism in mAdS. One can try
    to follow the ideas of chapter 3 in order to derive the algebraic
    conditions on the scalars in magnetic AdS @xmath S @xmath .

-   Examine the difference between toroidal black holes and black
    branes, e.g. how one would construct rotating BPS black branes in
    AdS that do not exist in the toroidal case. Find the possible
    near-horizon geometries for static solutions with flat horizons.

###### Lifshitz superalgebra and conserved charges

Due to the increasing interest in condensed matter applications of the
gauge/gravity dualities, it is important to carefully analyze the
Lifshitz spacetime. Lifschitz was shown to be a BPS solution in @xmath
@xmath supergravity with gauged hypermultiplets [ 146 , 147 ] and it can
therefore be potentially subjected to the procedure of chapter 7 . The
proper definition of conserved charges on the boundary of Lifshitz
spacetime is of particular importance in explicit applications, as
emphasized in e.g. [ 148 , 149 ] .

###### Microscopic entropy counting in AdS@xmath

An interesting question from a quantum gravity point of view is whether
one can correctly reproduce black hole entropy in AdS @xmath by counting
BPS state degeneracies. Unlike the case of asymptotically flat black
holes, the answer seems to lie in the dual 3-dimensional field theory
rather than in brane constructions. Brane constructions rely on the fact
that black holes in Minkowski exist for any value of the string coupling
constant. In AdS this is no longer the case - we have seen that the
scalar fields in AdS get stabilized exactly at the minimum of their
potential. However, due to the existence of the AdS/CFT dictionary, one
can try to analyze BPS states in the dual field theory providing an
independent entropy calculation. In practice it turns out that the
quantity that can be properly counted on the dual side is a certain
supersymmetric index. This research programme has been undertaken in the
case of rotating BPS black holes in AdS @xmath [ 150 , 151 , 152 , 153 ]
.

One can imagine similar considerations can be helpful in the
four-dimensional case as well, although the dual three-dimensional field
theory is more poorly understood. Still, the steps towards microscopic
counting in the dual theory are in principle clear. One first needs to
identify properly the black hole of interest from M-theory point of
view. This can be done purely at a superalgebra level, showing how the
black hole superalgebra fits in the 11-dimensional supergroup. The same
BPS states correspondingly exist in the dual Bagger-Lambert [ 154 , 155
, 156 ] or ABJM theories [ 56 ] since they have isomorphic algebras.
Once these states are identified, the problem of counting becomes rather
technical and depends on the particular details of the theory, as seen
in the higher dimensional case [ 150 ] . Nevertheless, the question of
microscopic counting is clearly approachable after the analysis of AdS
superalgebras in part III of this thesis.

###### mAdS@xmath/Cft@xmath and microscopic entropy counting in mAdS

The questions whether mAdS @xmath has its own field theory dual and what
such a theory might look like seem to be correlated with the question of
how to describe the microscopic degrees of freedom of BPS black holes in
mAdS. A known field theory dual would immediately give us a different
point of view towards entropy in mAdS. To construct such a dual is
however a much more complex issue. However, I believe that some of the
analysis in this thesis provides a good starting point to solving these
problems. The fact that mAdS black holes were embedded in M-theory in
chapter 6.3.6 is suggesting that a microscopic picture does exist. This
embedding still needs to be related to a proper brane solution in
11-dimensional supergravity and its superalgebra has to be analyzed by
the methods of part III . This will allow us to position the dual theory
in a broader perspective, since we already know how theories of multiple
M2 branes look like [ 154 , 155 , 156 ] . A particular possibility is
that the theory dual to mAdS @xmath is just a supersymmetry preserving
deformation of ABJM theory. This is however just a speculation that will
be confirmed only if the superalgebra of the conjectured bound state of
M2’s and Kaluza-Klein monopoles is a subalgebra of the M2 superalgebra [
135 ] . Fortunately, these issues can be discussed on a purely algebraic
level in the spirit of chapter 10 . This means that we do not explicitly
need to construct the conjectured bound state that describes mAdS in
M-theory. Rather, it is good start to find its superalgebra, which is
the common subalgebra of the 11-dimensional super-Poincaré group and the
mAdS @xmath S @xmath superalgebra.

We have therefore outlined the first few steps on the way of
constructing the mAdS dual. However, this is in no way a proof that a
dual theory needs to exist in the usual sense in which the AdS/CFT
correspondence holds. It is important to stress again that mAdS is a
different vacuum and its M-theory interpretation does not necessarily
lead to a brane construction and a well-defined field theory
description. At present this remains an interesting new possibility that
deserves further attention.

### Appendix A Notation, conventions and spacetimes

#### a.1 Notation and conventions

We mainly follow the notation and conventions from [ 37 ] . In
particular, our spacetime has a @xmath signature. Self-dual and
anti-self-dual tensors are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

The gamma matrices satisfy

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

In addition, they can be chosen such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

An explicit realization of such gamma matrices is the Majorana basis,
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath                        (A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath are the Pauli matrices. Their @xmath matrix indices
@xmath can be lowered or raised with the antisymmetric tensor. We then
obtain the following set of matrices:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our conventions for the sigma matrices follow [ 37 ] ; in particular
they are symmetric and satisfy @xmath , and we have the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Indices on bosonic quantities are raised and lowered as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and similarly for quaternionic indices @xmath , raised and lowered with
the antisymmetric symplectic metric @xmath . As mentioned in the main
text, all fermions with upper @xmath index have negative chirality and
all fermions with lower index have positive chirality. Since @xmath was
chosen to be purely imaginary, the complex conjugation interchanges
chirality.

For the charge conjugation matrix, we choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence Majorana spinors have real components.

We also make use of the following identities, with curved indices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another important property that ensures the super-Jacobi identities of
@xmath hold is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are defined in section 8.5.1 .

Antisymmetrizations are taken with weight one half, and the totally
antisymmetric Levi-Civita symbol is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

With curved indices,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a tensor.

The action is defined by @xmath . We consider the ungauged lagrangian,
whose Einstein-Hilbert and scalar derivative terms read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We set the Newton constant @xmath . As we use a @xmath metric signature,
we have to choose @xmath and @xmath positive definite to get positive
kinetic terms for the scalars.

We compute the Riemann curvature as follows ⁶¹ ⁶¹ 61 Note that this
definition, when applied to the Riemann curvature of the quaternionic
manifold, differs with a factor of @xmath compared with [ 37 , 60 ] . As
a consequence, there one has @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (A.18)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath for Riemann spaces (the quaternionic and special Kähler
target spaces) and @xmath for Lorentzian spaces (space-time). The
overall minus sign in the latter case is needed to give AdS spaces a
negative scalar curvature. This gives a sphere in Euclidean space (with
signature @xmath ) a positive scalar curvature.

The spin connection enters in the covariant derivative

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (A.19)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The Lagrangian ( A.17 ) is only supersymmetric if the Riemann curvature
of the hypermultiplet moduli space satisfies @xmath where @xmath is the
number of hypermultiplets, so the dimension of the quaternionic manifold
is @xmath (in applications to the universal hypermultiplet, we have
@xmath and hence @xmath ).

#### a.2 Metrics and field strengths

-   AdS @xmath S @xmath
    The line element, in local coordinates @xmath , is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (A.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is a real, overall constant which determines the size
    of both AdS @xmath and S @xmath . From ( 3.29 ) we find the only
    non–vanishing components

      -- -------- -- -- --------
         @xmath         (A.21)
      -- -------- -- -- --------

-   The pp-wave
    The line element of a four–dimensional Cahen-Wallach space [ 81 ] ,
    in local coordinates @xmath , is given by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (A.22)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is a symmetric matrix. Conformal flatness requires
    @xmath and @xmath . We denote @xmath as @xmath should be negative.
    This space is known as the pp-wave. From ( 3.29 ) we find the only
    non–vanishing components

      -- -------- -- -- --------
         @xmath         (A.23)
      -- -------- -- -- --------

### Appendix B Integrability conditions

#### b.1 Commutators of supersymmetry tranformations

A killing spinor @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

whence the commutator is

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

From ( 3.17 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

#### b.2 Fully BPS vacua

In the fully BPS case, all terms with a covariant derivative in ( B.2 )
and ( B.3 ) vanish. We furthermore see that ( B.3 ) does not contain a
term proportional to @xmath , so @xmath .

Some algebra now yields the necessary and sufficient conditions to match
the terms proportional to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

which give the first conditions of section 3.2.3 . The other conditions
are obtained by comparing the parts proportional to @xmath .

#### b.3 Half BPS vacua

We use ( 5.37 ) to eliminate @xmath in terms of @xmath and for
convenience define @xmath . The remaining equation should hold for any
choice of @xmath . We can then use the independence of the gamma
matrices and the SU(2) matrices @xmath to find the conditions

1.  Terms proportional to @xmath , no gamma.

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

2.  Terms proportional to @xmath , two gamma

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

3.  Terms proportional to @xmath , no gamma

      -- -------- -- -- -------
         @xmath         (B.7)
      -- -------- -- -- -------

    where we used that @xmath , which follows from ( 5.42 ). Using
    @xmath from ( 5.39 ) we therefore find

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    We now take components @xmath and use @xmath and @xmath . We then
    find @xmath , whence @xmath or @xmath . In the latter case also
    @xmath , because of the anti-self-duality property, and then @xmath
    . We conclude

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

4.  Terms proportional to @xmath , two gamma. Using ( B.9 ) we find

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (B.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

To summarize: we found two cases, one with @xmath , the other with
@xmath . We now list the remaining conditions for each case.

##### b.3.1 Case A: @xmath

The remaining conditions are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (B.11)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The first condition implies that the spacetime is maximally symmetric,
with constant curvature @xmath , and is then solved.

##### b.3.2 Case B: @xmath

The remaining conditions are

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (B.12)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

From the second condition we find the Riemann tensor

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (B.13)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

### Appendix C Isometries of special Kähler manifolds

In this appendix, we present some further relevant identities that are
used in the main body of the thesis. First, we have defined the moment
maps on the special Kähler manifold as follows. Given an isometry, with
a symplectic embedding ( 2.42 ), we can define the functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the Kähler potential satisfies ( 2.44 ), it follows that @xmath is
real. From this definition, we can verify that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence the @xmath can be called moment maps, but they are not subject to
arbitrary additive constants. Using ( 2.45 ) and ( 2.50 ), we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

also called the equivariance condition.

We can obtain formulas for the moment maps in terms of the holomorphic
sections. For this, one needs the identities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which follow from the gauge transformations of the sections, see ( 2.42
). Using the chain rule in ( 2.50 ), it is now easy to derive

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and similarly

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Killing vectors ( C.6 ) are not manifestly holomorphic. This needs
not be the case because otherwise we would have constructed isometries
for arbitrary special Kähler manifolds, since holomorphic vector fields
obtained from a (real) moment map solve the Killing equation.

We now show that @xmath , following the discussion in [ 78 ] . We start
from the consistency conditions on the symplectic embedding of the gauge
transformations, equations ( C.4 ). We eliminate @xmath using ( 2.50 ),
and rewrite them as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Multiplication of the first equation with @xmath and the
second with @xmath and subtracting leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the identity @xmath . Contracting equation ( C.5 )
with @xmath and using ( C.9 ) and ( 2.54 ) one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

as announced below equation ( 3.16 ). Contrating the first equation of (
C.7 ) with @xmath gives @xmath . It follows from contracting with @xmath
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have used the special geometry identities on the period matrix (
2.24 ).

### Appendix D The universal hypermultiplet

The metric for the universal hypermultiplet is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It describes the coset space @xmath . There are eight Killing vectors
spanning the isometry group @xmath . In the coordinates of ( D.1 ), they
can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The moment maps @xmath are computed from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quaternionic two-forms @xmath satisfy @xmath , and can be written as

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

We then find the moment maps

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

These formulas are needed for some of the examples that we consider in
the main text of this thesis.

### Appendix E Asymptotic Killing spinors

In this appendix we follow the spinor conventions of chapter 8 for
convenience. We therefore use a doublet of real Majorana spinors instead
of the two complex chiral spinors used elsewhere in this work. See
chapter 9 for more explanation of how to change between real and chiral
spinors.

#### e.1 AdS@xmath

Here we give details about the Killing spinors for AdS @xmath . We
consider the metric in spherical coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and corresponding vielbein

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non-vanishing components of the spin connection turn out to be:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the AdS @xmath solution, the field strength vanishes,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

To find the Killing spinors corresponding to this spacetime we need to
solve @xmath . This equation has already been solved in an unpublished
paper by Izquierdo, Meessen and Ortín and one can explicitly check that
the resulting Killing spinors are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a doublet of arbitrary constant Majorana spinors,
representing the eight preserved supersymmetries of the configuration.

It is important to note that the asymptotic solution of the Killing
spinor equations as @xmath (given the same asymptotic metric) cannot
change unless @xmath . This is easy to see from the form of the
supercovariant derivative ( 8.10 ) since any other term would
necessarily vanish in the asymptotic limit. More precisely, any gauge
field carrying an electric charge that appears in the derivative
vanishes asymptotically, the only constant contribution can come when a
magnetic charge is present. In other words, any spacetime with vanishing
magnetic charge and asymptotic metric ( E.1 ) has asymptotic Killing
spinors given by ( E.5 ).

#### e.2 Magnetic AdS@xmath

Now we will show that the asymptotic Killing spinors take a very
different form when magnetic charge is present. In this case the metric
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with corresponding vielbein:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non-vanishing components of the spin connection turn out to be:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

As opposed to the previous section, now we have a non-vanishing gauge
field component @xmath , resulting in @xmath . If we require @xmath and
insist that @xmath , we get a solution described by Romans in [ 102 ] as
a “cosmic monopole” (which we call magnetic AdS @xmath ). The magnetic
charge satisfies @xmath , such that the metric function is an exact
square @xmath . The Killing spinors corresponding to solutions with
@xmath in our conventions are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

preserving two of the original eight supersymmetries. Note that in the
limit @xmath the Killing spinor projections continue to hold.
Furthermore, the functional dependence is manifestly different in the
expressions ( E.5 ) and ( E.9 ) for the Killing spinors of ordinary AdS
@xmath and its magnetic version. This leads to the conclusion that these
two vacua and their corresponding excited states belong to two separate
classes, i.e. they lead to two independent superalgebras and BPS bounds.
Note that one can also add an arbitrary electric charge @xmath to the
above solution, preserving the same amount of supersymmetry (the “cosmic
dyon” of [ 102 ] ). The corresponding Killing spinors [ 102 ] have the
asymptotic form of ( E.9 ), i.e. the cosmic dyons are asymptotically
magnetic AdS @xmath .

#### e.3 Riemann AdS@xmath

We now determine the Killing spinors of the ground state with toroidal
topology and vanishing mass and charges, @xmath . The metric is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choosing upper triangular vielbein @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can straightforwardly derive the (non-vanishing) components of the
spin connection,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Killing spinors can now be computed from @xmath , and the solution,
with arbitrary constant spinors @xmath , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Without restriction on @xmath , all eight supercharges are preserved,
but ( E.13 ) does not respect the identification of the coordinates
@xmath on the torus ⁶² ⁶² 62 Without the toroidal compactification, the
spacetime is of course normal AdS written in Poincaré coordinates. It is
therefore no surprise that ( E.13 ) is similar to ( E.5 ). . One can
make the Killing spinors well-defined on the torus by imposing a
projection on @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Such a projection breaks half of the supersymmetries, and the Killing
spinors of RiAdS are therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

### Appendix F Rotations in AdS@xmath

Here we focus on stationary spacetimes with rotations. From the
supersymmetry Dirac brackets in asymptotic AdS @xmath spaces,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can derive a definition of the conserved angular momenta. The
explicit expressions are somewhat lengthy and assume a much simpler form
once we choose the vielbein matrix @xmath in an upper triangular form,
such that its inverse @xmath is also upper triangular. More explicitly,
in spherical coordinates we choose nonvanishing @xmath such that the
inverse vielbein has only non-vanishing components @xmath . The
resulting expressions for the angular momenta in this case become:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It is easy to see that in case of axisymmetric solutions around @xmath ,
such as the Kerr and Kerr-Newman metrics in AdS, the angular momenta
@xmath and @xmath automatically vanish due to @xmath .

One can then use the formula for @xmath to derive the value of the
angular momentum for the Kerr black hole. This is still somewhat
non-trivial because one needs to change the coordinates from
Boyer-Lindquist-type to spherical. The leading terms at large @xmath
were found in appendix B of [ 127 ] and are enough for the calculation
of the angular momentum since subleading terms vanish when the limit is
taken in ( F ). The calculation of the relevant component of the spin
connection leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and gives the exact same result as in (B.8) of [ 127 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This expression has also been derived from different considerations in [
157 ] , thus confirming the consistency of our results.

One can also verify the result for the asymptotic mass of the Kerr and
Kerr-Newman spacetimes using ( 8.34 ) and the metric in appendix B of [
127 ] . After a somewhat lengthy but straightforward calculation one
finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

as expected from previous studies (see, e.g., [ 109 , 157 ] ).

### Appendix G Supercharge of the general gauged theory

#### g.1 Additional details on @xmath @xmath gauged supergravity

Here we will give more details on the theory in consideration.
Alternatively, see [ 37 ] for a very detailed description. The bosonic
part of the supergravity lagrangian was given in ( 2.1 )-( 2.2 ). The
supersymmetry variations under which the full action is invariant (upto
higher order terms in fermions) are as follows. The fermionic variations
were already given in chapter 2 : ( 2.3 ),( 2.4 ),( 2.5 ). The bosonic
susy variations are as follows. The vielbein variation reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the vector multiplet sector we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The susy variation of the hypermultiplet scalars (hypers) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to derive the supercharge of the theory from the procedure
described in chapter 7 , we additionally need the Poisson/Dirac brackets
of the fundamental fields. It will suffice to list the non-vanishing
fermionic Dirac brackets that follow from the full lagrangian ⁶³ ⁶³ 63
The brackets for the bosonic fields can be derived directly from ( 2.1 )
if needed. (see e.g. [ 37 ] ):

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (G.5)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

Note in particular that we follow the original conventions of appendix A
for @xmath . Consequently, we define as a measure for the volume/surface
integrals

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which are defined differently in chapter 8 .

#### g.2 Supersymmetry charge

From the susy variations one can fix uniquely the supersymmetry charge
@xmath by the requirement that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (G.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all fundamental fields (here denoted by @xmath ) in the theory. From
the supersymmetry variations ( 2.3 ),( 2.4 ),( 2.5 ), together with the
Dirac brackets ( G.5 ), one finds

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (G.8)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

up to higher order in fermions. The expression for the supercharge
simplifies considerably when evaluated on shell, due to the very
suggestive form of the equations of motion of the gravitinos:

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (G.9)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

After performing a partial integration of the first term on the
r.h.s. of ( G.8 ) and using ( G.9 ), the supercharge becomes a surface
integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (G.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

similarly to ( 8.27 ) in the minimal case.

### Acknowledgements

There are hundreds of people I would like to thank to for their
involvement with my life during my PhD years. The top of the list is
reserved for my parents and sister, who have always been the most
important and influential people for me. Unfortunately, I am bound to
forget to mention some of the other names in the list and therefore I
will only write about the people that have most directly contributed to
the successful completion of this work. To all my friends in Bulgaria,
Netherlands and the other parts of the world I would just like to say
that you are all a-mazing!

Academically, I am most grateful to my supervisor, Stefan Vandoren, for
allowing me to work with him and his scientific enthusiasm and insight,
patience and guidance in the last five years. I hope I have become at
least a bit sharper and more rigorous in my physics understanding due to
our daily interactions. Another important person in my academic life
that I need to mention is Bernard de Wit, who introduced me to the
subject of quantum field theory in first place. The two of them,
together with Biene Meijerman and the people in NUFFIC and the
university of Sofia (especially Hristo Dimov and Radoslav Rashkov),
backed me up crucially in the organizationally messy start of my PhD. I
hope my thesis was worth their effort.

My academic career has been additionally boosted by many other
colleagues through the years. I am very thankful to Stefanos Katmadas
for the hundreds of hours spent for answering my questions and random
physics discussions. I also learnt a lot during my collaboration with
Hugo Looijestijn and Chiara Toldo, who always kept my motivation and
enthusiasm at high levels. I further enjoyed the numerous discussions
and journal clubs with Anne Franzen, Chris Wever and especially Philipp
Höhn on non-string theory related physics. Other colleagues at the ITF
that have suffered from my never-ending questions are Stijn van
Tongeren, Alessandro Sfondrini, Ivano Lodato, Vivian Jacobs (special
thanks to Vivian and Chris for their help with the Dutch version of my
summary), Timothy Budd, Maaike van Zalk, Nabamita Banerjee, Erik
Plauschinn, and Jeroen Diederix. Outside Utrecht, I have profited from
various discussions and correspondence with Glenn Barnich, Gianguido
Dall’Agata, Riccardo D’Auria, Jan de Boer, Giuseppe Dibitetto, Roberto
Emparan, Stefano Giusto, Alessandra Gnecchi, Gary Horowitz, Dietmar
Klemm, Andrei Micu, Petya Nedkova, Tomas Ortín, Ashoke Sen, Ergin
Sezgin, and Kostas Skenderis. I am particularly grateful to Tomas Ortín
for passing us a set of unpublished notes written by him and two
collaborators (Patrick Meessen and Jose Izquierdo). In the end, I would
like to express my general gratitude to the people at the ITF, the DRSTP
schools and physics communities elsewhere for creating a friendly work
environment that welcomes young and inexperienced students.

Kiril Hristov,

18 April 2012.
