##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Mathematical Background
-    3 Twistor Space
    -    3.1 Definition of Twistor Space
    -    3.2 Lines in @xmath
    -    3.3 The Correspondence Space
    -    3.4 Reality Structures
-    4 The Penrose-Ward Transform
    -    4.1 Lax Pairs and Fundamental Solutions
    -    4.2 The Patching Matrix
    -    4.3 The Reverse Transform
    -    4.4 The Abstract Form of the Transform
-    5 Yang’s Equation
    -    5.1 Yang’s Equation and the @xmath -Matrix
    -    5.2 Reduction of Yang’s Equation
    -    5.3 Reduction of Einstein Equations
    -    5.4 Solution Generation
-    6 Black Holes and Rod Structure
    -    6.1 Relevant Facts on Black Holes
    -    6.2 Rod Structure
-    7 Bundles over Reduced Twistor Space
    -    7.1 Reduced Twistor Space
    -    7.2 The Twistor Construction
    -    7.3 Review of the Four-Dimensional Case
-    8 Twistor Approach in Five Dimensions
    -    8.1 Bäcklund Transformations
    -    8.2 Higher-Dimensional Ernst Potential
    -    8.3 Properties of @xmath and the Bundle
    -    8.4 Patching Matrix near the Axis
-    9 Patching Matrix for Relevant Examples
    -    9.1 Five-Dimensional Minkowski Space
    -    9.2 Twist Potentials on the Axis
    -    9.3 Asymptotic Minkowski Space-Times
    -    9.4 Five-Dimensional Myers-Perry Solution
    -    9.5 Black Ring Solutions
-    10 The Converse
    -    10.1 From Rod Structure to Patching Matrix
    -    10.2 Local Behaviour of @xmath around a Nut
    -    10.3 Conicality and the Conformal Factor
    -    10.4 Local Behaviour of @xmath around a Nut: Switching
    -    10.5 Application to the Black Ring
-    11 Summary and Outlook
-    A Conformal Metrics and Null Separated Points
-    B Characterization of Simple Bivectors
-    C Computation for Reduced Einstein Equations
-    D Isothermal Coordinates
-    E Integrability of Einstein Equations
-    F Criterion for Orthogonal Transitivity
-    G Conical Singularities
-    H Rod Structure of Schwarzschild Solution
-    I General Bäcklund Transformation
-    J Reduced Bäcklund Transformation
    -    J.1 Two-Nut Spacetime: Parameter Configurations
-    K Implications of Hypersurface-Orthogonality

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Although initially proposed in four dimensions, the vacuum Einstein
Field Equations can be studied more generally in @xmath dimensions.
Higher-dimensional general relativity plays a role for example in string
theory [ 40 ] , the AdS/CFT correspondence, which relates the dynamics
of an @xmath -dimensional black hole with those of quantum field theory
in @xmath dimensions [ 32 , 1 ] , and scenarios involving large extra
dimensions and high-energy scattering are discussed in which
higher-dimensional black holes might be produced in particle colliders [
27 ] . Furthermore, black hole space-times are Ricci-flat Lorentzian
manifolds and as such central objects of study in differential geometry.
This list of motivations was taken from [ 13 , Sec. 1] .

In four dimensions general relativity has led to various striking
results about black holes, for example concerning their horizon
topology, their classification (see references in Section 6.1 ) or the
laws of black hole mechanics [ 2 ] . Are these features exclusive to
four-dimensional space-times or do some of them carry over to higher
dimensions? Answers to these questions would provide valuable insights
as well as a better understanding of general relativity and its objects
like black holes in a broader context [ 13 , Sec. 1] .

In four dimensions stationary and asymptotically-flat vacuum black holes
can be uniquely classified by their mass and angular momentum, and form
a single family, the Kerr solutions, see [ 6 ] , references therein and
Theorem 6.2 . However, a generalization of this statement to five
dimensions, which would be a classficiation of five-dimensional,
stationary, axisymmetric and asymptotically flat black holes by their
mass and two angular momenta, does not hold as the space-times found by
Myers & Perry [ 34 ] and Emparan & Reall [ 10 ] show. These examples of
black hole space-times in five dimensions have topologically different
horizons, so there cannot exist a continuous parameter to link them. Now
the task is: Can we determine, or at least characterize, all stationary
and asymptotically flat black hole solutions of the higher-dimensional
vacuum Einstein field equations [ 13 , Sec. 8] ?

Since mass and angular momenta are not enough anymore to classify the
solutions, an extra piece of information is needed. This extra piece was
proposed to be the so-called rod structure [ 11 , 21 , 24 ] and Hollands
& Yazadjiev [ 24 ] were able to show that two stationary, axisymmetric
and asymptotically flat black hole solutions with connected horizon must
be isometric, if their mass, angular momenta and rod structures
coincide. Thus the remaining problem is to prove that the only rod
structures giving rise to regular black hole solutions are those
associated with the known solutions or to find new examples.

Various strategies have been employed in order to address this question,
among which were direct approaches like the ones leading to the black
ring, Bäcklund transformations [ 33 , Sec. 6.6] or other hidden
symmetries [ 19 ] . Most often applied, however, was the method
developed by Belinskiĭ & Zakharov [ 3 ] , which uses the fact that the
Einstein field equations for a stationary and axisymmetric space-time
are integrable, see also [ 13 , Sec. 5.2.2.2] . Via this ansatz they
devised a purely algebraic procedure for generating new solutions from
known seeds that lead for example to the discovery of a doubly-spinning
black ring by Pomeransky & Sen’kov [ 37 ] and a candidate for a black
hole with a Lens-space horizon [ 5 ] .

In this thesis we are going to establish another way of constructing
such solutions from the rod structure and other asymptotic data. The
method is based on a twistor construction by which a holomorphic rank-
@xmath vector bundle over a one-dimensional complex manifold is assigned
to every stationary, axisymmetric solution of the vacuum Einstein field
equations in @xmath dimensions. Under not very restrictive technical
assumptions the bundle is fully characterized by only one transition
matrix, the so-called patching matrix, associated with each rod, and
with a simple transformation from rod to rod. It was shown by Ward [ 46
] that the correspondence can be better understood and made applicable
for practical examples with the help of a Bäcklund transformation. This
was studied extensively in [ 49 , 16 , 17 ] , but an application in more
than four dimensions is not feasible without a generalization of the
Ernst potential.

As a first result we will therefore show that a modified version of a
matrix already given in [ 31 ] satisfies the desired requirements.

###### Theorem 1.1.

Let @xmath be the matrix of inner products of Killing vectors for a
stationary and axisymmetric space-time in @xmath dimensions. Then for
any given rod @xmath the matrix

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is adapted to @xmath and @xmath is the vector of twist
potentials for @xmath , is called higher-dimensional Ernst potential
adapted to @xmath and obtained from @xmath by a Bäcklund transformation.

Following that, we quickly check that important results in four
dimensions hold in the same way in higher dimensions. Among these
results is the important fact that the patching matrix is the analytic
continuation of the Ernst potential @xmath .

As the second step we calculate the patching matrices @xmath for the
major examples in five dimensions, which essentially requires the
computation of various twist potentials on the axis @xmath .

More importantly, the twistor correspondence provides a procedure for
generating solutions from a given rod structure together with the
asymptotic quantities, that is based on the fact that @xmath has simple
poles at the nuts of the rod structure and the known fall-off towards
infinity. However, this ansatz contains numerous free parameters and the
aim is to fix these in terms of the given data by the use of boundary
conditions. For this it is inevitable to find out how the patching
matrices with adaptations to the different axis segments are related.

First this is done for the outer sections of the axis.

###### Theorem 1.2.

Assume that we are given a rod structure with nuts at @xmath . If @xmath
is the patching matrix adapted to @xmath , then @xmath with @xmath is
the patching matrix adapted to @xmath .

With the help of this connection we are able to reconstruct the known
space-times flat space, Myers-Perry and the black ring from the rod
structures with up to three nuts. However, we are not able to fix the
conicality of the black ring, which needs further investigation of the
behaviour of @xmath , @xmath and the conformal factor (appearing in the
@xmath -model form of the metric) in a neighborhood of a nut. A
definition of the @xmath -coordinates can be found in Section 10.2 .

###### Theorem 1.3.

For a space-time regular on the axis the generic form of @xmath in
@xmath -coordinates around a nut at @xmath , where two spacelike rods
meet, is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and, furthermore, one needs

-   @xmath as a function of @xmath on @xmath ,

-   @xmath as a function of @xmath on @xmath .

If one of the rods is the horizon instead of a spacelike rod
corresponding statements hold.

Building up on this, we obtain the following results about the conformal
factor.

###### Proposition 1.4.

On a segment of the axis where @xmath we have @xmath , and similarly
where @xmath . Therefore, the factor @xmath is continuous at the nut
@xmath and with the conventions leading to ( 1.1 ), the absence of
conical singularities requires

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Last in the set of tools we show how @xmath switches when going past a
nut.

###### Theorem 1.5.

Let at @xmath be a nut where two spacelike rods meet and assume that we
have chosen a gauge where the twist potentials vanish when approaching
the nut. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is adapted to @xmath and @xmath is adapted to @xmath .

By this we can impose more boundary conditions on the free parameters in
@xmath that are possibly left and we have enough at hand to solve the
conicality problem as exemplified for the black ring in Section 10.5 .

This thesis is structured as follows. In Chapters 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 7 we
give a detailed description of the background material in order to make
the thesis more self-contained, to familiarize the reader with the
established construction and to identify the points which impede a
generalization to higher dimensions. The material for this purpose is
mainly taken from [ 33 , 17 ] . In Chapter 6 we revisit some relevant
facts about black holes. The aforementioned generalization of the Ernst
potential follows in Chapter 8 , succeeded by the patching matrices for
the examples in Chapter 9 . Chapter 10 contains the reconstruction of
@xmath from the rod structure, results about the relation of different
adaptations of @xmath across nuts and the removal of conical
singularities.

## Chapter 2 Mathematical Background

This chapter is mainly based on Mason & Woodhouse [ 33 , Ch. 2] and
gives a brief summary of some mathematical tools which are needed later
on. It is far from exhaustive, and some parts are only aimed to make the
reader familiar with the notation used. In particular, we assume basic
knowledge about principal bundles and Yang-Mills theory as can be found
for example in [ 29 , 30 ] .

The starting point for twistor theory is complex Minkowski space @xmath
. For our purposes double null coordinates are often convenient, that is
coordinates on @xmath in which the metric takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the volume element is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the vector fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath form a null
tetrad at each point of @xmath . In general, a basis of 4-vectors @xmath
is called a null tetrad if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the metric tensor on @xmath , and all other inner
products vanish.

Within this setting we can recover various real spaces (“real slices”)
by imposing reality conditions on @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

-   Euclidean real slice @xmath : We identify real Cartesian coordinates
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath via

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    That is, we get @xmath by imposing the reality conditions @xmath and
    @xmath .

-   Minkowski real slice @xmath : The real coordinates @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath on @xmath are identified with @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath via

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    that is we pick out the real space by the condition that @xmath and
    @xmath should be real, and that @xmath .

For the definition of self-duality and anti-self-duality we need the
Hodge star operation. To clarify notation and conventions first a short
reminder. Let @xmath be an @xmath -dimensional Riemannian or
pseudo-Riemannian manifold. Given a @xmath -form @xmath on @xmath with
(skew-symmetric) components @xmath its exterior derivative @xmath has
components @xmath where the square brackets stand for
antisymmetrization. ¹ ¹ 1 For a @xmath tensor

@xmath

where @xmath is the group of permutations of @xmath elements. The
symmetrization @xmath is defined in the same way but without the signum.
The exterior or wedge product @xmath with a @xmath -form @xmath has
components

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath be the @xmath -dimensional alternating symbol, that is
@xmath and @xmath , and @xmath . We then define the ( Hodge ) dual of
@xmath to be the @xmath -form @xmath with components

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where indices are raised and lowered with the metric @xmath or its
inverse @xmath . To see that the definition is actually independent of
the basis consider @xmath vector fields @xmath with their covariant
images @xmath (according to the metric) and fix a volume form @xmath .
Then @xmath is defined as the unique @xmath -form satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is a basis independent definition of @xmath and coincides with (
2.1 ), since in coordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus one can think of @xmath as the complement of @xmath with respect to
the volume form (and the appropriate prefactor). For example in terms of
an oriented orthonormal basis @xmath (of a vector space) the Hodge star
operation is defined completely by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an even permutation of @xmath . Of particular interest
for us are 2-forms on @xmath where we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the properties of the alternating symbol, it follows that the
Hodge star operation is idempotent, that is @xmath , thus has
eigenvalues @xmath . ² ² 2 In general, on a Riemannian manifold @xmath
for a @xmath -form @xmath it is @xmath , where @xmath is the signature
of @xmath . For complex manifolds the concept of signature is void, thus
we can set @xmath and then @xmath for 2-forms on a four-dimensional
manifold.

###### Definition 2.1.

A 2-form is called self-dual (SD) if @xmath , and anti-self-dual (ASD)
if @xmath .

The space of 2-forms then decomposes into the direct sum of eigenspaces,
because in double null coordinates we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

as a basis for SD 2-forms, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as a basis for ASD 2-forms.

Let @xmath be a rank- @xmath vector bundle with a connection @xmath ,
that is a differential operator that maps sections @xmath of @xmath to
1-forms with values in @xmath and in a local trivialization it is given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is matrix-valued 1-form called gauge potential , potential
or sometimes also connection . In a general gauge theory, that is a
principal bundle @xmath over a (pseudo-) Riemannian manifold @xmath with
with gauge group @xmath , the curvature of @xmath is the matrix-valued
2-form @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Yang-Mills equations are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first one is called the Bianchi identity and the second one is
the Euler-Lagrange equation of the Lagrangian density @xmath . We then
see that if @xmath is SD or ASD then @xmath , that is the second set of
Yang-Mills equations follow from the Bianchi identity.

Important objects for twistor theory is null 2-planes.

###### Definition 2.2.

Let @xmath be an affine 2-plane in @xmath and @xmath the normal bundle
of @xmath . The 2-plane @xmath is called ( partially ) null if @xmath
for all @xmath , and it is called ( totally ) null if @xmath .

Hence, totally null means that @xmath for all tangent vectors @xmath ,
@xmath of @xmath . From now on when we speak about null 2-planes we will
always mean totally null 2-planes (unless mentioned differently). With
each null 2-plane @xmath we associate a tangent bivector @xmath where
@xmath , @xmath are independent tangent vectors of @xmath . The tangent
bivector has components @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.3.

If @xmath is a null 2-plane, then @xmath , and @xmath is either SD or
ASD.

###### Proof.

First of all we observe that @xmath is determined up to scale by the
tangent space of @xmath , because another choice of independent tangent
vectors can be written as a linear combination of @xmath and @xmath and
thus gives the same @xmath up to a nonzero scalar factor. Conversely,
the tangent space of @xmath is given by all @xmath with @xmath , since
@xmath , @xmath are null and orthogonal. But @xmath can also be
characterized up to a nonzero scalar factor by the condition that @xmath
for all @xmath tangent vectors of @xmath . This follows from @xmath ,
and @xmath which implies that @xmath if and only if @xmath is a linear
combination of @xmath and @xmath . Hence, @xmath for some @xmath .
However, the eigenvalues of @xmath are @xmath , therefore @xmath or
@xmath , that is @xmath SD or ASD. Again from @xmath and the fact that
@xmath , and @xmath are null and orthogonal it is obvious that @xmath .
∎

###### Definition 2.4.

An affine null 2-plane @xmath is called an @xmath -plane if @xmath is SD
and a @xmath -plane if @xmath is ASD.

In double null coordinates the surfaces of constant @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , respectively, have tangent bivectors @xmath and @xmath
, respectively, and are therefore @xmath -planes.

If @xmath is the tangent bivector of an @xmath -plane through the
origin, then it must be a linear combination of the 2-forms in ( 2.2 ).
It is only determined up to a scalar factor, that is we can set the
coefficient of @xmath to 1 without loss of generality. Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, the nonzero coefficients are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then the
requirement from Lemma 2.3 turns into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . The case where the coefficient of @xmath vanishes
yields @xmath , so that @xmath (up to a constant) and @xmath , @xmath .
There is no point in the argument where we needed that our null tetrad
is induced by coordinates, that is the above statement is also true if
we set @xmath and @xmath for some null tetrad @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath not necessarily induced by coordinates. Conversely, @xmath and
@xmath span an @xmath -plane through the origin for every @xmath .
Including the point @xmath by mapping it to the @xmath -plane spanned by
@xmath and @xmath then yields a one-to-one correspondence between @xmath
-planes through the origin and points of the Riemann sphere, @xmath .
This correspondence will be important for the characterization of
twistor spaces.

As a last point in this chapter a reminder about equivalence and
reconstruction of holomorphic vector bundles (these statements can be
found in standard textbooks such as [ 20 , 18 ] ). Let @xmath be a rank-
@xmath holomorphic vector bundle with an open cover @xmath of @xmath and
trivialization functions (biholomorphic maps) @xmath .

The (holomorphic) transition functions @xmath for all @xmath are
obtained from the biholomorphic maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are of the form @xmath . By construction the transition functions
obviously satisfy the relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Two holomorphic vector bundles @xmath and @xmath are called isomorphic
if there exists a bijective map @xmath such that @xmath and its inverse
are vector bundle homorphisms, that is @xmath is a fibre-preserving
holomorphic map @xmath such that for any @xmath a linear map @xmath is
induced and analogously for the @xmath .

Given two systems of transition functions, @xmath and @xmath with covers
@xmath and @xmath , then they are called equivalent if for a common
refinement of the open covers @xmath there are holomorphic maps @xmath
with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The transition functions with respect to the refined cover can be taken
as the restrictions of the initial transition functions and a common
refinement is for example obtained by taking all possible intersections
of @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.5.

For holomorphic vector bundles the following statements hold. a long
word

1.   Let @xmath be an open covering of @xmath , and let @xmath satisfy
    the cocycle relation ( 2.3 ). Then there exists as holomorphic
    vector bundle @xmath of rank @xmath with these transition functions.
    [ 20 ]

2.   Isomorphic bundles can be represented by equivalent systems of
    transition functions. [ 18 ]

## Chapter 3 Twistor Space

In this chapter the twistor space for complexified Minkowski space is
introduced using Mason & Woodhouse [ 33 , Sec. 9.2] .

### 3.1. Definition of Twistor Space

In the previous chapter we have seen that @xmath -planes through the
origin in @xmath are spanned by @xmath and @xmath or by @xmath and
@xmath in the limiting case @xmath . As before, the coordinates @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath will always be double-null coordinates. Thus, a
general @xmath -plane, not necessarily passing through the origin, is
labelled by three complex coordinates: the parameter @xmath which
determines the tangent space, together with the parameters

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

that are constant over the @xmath -plane.

###### Definition 3.1.

The twistor space of @xmath is the three-dimensional complex manifold
consisting of all (affine) @xmath -planes in @xmath .

A way to determine the global geometry is by writing the equations of an
@xmath -plane in homogeneous form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with complex constants @xmath , @xmath . The order of these constants is
a convention in twistor theory. If @xmath , then ( 3.2 ) is equivalent
to ( 3.1 ) for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the case @xmath , @xmath , the parameter @xmath must be infinite and
the tangent space is spanned by @xmath and @xmath . Consequently, we can
identify the twistor space of @xmath with an open subset of @xmath if we
include this @xmath -plane of constant @xmath , @xmath and regard the
@xmath s as homogeneous coordinates.

The excluded points of @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are 2 homogeneous coordinates left which parameterize @xmath ,
hence it is a @xmath and the twistor space of @xmath is, as a complex
manifold, @xmath . We can cover the twistor space of @xmath by two
coordinate patches @xmath and @xmath with @xmath being the complement of
the plane @xmath (that is the plane @xmath ) and @xmath being the
complement of the plane @xmath (that is the plane @xmath ). The
parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are coordinates on @xmath , and on
@xmath we can use coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which on the overlap @xmath gives the relations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the twistor space we denote by @xmath the copy of @xmath on which
@xmath are linear coordinates, and by @xmath the corresponding
projective space @xmath .

Now let @xmath and assume that its intersection with each @xmath -plane
is connected (but possibly empty). ¹ ¹ 1 The connectivity assumption is
not necessary for the considerations in this chapter, but will later
make the Penrose-Ward transform work in a natural way.

###### Definition 3.2.

The twistor space of @xmath is the subset

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath .

If @xmath is open, then @xmath is open, and if @xmath , then @xmath is
the complement of @xmath .

###### Remark 3.3.

1.  For many aspects of twistor theory it turns out that spinor calculus
    is a suitable tool. However, in our context we do not gain anything
    by using spinors and thus they are not going to be introduced in
    this work.
    @xmath

2.  The Klein correspondence shows that compactified @xmath together
    with the complex conformal group can be identified with a @xmath ,
    the Klein quadric , together with the so-called projective general
    linear group @xmath . [ 33 , Sec. 2.4 and 9.2]

### 3.2. Lines in @xmath

The equations ( 3.2 ) allow further conclusions: if we hold @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath fixed, and vary @xmath , then the equations
determine a two-dimensional subspace of @xmath , that is a projective
line in @xmath . This is the Riemann sphere of @xmath -planes through
the point in @xmath with coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
which we denote by @xmath . It corresponds to the twistor space of
@xmath .

Two points @xmath are null separated if and only if they lie on an
@xmath -plane, hence if and only if @xmath . In other words, two lines
in the twistor space intersect if and only if the corresponding points
are separated by a null vector. A conformal metric (that is a class of
conformally equivalent metrics) is completely determined by saying when
two vectors are null separated (Appendix A ). Hence, the conformal
geometry of @xmath is encoded in the linear geometry of @xmath .

### 3.3. The Correspondence Space

Let @xmath be a subset of @xmath . The correspondence space @xmath is
the set of pairs @xmath with @xmath and @xmath an @xmath -plane through
@xmath . It is fibred over @xmath and @xmath by projections

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which map @xmath to @xmath and @xmath , respectively, see Figure 3.1
(the lines through @xmath respectively @xmath in @xmath visualize the
projective lines of @xmath -planes through @xmath respectively @xmath ).

The projection maps @xmath and @xmath are surjective. Points in @xmath
are labelled by @xmath (including @xmath ), and the coordinate
expressions for the projections are

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The tangent spaces to the leaves of the fibration of @xmath are spanned
at each point by vector fields @xmath and @xmath on @xmath .

A function on @xmath is a function of the twistor coordinates @xmath ,
and pulling it back by @xmath therefore yields a function on the
correspondence space @xmath that is constant along @xmath and @xmath .

### 3.4. Reality Structures

In the previous chapter we saw that the real slices are characterized as
fixed point sets of an antiholomorphic involution @xmath . Using
double-null coordinates @xmath was defined for the two cases as

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath .

For @xmath this picks out a real hypersurface @xmath by @xmath . The
@xmath -plane @xmath has complex dimension 2, and by imposing @xmath in
the @xmath -case we add three real conditions which leaves one real
degree of freedom. Hence, if @xmath , then @xmath is a real line that is
null ( @xmath -planes are totally null), that is a real null geodesic.
In turn, given a real null geodesic we can pick two points @xmath ,
@xmath on it. They are null separated, and determine an @xmath -plane
@xmath as described above. Furthermore, they are real points, thus
@xmath which means @xmath . Therefore, we have shown that @xmath is the
space of real null geodesics. Together with what we have seen in the
last chapter this implies that the set of real null geodesics through a
real point @xmath is a Riemann sphere. Figure 3.2 depicts the
correspondence in this real case.

It also indicates how a point in @xmath corresponds to a locus in @xmath
and a point @xmath represented by its light cone corresponds to a locus
(Riemann sphere) in @xmath . Thus, the relationship between @xmath and
its twistor space @xmath is a non-local correspondence in general.

## Chapter 4 The Penrose-Ward Transform

This chapter is about the Penrose-Ward transform which associates a
solution to the anti-self-dual Yang-Mills (ASDYM) equation on a domain
@xmath in @xmath to a holomorphic vector bundle on the twistor space
@xmath of @xmath , using Mason & Woodhouse [ 33 , Sec. 10.1 and 10.2] .

That raises the question: What is the special importance of the ASDYM
equation for our considerations? To answer this, we have to say a few
words about integrable systems. In classical mechanics the notion of
integrability is a precise concept. However, for systems obeying partial
differential equations in which there are infinitely many degrees of
freedom, we do not have a clear-cut characterization of integrability. A
lot of theories were developed and it is easy to give examples of
‘integrability’, yet there is no single effective characterization that
covers all cases [ 33 , Ch. 1] .

But whatever the definition of integrability is, a reduction of an
integrable system, which is obtained by imposing a symmetry or
specifying certain parameters, always yields another integrable system.
Thus we have a partial ordering, in the sense that we say system @xmath
is less than system @xmath if @xmath is a reduction of @xmath . This
ordering motivates the search for a ‘maximal element’, that is an
integrable system from which all others can be derived. Such a system
has not yet been found, but it turns out that almost all known systems
in dimension 1 and 2, and a lot of important systems in dimension 3
arise as reductions of the ASDYM equation [ 33 , Ch. 4.1] .

The example of special significance for us will be the Ernst equation
for stationary axisymmetric gravitational fields.

### 4.1. Lax Pairs and Fundamental Solutions

Let @xmath be a connection on a complex rank- @xmath vector bundle
@xmath over some region @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath its curvature
2-form. If @xmath , then @xmath , where in a coordinate induced local
trivialization

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The ASD conditions then take in double-null coordinates the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

With

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the ASD condition can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that the ASDYM equation corresponds to the vanishing of the curvature
on every @xmath -plane. Equivalently, we can require that the Lax pair
of operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

should commute for every value of the complex ‘spectral parameter’
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath act on vector-valued functions on
@xmath .

This last compatibility condition says that for a section @xmath of
@xmath , represented by a column vector of length @xmath , the linear
system

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

can be integrated for each fixed value of @xmath . Therefore, putting
@xmath independent solutions together, we obtain an @xmath matrix
fundamental solution @xmath (dependent on @xmath ) such that the columns
of @xmath form a frame field for @xmath consisting of sections that are
covariantly constant on the @xmath -planes tangent to @xmath and @xmath
. Henceforth, we suppose that @xmath is open and that each @xmath -plane
that meets @xmath intersects it in a connected and simply connected set,
for example @xmath an open ball. The second condition about simply
connectedness ensures that the sections are single valued.

The matrix @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and depends holomorphically on @xmath (varied over the complex plane),
and the coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . However, if
@xmath were regular, by which we mean holomorphic with non-vanishing
determinant, on the entire @xmath -Riemann sphere, then Liouville’s
theorem would imply that @xmath is independent of @xmath . Consequently,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in other words @xmath were covariantly constant and the connection flat.

Given a choice of gauge, @xmath is unique up to @xmath where @xmath is a
non-singular matrix-valued function of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

So, @xmath is essentially a function of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath denotes the twistor space of @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath is a
two-set Stein open cover of @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 For Stein manifolds see for
example Field [ 15 , Def. 4.2.7] and how the two-set cover can be chosen
see for example Popov [ 38 , Sec. 3.3] . such that @xmath is contained
in the complement of @xmath , and @xmath is contained in the complement
of @xmath , then @xmath can be regarded as a function on the
correspondence space @xmath and @xmath as the pull-back of a holomorphic
function on @xmath , as by ( 4.4 ) @xmath is constant along the leaves
of @xmath .

If @xmath is not flat, @xmath cannot be chosen so that it is regular for
all finite values of @xmath and at @xmath . However, with @xmath we get
a solution @xmath for the linear system

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is holomorphic on the whole @xmath -Riemann sphere except for
@xmath . This solution is unique up to @xmath , where @xmath is
holomorphic on @xmath and satisfies the equation corresponding to ( 4.4
).

### 4.2. The Patching Matrix

On the overlap of the domains of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath we must
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath satisfies ( 4.4 ), and thus it is the pull-back by @xmath
of a holomorphic function on @xmath . We call @xmath patching matrix
associated to @xmath . It is determined by @xmath up to equivalence
@xmath where @xmath is regular on @xmath , @xmath is regular on @xmath
and both satisfy ( 4.4 ). The matrices in the equivalence class of
@xmath are called patching data of @xmath . If @xmath is in the
equivalence class of the identity solution, then @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The left-hand side of ( 4.6 ) is regular in @xmath , and the right-hand
side is regular in @xmath , so we have a global solution in @xmath , and
therefore vanishing curvature. If there is no such solutions, the
curvature has to be nonzero.

The transformation of @xmath under a gauge transformation is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a function of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with
values in the gauge group. A solution for the new potential can be
attained by replacing @xmath and @xmath , which leaves the patching
matrix unchanged.

We have obtained a map which assigns patching data to every ASDYM field.
It is called forward Penrose-Ward transform . Indeed, the converse is
true as well, that is a patching matrix encodes an ASDYM field.

### 4.3. The Reverse Transform

For the following arguments we need the so-called Birkhoff’s
factorization theorem. We do not state it in full precision, but only to
the extend that is necessary here (for more details see Mason &
Woodhouse [ 33 , Sec. 9.3] ).

Suppose @xmath is holomorphic matrix-valued function on @xmath with
non-vanishing determinant. Birkhoff’s factorization theorem says that
for fixed values of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath we can factorize
@xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is regular for @xmath , @xmath is regular for @xmath
(including @xmath ), and @xmath for some integers @xmath which may
depend on the point in @xmath . For functions @xmath for which @xmath ,
this factorization is unique up to @xmath , @xmath for some constant
@xmath . Furthermore, given a @xmath such that @xmath at some point of
@xmath , then @xmath in an open set of @xmath . ² ² 2 This statement is
consequence of Birkhoff’s factorization theorem. If @xmath depends
smoothly on additional parameters @xmath and @xmath at some point @xmath
, then @xmath in an open neighbourhood of @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath
can be chosen such that they depend smoothly on the parameters. The
statement also holds if we replace ‘smooth’ by ‘holomorphic’ in the case
that @xmath depends holomorphically on @xmath (in a neighbourhood of the
unit circle) and on the complex parameters @xmath . Attempts to extend
the factorization to the entire parameter space typically fail on a
submanifold of codimension 1, where @xmath ‘jumps’ to another value than
the identity [ 33 , Prop. 9.3.4] .

Given a Birkhoff factorization for fixed @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can recover @xmath in terms of @xmath or @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with a similar equation for the other two components. By the uniqueness
statement any other factorization is given by @xmath , @xmath , where
@xmath is independent of @xmath . The new potential @xmath , which is
obtained from @xmath , @xmath , is related to the previous one via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is obvious regarding ( 4.7 ). Hence, @xmath determines @xmath up to
gauge transformations.

It remains to show that our patching matrix @xmath is the same as the
one that is associated to the ASDYM field we have just constructed. In
other words, we must ensure that applying first the reverse and then the
forward Penrose-Ward transform to the function @xmath gets us back to
the starting point.

Suppose @xmath is chosen such that @xmath at some point of @xmath , then
@xmath in an open set @xmath of @xmath . The constancy of @xmath along
@xmath implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or equivalently

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

at every point in @xmath and for all @xmath in some neighbourhood of the
unit circle. The left-hand side of ( 4.8 ) is holomorphic for @xmath ,
and the right-hand side is holomorphic for @xmath except for a simple
pole at infinity. Therefore, by an extension of Liouville’s theorem both
sides have to be of the form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
independent of @xmath . We take them to be the two components of @xmath
. The same procedure with @xmath instead of @xmath defines @xmath and
@xmath . Then, by construction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath acts on the columns of @xmath . Thus, the linear system
associated to @xmath is integrable, and @xmath is ASD.

The above constructions gives an explicit formula of the potential
@xmath using @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.1.

The gauge potential @xmath is given in terms of @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Setting @xmath in ( 4.3 ) gives the first two components @xmath , @xmath
; setting @xmath in ( 4.5 ) gives the second pair of components @xmath ,
@xmath . ∎

So, we have shown that @xmath can be recovered from the patching matrix,
and indeed even more, namely that any patching matrix such that @xmath
at some point of @xmath generates a solution of the ASDYM equation in an
open set of @xmath .

### 4.4. The Abstract Form of the Transform

The construction as described so far is very explicit and suggests that
it depends on the cover @xmath , @xmath and the chosen coordinates.
However, it does not show, as stated in its abstract form, that the
transform is in fact between ASDYM fields on @xmath and holomorphic
vector bundles on @xmath . The above choices were only a way to
represent the bundle in a concrete way.

If @xmath is an ASD connection on a rank- @xmath vector bundle @xmath ,
then the patching matrix @xmath on @xmath determines a rank- @xmath
vector bundle @xmath , where @xmath can be regarded as the transition
matrix between the holomorphic trivializations (of @xmath ) over @xmath
and @xmath . The fibre of @xmath attached to a point @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the space of sections of @xmath over @xmath . That is
the fibre over an @xmath -plane @xmath is the vector space of
covariantly constant sections of @xmath over @xmath with respect to
@xmath . Because @xmath has the Birkhoff factorization with @xmath at
each point of @xmath , the restriction of @xmath to each line in @xmath
corresponding to a point in @xmath is holomorphically trivial. The
holomorphic bundle is uniquely determined up to equivalence by @xmath ,
as the freedom in the construction of @xmath from @xmath is precisely
the freedom in choice of two local holomorphic trivializations.
Conversely, given @xmath , the patching matrix @xmath (and hence @xmath
) can be recovered in a direct geometrical way.

###### Theorem 4.2 (Ward [47]).

Let @xmath be an open set such that the intersection of @xmath with
every @xmath -plane that meets @xmath is connected and simply connected.
Then there is a one-to-one correspondence between solutions to the ASDYM
equation on @xmath with gauge group @xmath and holomorphic vector
bundles @xmath such that @xmath is trivial for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

See Mason & Woodhouse [ 33 , Thm. 10.2.1] . ∎

## Chapter 5 Yang’s Equation, @xmath-Model and Ernst Potential

We will see how the ASDYM can be written in a form called Yang’s
equation using Mason & Woodhouse [ 33 , Sec. 3.3] . Then it is shown how
Yang’s equation turns by a symmetry reduction into the Ernst equation
which describes stationary axisymmetric solutions to the Einstein
equations [ 33 , Sec. 6.6] .

### 5.1. Yang’s Equation and the @xmath-Matrix

The ASD condition on the curvature 2-form @xmath is
coordinate-independent and invariant under gauge transformations as well
as under conformal isometries of @xmath . It can be written in other
forms that are more tractable for certain aspects, even though some of
the symmetries are broken.

The first two equations of ( 4.1 ), equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are an integrability condition for the existence of matrix-valued
functions @xmath and @xmath on @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The potential @xmath determines @xmath and @xmath uniquely up to @xmath
, @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are matrices depending only on @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , respectively. For a gauge transformed
potential @xmath we can replace @xmath and @xmath , which leaves the
expression @xmath invariant.

We define Yang’s matrix [ 50 ] as @xmath . It is determined by the
connection @xmath up to @xmath . Note that @xmath and @xmath satisfy the
same differential equations as those in Lemma 4.1 . Thus, the definition
for Yang’s matrix is equivalent to @xmath with @xmath and @xmath as in
Chapter 4 . To consider the converse direction let @xmath be a Yang’s
matrix. The connection @xmath is determined by @xmath , since we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that @xmath is equivalent to @xmath by the gauge transformation
@xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 Note that after the gauge transformation the potential
@xmath has vanishing @xmath and @xmath component. Given the matrix
@xmath we see that the first two equations of ( 4.1 ) are implied by (
5.1 ), because

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

yields the first equation in ( 4.1 ) trivially, and the second one
follows from

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

A calculation similar to ( 5.1 ) shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to @xmath under the above gauge transformation, and
hence the ASD equations are equivalent to Yang’s equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

However, they are no longer covariant under conformal transformations as
this would change the 2-planes spanned by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath .

Geometrically the construction of @xmath can be interpreted as follows.
Starting from the original gauge we make a transformation by @xmath or
@xmath , respectively. This yields an equivalent gauge with vanishing
@xmath , @xmath in the first case and vanishing @xmath , @xmath in the
second case. If we have frame fields @xmath and @xmath , respectively,
corresponding to the new gauge potentials, then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . Furthermore, by definition of Yang’s matrix @xmath .
Therefore, @xmath is the linear transformation from a frame field
satisfying ( 5.3 ) to a frame field satisfying ( 5.4 ). The connection
potentials in the frames @xmath and @xmath are, respectively,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The freedom in the construction of @xmath from @xmath is the freedom to
transform the first frame by @xmath and the second frame by @xmath .

### 5.2. Reduction of Yang’s Equation

In this section we show how Yang’s equation can be reduced by an
additional symmetry so that it provides the linkage to Einstein
equations.

Such a reduction can in general be approached as follows. Suppose we are
given a two-dimensional subgroup of the conformal group, generated by
two conformal Killing vectors @xmath and @xmath , which span the tangent
space of the orbit of our two-dimensional symmetry group at each point.
To impose the symmetry on a solution of the ASDYM equation, we require
that the Lie derivative of the gauge potential @xmath along @xmath and
@xmath vanishes. ² ² 2 This requirement can be justified in a more
systematic way if invariant connections, Lie derivates on sections of
vector bundles etc. are introduced [ 33 ] . Here the Lie derivative of
@xmath along the Killing fields is the ordinary Lie derivative operator
on differential form. If the symmetry group is Abelian, @xmath , then
there exists a coordinate system with @xmath , @xmath as the first two
coordinate vector fields and by the symmetry the components of @xmath
depend only upon the second pair of coordinates. The reduced version of
equation ( 4.1 ) is obtained by changing the coordinates and discarding
the derivatives with respect to the ignorable coordinates.

Another way is to impose the symmetry on Yang’s equation which is not
always straightforward and we will see how it works in our case.

We are interested in the reduction by the commuting Killing vectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The coordinates can be adapted by the transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the metric is easily calculated to have the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the Killing vectors are @xmath , @xmath so that the symmetries are a
rotation @xmath and a time translation @xmath .

In the Minkowski real slice the coordinates are real and the spatial
metric is of cylindrical polar form. Thus, a reduction by @xmath and
@xmath refers to stationary axisymmetric solutions of the ASDYM equation
and their continuations to @xmath . The crucial point for our
considerations is the coincidence that apart from their role in
Yang-Mills theory the reduced equation turns out to be equivalent to the
Ernst equation for stationary axisymmetric gravitational fields in
general relativity.

We want to construct Yang’s matrix for the invariant potential in this
stationary axisymmetric reduction. First, we note that it is still
possible to choose the invariant gauge such that @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where ³ ³ 3 This @xmath should not be confused with the Patching matrix.
@xmath and @xmath depend only on @xmath and @xmath . This can be seen as
follows. Above we have shown that for @xmath being a solution of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

the gauge transformation with @xmath yields a potential with @xmath ,
because ( 5.6 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The integrability of ( 5.6 ) and hence the existence of @xmath was
ensured by the ASD condition ( 4.2 ).

Now with the additional symmetry the question arises whether this is
still possible but with @xmath and @xmath depending on @xmath and @xmath
only. Under a gauge transformation we then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is obtained by just substituting the coordinates and discarding
the dependency on @xmath and @xmath . In the same way the first equation
of ( 4.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, analogous to the general case, ( 4.1 ) in form of ( 5.7 ) is
exactly the integrability condition for the existence of an invariant
gauge in which @xmath and where @xmath and @xmath depend only on @xmath
and @xmath , that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the notation from ( 5.5 ) and by a similar calculation like above
the second equation in ( 4.1 ), @xmath , takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the third equation, @xmath , becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or equivalently

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Condition ( 5.8 ) guarantees the existence of Yang’s matrix @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can again be interpreted as a change of gauge, but this time @xmath
and @xmath depend only on @xmath and @xmath , hence so does @xmath .

Starting with a matrix @xmath , and defining the gauge potential by (
5.10 ), it is an easy calculation that ( 5.8 ) is satisfied. Equation (
5.9 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, every solution to ( 5.11 ) determines a stationary axisymmetric
ASDYM field and every stationary axisymmetric ASDYM field can be
obtained in that way. The Yang’s matrix @xmath determines the connection
up to @xmath with constant matrices @xmath and @xmath . Note that in the
general case above @xmath , @xmath depended on @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , respectively. But here we restricted to gauge
transformations such that the condition @xmath is preserved, hence they
have to be constant (formula for gauge transformation of @xmath involves
derivatives of @xmath , respectively @xmath ).

### 5.3. Reduction of Einstein Equations

The next step will be to show how reduced Yang’s equation ( 5.11 )
emanates from a reduction of the Einstein equations. This was originally
discovered by Witten [ 48 ], Ward [ 46 ] .

Let @xmath be a metric tensor in @xmath dimensions (real or complex),
and @xmath , @xmath , be @xmath commuting Killing vectors that generate
an orthogonally transitive isometry group with non-null @xmath
-dimensional orbits. This means the distribution of @xmath -plane
elements orthogonal to the orbits of @xmath is integrable, in other
words @xmath is orthogonal to all @xmath whenever @xmath and @xmath are
orthogonal to all @xmath .

Define @xmath , and denote by @xmath the Levi-Civita connection. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the first term vanishes due to the fact that @xmath is a Killing
vector, and the last two terms since the Killing vectors commute. Thus
@xmath is constant along the orbits of the Killing vectors. The Killing
equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and @xmath be vector fields orthogonal to the orbits. From

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the last step follows from the orthogonal transitivity. This
result together with the Killing equation @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

However,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , ⁴ ⁴ 4 Here we need that the orbits of the isometry group
are non-null, otherwise @xmath would be degenerate. gives the same
expressions when contracted with combinations of Killing and orthogonal
vectors. Hence, they must have the same components,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, for a Killing vector @xmath we can use the Ricci identity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the Riemann tensor, to take the second derivative of ( 5.15
). After some computations (see Appendix C ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is the Ricci tensor. If the Einstein vacuum
equations, @xmath , hold, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is constant along the orbits ( 5.16 ) is essentially an
equation on @xmath , where @xmath is the quotient space by the Killing
vectors identified with any of the @xmath -surfaces orthogonal to the
orbits. Denote by @xmath the metric on @xmath and by @xmath the
corresponding Levi-Civita connection so that we get for the determinant

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 The sign might vary depending on the signature of
the metric and the Killing vectors (spacelike or timelike). In some of
the literature the condition is @xmath . Here it is adapted to the
Lorentzian case with one timelike and one spacelike Killing vector. We
know that for functions @xmath on @xmath covariant and partial
derivative are equal @xmath . Considered this together with the
expression for the Laplace-Beltrami operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

equation ( 5.16 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the indices now run over @xmath and are lowered and raised with
@xmath and its inverse. Now remembering that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can take the trace of ( 5.17 ) to get furthermore

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

hence @xmath is harmonic on @xmath . From now on we assume that the
gradient of @xmath is not null.

In the case @xmath isothermal coordinates always exist (see Appendix D
), that is we can write the metric on @xmath in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the harmonic conjugate to @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 The function
@xmath is said to be harmonic conjugate to @xmath , if @xmath and @xmath
satisfy the Cauchy-Riemann equations. As the Killing vectors commute,
there exist coordinates @xmath , where the @xmath are the first @xmath
coordinate vector fields. Taking furthermore the isothermal coordinates
for the last two components, the full the metric then has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is known as the ( Einstein ) @xmath -model . In this case ( 5.17 )
reduces to ( 5.11 ) and we obtain the following proposition.

###### Proposition 5.1 (Proposition 6.6.1 in Mason & Woodhouse [33]).

Let @xmath be a solution to Einstein’s vacuum equation in @xmath
dimensions. Suppose that it admits @xmath independent commuting Killing
vectors generating an orthogonally transitive isometry group with
non-null orbits, and that the gradient of @xmath is non-null. Then
@xmath is the Yang’s matrix of a stationary axisymmetric solution to the
ASDYM equation with gauge group @xmath .

The partial converse of the Proposition yields a technique for solving
Einstein’s vacuum equations as follows. Any real solution @xmath to
reduced Yang’s equation ( 5.11 ) such that

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath is symmetric

determines a solution to the Einstein vacuum equations, because we can
reconstruct the metric from given @xmath and @xmath via ( 5.18 ), and
then ( 5.11 ) is equivalent to the vanishing of the components of @xmath
along the Killing vectors (as we have shown above). The remaining
components of the vacuum equations can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , together with the complex conjugate equation (if @xmath
and @xmath are real), where @xmath is replaced by @xmath and @xmath by
@xmath . These equations can be obtained by a direct calculation of the
Christoffel symbols, curvature tensors and so on [ 21 , App. D,
Eq. (D9)] . They are automatically integrable if ( 5.11 ) is satisfied
and under the constraint @xmath (see Appendix E ), and they determine
@xmath up to a multiplicative constant. The constraint, however, is not
significant for the following reason. We know that in polar coordinates
@xmath is a solution to the (axisymmetric) Laplace equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

so is @xmath for constants @xmath and @xmath . Now suppose @xmath is a
solution to ( 5.11 ), and consider @xmath . Plugging this new matrix in
( 5.11 ), we see that it is again a solution of reduced Yang’s equation
if ( 5.20 ) holds. The determinant constraint can thus be satisfied by
an appropriate choice of the constants, since we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The condition @xmath is a further @xmath symmetry of the ASD connection.

This coincidence between Einstein equations and Yang’s equation is
remarkable, since, although we started from a curved-space problem, by
the correspondence it can essentially be regarded as a problem on
Minkowski space reduced by a time translation and a rotation, hence on
flat space.

Considering the case @xmath , Yang’s matrix @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath and @xmath . It can be
read off that the metric takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath are real for real @xmath and @xmath this is known
as the stationary axisymmetric gravitational field written in canonical
Weyl coordinates.

### 5.4. Solution Generation by the Symmetries of Yang’s Equation

A tedious but straightforward calculation shows that in canonical Weyl
coordinates reduced Yang’s equation ( 5.11 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for real @xmath is the axisymmetric form of the
three-dimensional Laplacian in cylindrical polar coordinates. The second
equation is an integrability condition for @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or equivalently

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we consider the matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

instead of @xmath , ⁷ ⁷ 7 Since @xmath is only determined up to constant
@xmath is only determined up to

@xmath

for a constant @xmath . we find that ( 5.11 ) for @xmath again comes
down to ( 5.22 ), but with @xmath replaced by @xmath as one of the
variables. Solutions to Einstein’s vacuum equations can now be obtained
by solving ( 5.11 ) for @xmath subject to the conditions @xmath , @xmath
. In this context ( 5.11 ) is called Ernst equation and the complex
function @xmath is the Ernst potential [ 14 ] , which is often taken as
the basic variable in the analysis of stationary axisymmetric fields. We
will also refer to @xmath as the Ernst potential.

Note that ( 5.11 ) has the obvious symmetry @xmath , where @xmath is
constant. ⁸ ⁸ 8 The requirement @xmath is necessary to preserve the
constraint @xmath . This corresponds to the linear transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

of Killing vectors in the original space-time. Yet, the construction of
@xmath is not covariant with respect to general linear transformations
in the space of Killing vectors, that is for ( 5.24 ) we do not have
@xmath . Given a solution of the Einstein vacuum equations in form of
@xmath , this leads to a method of generating new solutions. First,
recover the corresponding @xmath by solving for @xmath in terms of
@xmath and @xmath . Then replace @xmath by @xmath , @xmath , and
construct @xmath from the new @xmath . Again replace @xmath by @xmath ,
@xmath , and so on. This produces an infinite-parameter family of
solutions to the Einstein vacuum equations starting from one original
seed (if @xmath and @xmath are real, the transformations preserve the
reality, stationarity and axisymmetry of the solutions as well).

## Chapter 6 Black Holes and Rod Structure

A remarkable consequence of Einstein’s theory of gravitation is that
under certain circumstances an astronomical object cannot exist in an
equilibrium state and hence must undergo a gravitational collapse. The
result is a space-time in which there is a “region of no escape” — a
black hole. Black hole space-times are of interest not only in four but
also in higher dimensions.

This chapter will provide basic knowledge in general relativity that is
needed later on. Yet, proofs or further details are omitted at many
points as this would be beyond the scope of our discussion. Moreover, we
will see what questions arise in higher-dimensional black hole
space-times and in the next chapter we will describe how twistor theory
can be useful in tackling these problems.

In the following a space-time will be a real time-orientable and
space-orientable ¹ ¹ 1 In fact, one can argue that time-orientability
implies space-orientability [ 23 , Sec. 6.1] . Lorentzian manifold,
where not stated differently.

### 6.1. Relevant Facts on Black Holes

The following definitions are taken from Wald [ 45 ] and Chruściel &
Costa [ 6 , Sec. 2] . Denote by @xmath the causal future or past of a
space-time point @xmath . An important concept is asymptotic flatness
which roughly speaking means that the gravitational field and matter
fields (if present) become negligible in magnitude at large distance
from the origin. More precisely we say an @xmath -dimensional space-time
@xmath is asymptotically flat and stationary if @xmath contains a
spacelike hypersurface @xmath diffeomorphic to @xmath , where @xmath is
an open coordinate ball of radius @xmath , that is contained in a
hypersurface satisfying the requirements of the positive energy theorem
and with the following properties. There exists a complete Killing
vector field @xmath which is timelike on @xmath (stationarity) and there
exists a constant @xmath such that, in local coordinates on @xmath
obtained from @xmath , the metric @xmath induced by @xmath on @xmath ,
and the extrinsic curvature tensor @xmath of @xmath , satisfy the
fall-off conditions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath , where we write @xmath if @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In [ 6 , Sec. 2.1] it is argued that these assumptions together with the
vacuum field equations imply that the full metric asymptotes that of
Minkowski space.

The Killing vector @xmath models a “time translation symmetry”. The
one-parameter group of diffeomorphisms generated by @xmath is denoted by
@xmath . Let @xmath be the exterior region , then the domain of outer
communications is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call @xmath the black hole region and its boundary @xmath the black
hole event horizon . ² ² 2 This definition does in fact not depend on
the choice of @xmath [ 6 , Sec. 2.2] . Analogously, the white hole and
the white hole event horizon are @xmath and @xmath . So, if the space
time contains a black hole, that means it is not (entirely) contained in
the causal past of its exterior region. @xmath is a null hypersurface
generated by (inextendible) null geodesics [ 23 , p. 312] .

The second type of symmetry we will impose models a rotational symmetry.
We say a space-time admits an axisymmetry if there exists a complete
spacelike Killing vector field with periodic orbits. This is a @xmath
-symmetry so we imagine it as a rotation around a codimension-2
hypersurface. As shown in Myers & Perry [ 34 , Sec. 3.1] and Emparan &
Reall [ 13 , Sec. 1.1] , note that for @xmath there is the possibility
to rotate around multiple independent planes (if @xmath is
asymptotically flat). For spatial dimension @xmath we can group the
coordinates in pairs @xmath where each pair defines a plane for which
polar coordinates @xmath can be chosen. Thus there are @xmath
independent (commuting) rotations each associated to an angular
momentum. An @xmath -dimensional space-time @xmath will be called
stationary and axisymmetric if it admits @xmath of the above @xmath
axisymmetries in addition to the timelike symmetry. However, note that
this yields an important limitation. For globally asymptotically flat
space-times we have by definition an asymptotic factor of @xmath in the
spatial geometry, and @xmath has isometry group @xmath . The orthogonal
group @xmath in turn has Cartan subgroup @xmath with @xmath , that is
there cannot be more than @xmath commuting rotations. But each of our
rotational symmetries must asymptotically approach an element of @xmath
so that @xmath , and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is only possible for @xmath . Therefore, stationary and
axisymmetric solutions in our sense can only have a globally
asymptotically flat end in dimension four and five. However, much of the
theory, for example the considerations in Chapter 5 , is applicable in
any dimension greater than four so that henceforth we still consider
stationary and axisymmetric space-times and it will be explicitly
mentioned if extra care is necessary.

Note for example that we have to change the above definitions of a black
hole and stationarity in dimensions greater or equal than 6 because they
require asymptotical flatness. Instead of asking @xmath to be
diffeomorphic to @xmath we set the condition that @xmath is
diffeomorphic to @xmath , where @xmath is again an open coordinate ball
of radius @xmath and @xmath is a compact manifold with the relevant
dimension. This is also called asymptotic Kaluza-Klein behaviour. The
fall-off conditions then have to hold for the product metric on @xmath .
The definition of stationarity is verbatim the same only with other
asymptotic behaviour of @xmath .

The time translation isometry must leave the event horizon of the black
hole region invariant as it is completely determined by the metric which
is invariant under the action of @xmath . Hence @xmath must lie tangent
to the horizon, but a tangent vector to a hypersurface with null normal
vector must be null or spacelike. So, @xmath must be null or spacelike
everywhere on the horizon. This motivates the following definition. A
null hypersurface @xmath is called a Killing horizon of a Killing vector
@xmath if (on @xmath ) @xmath is normal to @xmath , that is @xmath is in
particular null on @xmath . The integral curves of the normal vector of
a null hypersurface are in fact geodesics and these geodesics generate
the null hypersurface. ³ ³ 3 This and some of the following statements
can be found in standard textbooks or lecture notes, for example [ 44 ]
. If @xmath is normal to @xmath such that @xmath (affinely
parameterized), then @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the so-called surface gravity . It can be shown that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that @xmath is constant on the horizon. Thus, the following
definition makes sense: A Killing horizon is called non-degenerate if
@xmath , and degenerate otherwise. Henceforth, we will restrict our
attention to non-degenerate horizons, since it is a necessary assumption
in the upcoming theorems and degenerate horizons may have a somewhat
pathological behaviour.

The following theorem links the two notions of event and Killing
horizon.

###### Theorem 6.1 (Theorem 1 in Hollands et al. [25]).

Let @xmath be an analytic, asymptotically flat @xmath -dimensional
solution of the vacuum Einstein equations containing a black hole and
possessing a Killing field @xmath with complete orbits which are
timelike near infinity. Assume that a connected component, @xmath , of
the event horizon of the black hole is analytic and is topologically
@xmath , with @xmath compact, and that @xmath . Then there exists a
Killing field @xmath , defined in a region that covers @xmath and the
entire domain of outer communication, such that @xmath is normal to the
horizon and @xmath commutes with @xmath .

This theorem essentially states that the event horizon of a black hole
that has settled down is a Killing horizon (not necessarily for @xmath
). In four dimensions this theorem has already been proven earlier [ 23
] . In four dimensions Theorem 6.1 is an essential tool in the proof of
the following uniqueness theorem, which is the result of a string of
papers [ 26 , 4 , 22 , 39 ] .

###### Theorem 6.2.

Let @xmath be a non-degenerate, connected, analytic, asymptotically
flat, stationary and axisymmetric four-dimensional space-time that is
non-singular on and outside an event horizon, then @xmath is a member of
the two-parameter Kerr family. The parameters are mass @xmath and
angular momentum @xmath .

Since stationarity can be interpreted as having reached an equilibrium,
this says that in four dimensions the final state of a gravitational
collapse leading to a black hole is uniquely determined by its mass and
angular momentum. The assumption of axisymmetry is actually not
necessary in four dimensions, as it follows from the higher-dimensional
rigidity theorem.

###### Theorem 6.3.

Let @xmath be an analytic, asymptotically flat @xmath -dimensional
solution of the vacuum Einstein equations containing a black hole and
possessing a Killing field @xmath with complete orbits which are
timelike near infinity. Assume that a connected component, @xmath , of
the event horizon of the black hole is analytic and is topologically
@xmath , with @xmath compact, and that @xmath .

1.   If @xmath is tangent to the null generators of @xmath , then the
    space-time must be static; in this case it is actually unique (for
    @xmath the Schwarzschild solution). [ 41 ]

2.   If @xmath is not tangent to the null generators of @xmath , then
    there exist @xmath , @xmath , additional linear independent Killing
    vectors that commute mutually and with @xmath . These Killing vector
    fields generate periodic commuting flows, and there exists a linear
    combination

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    so that the Killing field @xmath is tangent and normal to the null
    generators of the horizon @xmath , and @xmath on @xmath . [ 25 ,
    Thm. 2]

Thus, in case ( 2 ) the space-time is axisymmetric with isometry group
@xmath .

###### Remark 6.4.

In dimension four the last theorem has already been shown in [ 22 , 23 ]
.
@xmath

Interestingly, the higher-dimensional analogue of Theorem 6.2 is not
true, that is there exist different stationary and axisymmetric vacuum
solutions with the same mass and angular momenta. Examples for five
dimensions are given in Hollands & Yazadjiev [ 24 ] . They have
topologically different horizons so there cannot exist a continuous
parameter to link them. A useful tool for the study of solutions in five
dimensions is the so-called rod structure. Before defining it let us set
the basic assumptions about our space-time.

Henceforth we are going to assume that, if not mentioned differently, we
are given a vacuum (non-degenerate black hole) space-time @xmath which
is five-dimensional, globally hyperbolic, asymptotically flat,
stationary and axisymmetric, and that is analytic up to and including
the boundary @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4 The coordinate @xmath is defined in Chapter
5 . Further statements on that are below in the following section. We
are not considering space-times where there are points with a discrete
isotropy group. Note that the stationarity and axisymmetry implies
orthogonal transitivity, which was necessary for the construction in
Chapter 5 (see Appendix F ). The assumption about analyticity might seem
unsatisfactory, but in this thesis we are going to focus on concepts
concerning the uniqueness of five-dimensional black holes rather than
regularity.

### 6.2. Rod Structure

Remember the @xmath -model construction in Chapter 5 . Using the @xmath
-coordinates from there we define as in Harmark [ 21 , Sec. III.B.1] .

###### Definition 6.5.

A rod structure is a subdivision of the @xmath -axis into a finite
number of intervals where to each interval a constant three-vector (up
to a non-zero multiplicative factor) is assigned. The intervals are
referred to as rods , the vectors as rod vectors and the finite number
of points defining the subdivision as nuts .

In order to assign a rod structure to a given space-time we quote the
following proposition.

###### Proposition 6.6 (Proposition 3 in Hollands & Yazadjiev [24]).

Let @xmath be the exterior of a stationary, asymptotically flat,
analytic, five-dimensional vacuum black hole space-time with connected
horizon and isometry group @xmath . Then the orbit space @xmath is a
simply connected 2-manifold with boundaries and corners. If @xmath
denotes the matrix of inner products of the spatial (periodic) Killing
vectors then furthermore, in the interior, on the one-dimensional
boundary segments (except the segment corresponding to the horizon), and
at the corners @xmath has rank 2, 1 or 0, respectively.

Furthermore, since @xmath in the interior of @xmath , the metric on the
quotient space must be Riemannian. Then @xmath is an (orientable) simply
connected two-dimensional analytic manifold with boundaries and corners.
The Riemann mapping theorem thus provides a map of @xmath to the complex
upper half plane where some further arguments show that the complex
coordinate can be written as @xmath . So, starting with a space-time
@xmath the line segments of the boundary @xmath give a subdivision of
the @xmath -axis

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the boundary of the complex upper half plane. This subdivision is
moreover unique up to translation @xmath which can be concluded from the
asymptotic behaviour [ 24 , Sec. 4] . This subdivision is now our first
ingredient for the rod structure assigned to @xmath . For reasons which
will become clear in Sections 7.2 and 8.3 we take the set of nuts to be
@xmath .

As the remaining ingredient we need the rod vectors. The imposed
constraint @xmath implies @xmath , and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will refer to the set @xmath as the axis . Taking the subdivision (
6.1 ) we define the rod vector for a rod @xmath as the vector that spans
@xmath for @xmath (we will not distinguish between the vector and its
@xmath -span). A few comments on that.

First consider the horizon. From Theorem 6.3 we learn that @xmath (I) is
null on the horizon and @xmath (II). ⁵ ⁵ 5 It is not hard to see that if
@xmath , @xmath is a second pair of commuting Killing vectors which
generate an action of @xmath , then @xmath is related to @xmath by a
constant matrix [ 24 , Eq. (9) and Sec. 4] . Hence, we can without loss
of generality assume that our periodic Killing vectors are the ones from
Theorem 6.3 . These conditions are equivalent to

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (II)
     @xmath   @xmath      (I)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words @xmath is an eigenvector of @xmath on @xmath . So, by the
change of basis @xmath , @xmath the first row and column of @xmath
diagonalizes with vanishing eigenvalue towards @xmath . On the other
hand away from any of the rotational axes the axial symmetries @xmath ,
@xmath are independent and non-zero, thus the rank of @xmath drops on
the horizon precisely by one and the kernel is spanned by @xmath . Note
that if the horizon is connected precisely one rod in ( 6.1 ) will
correspond to @xmath .

Second, consider the rods which do not correspond to the horizon
(assuming that @xmath is connected). Proposition 1 and the argument
leading to Proposition 3 in Hollands & Yazadjiev [ 24 ] show that on
those rods the rotational Killing vectors are linearly dependent and the
rank of @xmath again drops precisely by one. Whence, on each rod @xmath
that is not the horizon, there is a vanishing linear combination @xmath
. Therefore the vector @xmath spans the @xmath , @xmath . By Hollands &
Yazadjiev [ 24 , Prop. 1] @xmath and @xmath are constant so that we take
@xmath as the rod vector on @xmath .

###### Remark 6.7.

The fact that @xmath and @xmath are constant is not explicitly shown in
the proof of [ 24 , Prop. 1] , but follows quickly from [ 24 , Eq. (11)]
. For @xmath being a point where @xmath , @xmath are linearly dependent
or where one (but not both) of them vanishes, and for @xmath being the
orbit of @xmath under the action which is generated by @xmath , @xmath
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath commute it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand @xmath is the derivative along the orbit (the orbit is
one-dimensional), hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assuming that @xmath and @xmath do not vanish, this can be integrated
and implies @xmath so that without loss of generality both factors can
be taken as constants. If @xmath or @xmath vanishes on the orbit, then
one obtains immediately @xmath . Note that if one of the Killing vectors
vanishes somewhere on @xmath it vanishes everywhere on @xmath ,
otherwise one could follow the integral curve where the Killing vector
is non-zero up to the first point where it vanishes and there it stops,
which is a contradiction to the periodicity. This shows that the two
cases above are disjoint.
@xmath

Note that the nuts of the rod structure are the points which correspond
to the corners of @xmath and that is where the rank of @xmath drops
precisely by two. So, at those points @xmath .

###### Example 6.8 (Rod Structure of Four-Dimensional Schwarzschild
Space-Time, taken from Section 3.1 in Fletcher [16]).

The Schwarzschild solution in four dimensions has in usual coordinates
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and is obtained in Weyl coordinates @xmath by replacing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the symmetry group is generated by @xmath and @xmath , then one can
calculate the matrix of inner products of the Killing vectors (see
Appendix H ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath , @xmath for @xmath so that for @xmath and @xmath we
have @xmath , @xmath . Hence, @xmath vanishes for @xmath , @xmath . Yet,
applying l’Hôpital’s rule twice shows that @xmath does not vanish for
@xmath , @xmath . So, the rod structure can be read off. It consists of
the subdivision of the @xmath -axis into @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and
the rod vectors as in Figure 6.1 . The semi-infinite rods correspond to
the rotation axis and the finite one to the horizon. At @xmath the entry
@xmath blows up. Furthermore, we see that the boundary values of the
rods are related to the mass of the black hole.
@xmath

There is a better way of visualizing the topology associated with the
rod structure in five dimensions (from private communication with Piotr
Chruściel). First consider five-dimensional Minkowski space. We leave
the time coordinate and only focus on the spatial part. It is Riemannian
and has dimension four, thus we can write it in double polar coordinates
@xmath . Then the first quadrant in Figure 6.2 , that is @xmath ,
corresponds to the space-time.

The diagram suppresses the angles, so that each point in @xmath
represents @xmath where the radius of the corresponding circle is @xmath
. On the axes it thus degenerates to @xmath . The boundary of our
space-time, @xmath , is in these polar coordinates @xmath , and the nut
is at the origin @xmath (see also Section 9.1 ).

Since our interest lies in asymptotically flat space-times, the rod
structures for other space-times will be obtained from this one by
modifying its interior and leaving the asymptotes unchanged. For example
we can cut out a quarter of the unit disc as in Figure 6.3 .

But cutting out the quarter of the unit disc is nothing else than
cutting out @xmath (obviously taking the radius not to be one does not
make any difference for the topology). Therefore the middle rod is the
boundary of a region with topology @xmath . So, if this is the horizon
of a black hole, then the black hole has horizon topology @xmath .
Finally look at Figure 6.4 .

This rod structure has three nuts: at @xmath , at @xmath and at the
origin @xmath , that is at @xmath . If the rod limited by @xmath and
@xmath represents the horizon then the horizon topology is @xmath ,
which can be seen by rotating Figure 6.4 first about the vertical and
then about the horizontal axis. Another visualization is depicted in
Figure 6.5 ,

where the labelled points correspond to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Interpolating the transition between those points explains the topology
as well.

The relation between those more geometrical diagrams and the above
definition of rod structure, that is only the @xmath -axis with the
nuts, can be made by the Riemann mapping theorem [ 24 , Sec. 4] .

The rod structure is essential for the characterization of stationary
axisymmetric black hole solutions. As mentioned above, such a solution
is in five dimensions no longer uniquely given by its mass and angular
momenta. But two solutions with connected horizon are isometric if their
mass, angular momenta and rod structures coincide, if the exterior of
the space-time contains no points with discrete isotropy group [ 24 ]
(see also Theorem 10.3 ). An important question for the classification
of five-dimensional black holes is which rod structures are admissible.
Are there any restrictions on the possible configurations?

## Chapter 7 Bundles over Reduced Twistor Space

We have seen earlier that by the Penrose-Ward transform an ASDYM field
corresponds to a holomorphic vector bundle over twistor space. However,
we are not interested in the full ASDYM field, but in its reduction
through symmetries. This chapter will provide a construction of bundles
representing solutions which are invariant under a subgroup of the
conformal group, and explain how we obtain in this way a twistor
characterization of solutions of the Einstein equations using Mason &
Woodhouse [ 33 , Ch. 11] and Fletcher & Woodhouse [ 17 ] .

### 7.1. Reduced Twistor Space

Proper conformal transformations of compactified @xmath map @xmath
-planes to @xmath -planes, and induce holomorphic motions of the twistor
space which coincide with those of the natural action of @xmath on
@xmath , see Chapter 3 and [ 33 , Sec. 9.2] . Given an ASDYM field that
is invariant under a group of conformal symmetries, by the Penrose-Ward
transform the bundle over the twistor space belonging to the ASDYM field
is invariant under the subgroup of @xmath that corresponds to the group
of conformal symmetries.

This can be made more precise as follows. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a conformal Killing vector on @xmath open, @xmath the twistor space
and @xmath the correspondence space associated to @xmath ,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The idea is to lift @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and project into @xmath
. Since @xmath is a conformal Killing vector, its flow preserves the
metric up to scaling. Hence, @xmath is proportional to the metric
tensor, that is in the usual double-null coordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

together with the same equations but tilded and untilded variables
interchanged.

Now we are looking for a vector field @xmath that acts on @xmath -planes
and is induced by the vector field @xmath on @xmath . So, we have to
define a vector field @xmath on @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and that preserves the distribution spanned by @xmath , @xmath , that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modulo combinations of @xmath and @xmath . From ( 7.2 ) we see that
@xmath has to be of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

For fixed @xmath the conditions ( 7.1 ) imply

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An easy calculation using ( 7.1 ) again shows also @xmath , hence @xmath
. Therefore, with @xmath as in ( 7.4 ) we define @xmath to be the lift
of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . Its projection @xmath is a
well-defined holomorphic vector field on the twistor space, and the flow
of @xmath is the action of conformal motions generated by @xmath on
@xmath -planes.

Remember that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath defined coordinates on the
twistor space and using @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath as
coordinates on @xmath the projection was given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the components are constant on @xmath -planes, that is functions
of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Let @xmath be an open set satisfying the condition as in Theorem 4.2 ,
and @xmath be a subgroup of the conformal group. We have shown that the
Lie algebra @xmath gives rise to Killing vectors @xmath on @xmath and to
holomorphic vector fields @xmath on @xmath . Now assume that @xmath acts
freely on @xmath , then we define the reduced twistor space @xmath as
the quotient of @xmath over @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 A technically more detailed
definition can be found in [ 33 , Sec. 11.3] . A vector bundle @xmath ,
that is the Penrose-Ward transform of an ASDYM connection @xmath on a
vector bundle @xmath , is said to be invariant under @xmath if it is the
pullback of an unconstrained vector bundle @xmath .

In our example of stationary and axisymmetric solutions the reduction
was generated by the two commuting Killing vectors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The above construction yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives us

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath as in Chapter 5 and
the gauge such that ( 5.5 ) holds,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The pullback of local invariant sections of a bundle @xmath to @xmath by
@xmath are simultaneous solutions to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a function of @xmath and the space-time coordinates. The
first pair of equations is required by the constancy of @xmath on @xmath
-planes, and the second pair is the symmetry condition.

Introducing the invariant spectral parameter @xmath the symmetry
conditions can be stated as @xmath . A substitution of coordinates gives
for the first pair of equations in ( 7.5 ) the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equations ( 7.6 ) is a linear system for the reduced form of Yang’s
equation that is integrable if and only if ( 5.11 ) holds.

Another useful parameter for this example is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is constant along @xmath and @xmath as it depends only on @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . Hence, @xmath is a function on the twistor space.

The reduced twistor space has dimension @xmath , thus there exists one
invariant coordinate. Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is constant along the orbits of @xmath and @xmath , so we can
take it to be this coordinate. The pair of planes with @xmath and @xmath
corresponds to @xmath .

The section @xmath can now also be written in terms of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and the reduced system becomes

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a function of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath by ( 7.7 ), and
@xmath satisfies the reduced form of Yang’s equation if and only if this
reduced system is integrable for every @xmath .

A point of @xmath is a leaf of the foliation of @xmath spanned by @xmath
, @xmath . This is a two-parameter family of @xmath -planes, each member
being the orbit of one @xmath -plane under the flow of @xmath and @xmath
. Points of @xmath are labelled by @xmath .

The reduced twistor space @xmath has a non-Hausdorff topology, which can
be seen as follows. Let @xmath as in Theorem 4.2 , and @xmath the
twistor space of @xmath . Consider a leaf of @xmath , that is a point of
@xmath , with constant @xmath . This is the family of @xmath -planes two
of which pass through a general point of @xmath with coordinates @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , corresponding to the two roots of the
quadratic equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . There are two cases. If we can continuously change one root
into the other by moving the point of @xmath but keeping @xmath fixed,
then there is only one leaf in the foliation for this value of @xmath ,
hence @xmath labels a single point in @xmath . Otherwise @xmath labels
two points. The discriminant of ( 7.8 ) is @xmath , so that there is
only one solution to ( 7.8 ) if @xmath . Thus, @xmath labels only one
point of @xmath if @xmath for some point of @xmath , and two otherwise.
For @xmath we will always get two points, the leaves on which @xmath and
@xmath . If @xmath is compact, then @xmath as a quotient of @xmath is
compact, and from the range of the coordinate @xmath we see that it
covers @xmath . So, @xmath is a compact Riemannian surface covering
@xmath , but not Hausdorff, as for @xmath with @xmath , @xmath belonging
to a point of the boundary of @xmath there are two points in @xmath .
They cannot be separated in the quotient topology since every
neighbourhood contains a @xmath for some point in @xmath .

Despite our complex manifold not being Hausdorff it still makes sense in
our case to consider holomorphic vector bundles over it [ 49 , App. 1] .

### 7.2. The Twistor Construction

The considerations below are based on Fletcher & Woodhouse [ 17 ] which
in turn go back to Woodhouse & Mason [ 49 ] . An alternative reference
is Klein & Richter [ 28 , App. B] .

To obtain the formulae in the following in accordance with most of the
literature we change the notation such that the coordinate @xmath is now
named @xmath , the parameter @xmath will be @xmath as of now. Due to the
clash with the standard notation for double-null coordinates this would
have been confusing in the previous paragraphs. Furthermore, we will
take @xmath to be the spectral parameter instead of @xmath .

Another way of defining the reduced twistor space is to take the
quotient of @xmath and @xmath by @xmath so that we have @xmath and
@xmath . Then we obtain the reduced version of the double fibration

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which can be used for a slightly more abstract approach. Henceforth,
instead of beginning with an ASD vacuum space-time, we take a
two-dimensional complex conformal manifold @xmath on which we are given
a holomorphic solution @xmath of the Laplace equation. By @xmath we
denote the harmonic conjugate of @xmath . We define @xmath , where
@xmath is a @xmath Riemann sphere. The reduced twistor space @xmath
associated to @xmath and @xmath is constructed from @xmath by
identifying @xmath and @xmath if they lie on the same connected
component of one of the surfaces given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some value of @xmath and where @xmath , @xmath .

We can use @xmath as a local holomorphic coordinate on @xmath , which is
a non-Hausdorff Riemann surface. Like above, @xmath corresponds to one
point of @xmath if one can continuously change the roots of ( 7.9 ) into
each other by going on a path in @xmath and keeping @xmath fixed; and
two points otherwise. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Note that the condition for @xmath to
correspond only to one point is an open condition in @xmath as @xmath
and @xmath are smooth functions on @xmath . Let @xmath be the @xmath
Riemann sphere, and @xmath be the set of values for @xmath which
correspond only to one point in @xmath . Then @xmath is open, and if
@xmath is simply connected, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, @xmath is not connected.

However, for axis-regular solutions (for the definition see below)
@xmath can be enlarged so that it becomes a simply connected open set
@xmath . This situation is depicted in Figure 7.1 .

For @xmath we will always have two points, corresponding to @xmath and
@xmath , whatever @xmath and @xmath are. Therefore, @xmath is never in
@xmath . We denote the points in @xmath corresponding to @xmath by
@xmath (for @xmath ) and @xmath (for @xmath ).

Now we need to construct the reduced form of the Penrose-Ward transform.
First the forward direction, where we are given @xmath as a solution of
( 5.11 ). In the unconstrained case the bundle over twistor space was
defined by specifying what the fibres are. For an @xmath -plane @xmath ,
that is a point in the twistor space @xmath , it was the space of
covariantly constant sections over @xmath in the given ASD bundle @xmath
(see end of Chapter 4 ). With our symmetry assumptions these are the
sections defined by ( 7.5 ). We have seen above that with our additional
symmetry ( 7.5 ) comes down to ( 7.6 ). Hence, the holomorphic bundle
@xmath is constructed by taking the fibre over a point of @xmath to be
the space of solutions of ( 7.6 ) on the corresponding connected surface
in @xmath . The integrability condition is precisely ( 5.11 ).

Conversely, let @xmath be a holomorphic rank- @xmath vector bundle
together with a choice of frame in the fibres. For a fixed @xmath let
@xmath be the restricted projection of @xmath to @xmath , that is the
identification @xmath as above, and denote by @xmath the pullback bundle
of @xmath to @xmath . We have to assume that @xmath is a trivial
holomorphic bundle over @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 This is less restrictive than it
seems since if it is satisfied at one point @xmath then it holds in a
neighbourhood of @xmath , compare comment on page 2 .

The matrix @xmath can again be recovered within @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath are constant, by the splitting procedure as in Chapter 4 ,
but adapted to the symmetry constraint. Suppose @xmath is given by
patching matrices @xmath according to an open cover @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is given by patching matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

according to the open cover @xmath of @xmath . The triviality assumption
implies that there exist splitting matrices @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define @xmath . Another splitting would be of the form @xmath for an
invertible matrix @xmath , which has to be holomorphic on the entire
@xmath Riemann sphere, thus @xmath is constant. But this leaves @xmath
invariant and the definition is independent of the choice of splitting.
The splitting matrices @xmath depend smoothly on @xmath , @xmath as
@xmath varies, so @xmath does. Although @xmath might have singularities
where the triviality condition does not hold.

Next we have to show that the so defined @xmath satisfies ( 5.11 ).
Therefore, we exploit the freedom to choose the splitting matrices such
that @xmath , thus @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the vector fields
in ( 7.6 ). An easy calculation shows @xmath , @xmath . Using this and
acting with @xmath , @xmath , on ( 7.12 ) yields for the left-hand side
zero and hence for the right-hand side

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be rearranged as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In ( 7.13 ) the left-hand side is holomorphic on @xmath and the
right-hand side on @xmath , so we obtain a function that is holomorphic
on the entire @xmath Riemann sphere, and therefore by Liouville’s
theorem both sides are independent of @xmath . Evaluate ( 7.13 ) at
@xmath , that is on @xmath . This can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But we can also write it as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining both and rearranging yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath is a solution for ( 7.6 ) at @xmath and then for all
@xmath since we have already seen that it is independent of @xmath . The
existence of a simultaneous solution to both equations means they are
integrable, thus @xmath satisfies ( 5.11 ).

Another freedom in the construction of @xmath from @xmath is the change
of local trivialization @xmath , where each @xmath is holomorphic. Then
@xmath becomes @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . This freedom of
multiplying @xmath by constant matrices is the freedom of making linear
transformations in the fibres of @xmath over @xmath and @xmath . By
construction @xmath is a linear map @xmath , but in the context of
general relativity it was also the matrix of inner products of Killing
vectors. Hence, @xmath has to be interpreted as the space of Killing
vectors in space-time, and @xmath as its dual.

Furthermore, from the context of general relativity we have the
requirement for @xmath to be real and symmetric, and the constraint
@xmath . These conditions lead to further constraints on the bundle
@xmath which are in general still rather complicated [ 49 , Sec. 5] . To
obtain a simplification, we consider only axis-regular solutions.

###### Definition 7.1.

An Ernst potential @xmath is called axis-regular if the corresponding
bundle @xmath satisfies @xmath where @xmath is a bundle over @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath are trivial.

Here @xmath is a double cover of the @xmath -Riemann sphere identified
over the two copies of the set @xmath where @xmath is open, simply
connected, invariant under @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath as in ( 7.10 )).
The map @xmath is the projection.

We shall also say that a metric @xmath is axis-regular if the
corresponding Ernst potential @xmath is.

Roughly speaking this definition just says that @xmath is axis-regular
if we can enlarge the region where two spheres are identified to a
simply connected patch such that this identification also extends to the
fibres of @xmath . The exact shape of @xmath is not important. Despite
the further identifications we still have the projections @xmath and can
therefore construct @xmath from a holomorphic bundle @xmath that
satisfies the triviality condition. Choose the copies of the two Riemann
spheres in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

If the bundle was not axis-regular, it meant that there are more than
only isolated points where the two spheres cannot be identified. Thus,
in the light of later results (Proposition 8.16 , Corollary 8.17 ) and [
21 , App. F] axis-regularity is necessary for the the space-time not to
have curvature singularities at @xmath .

This completes our construction of a correspondence between general
relativity and twistor theory. The following diagram depicts the
established relation in a nutshell.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

### 7.3. Review of the Four-Dimensional Case

For the rest of this chapter we review results for the case @xmath ,
that is @xmath is a @xmath -matrix and @xmath a rank-2 vector bundle. To
characterize the bundle @xmath in terms of patching matrices we choose a
four-set open cover @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath , and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Now we use the following
theorem.

###### Theorem 7.2 (Grothendieck).

Let @xmath be a rank- @xmath vector bundle. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some integers @xmath unique up to permutation. Here, @xmath with
@xmath the tautological bundle. ⁷ ⁷ 7 @xmath is the tautological bundle
: If @xmath and @xmath are linear coordinates on @xmath , then @xmath is
an affine (stereographic) coordinate on @xmath . Each value of @xmath ,
including @xmath , defines a one-dimensional subspace @xmath . So, as
@xmath varies, these subspaces form a line bundle @xmath , called
tautological bundle @xmath . Covering @xmath by @xmath and @xmath , we
have a trivialization given by

@xmath

so that the transition function is @xmath .

Hence we can choose a trivialization such that @xmath and @xmath , that
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we assume that without loss of generality @xmath which can be
achieved by adding a real constant to @xmath . The above form of the
patching matrices can also be concluded from the Birkhoff factorization.

Now the triviality assumption and the symmetry imply that @xmath and
@xmath which can be seen as follows. As a generalization of the winding
number the determinant of a patching matrix has to be topologically
invariant which implies that @xmath is topologically invariant since
@xmath . The triviality of the pullback of @xmath to @xmath then implies
that @xmath . We will see later that the symmetry of @xmath requires
that @xmath , thus @xmath and @xmath .

That reduces the patching data to two integers @xmath , @xmath and a
single holomorphic patching matrix @xmath defined for @xmath . The
remaining patching matrices are obtained by concatenation.

We can then also reduce the reconstruction of @xmath from @xmath given
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For fixed @xmath , @xmath we get a map
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is again the @xmath Riemann sphere, namely @xmath . The map
is not yet well-defined as outside @xmath a value of @xmath corresponds
to two points of @xmath . So, we have to add a rule which of the two
points is to be @xmath . For the construction of @xmath we need @xmath
to be in @xmath , otherwise @xmath is only a double cover of one of the
spheres in @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath lie on different spheres) for the
following reason. First note that @xmath and @xmath are mapped to the
same @xmath , so if @xmath it corresponds to two points, each on one
sphere, and we have to decide to which sphere we map @xmath and @xmath .
Note further, as soon as we can find a path from @xmath to @xmath whose
image does not go through @xmath , @xmath covers only one sphere,
because we can only change the sphere by going through @xmath . Now the
image of every path from @xmath to @xmath has to go through one of the
points @xmath as @xmath and @xmath lie on different branches of the root
function of quadratic equation ( 7.14 ), hence the path has to go
through a branch point. Any other value of @xmath can be avoided by
picking a suitable path. Thus, if @xmath , then we can find a path
connecting @xmath and @xmath whose image does not go through @xmath and
@xmath must be a double cover of one of the spheres. However, as we have
seen above, if @xmath and @xmath for @xmath this condition is satisfied
automatically (which will be assumed further on).

If @xmath is simply connected, @xmath can be fixed by the condition that
@xmath is mapped to @xmath and @xmath to @xmath . Yet, even if the
space-time is regular on @xmath , that is there exist smooth
non-singular coordinates on a neighbourhood of @xmath , the Ernst
Potential may have poles on @xmath (see Example 6.8 ). In most of the
relevant examples @xmath is the complement of a finite set — infinity
and a finite set of isolated singularities, @xmath , where the @xmath
lie on the real axis, thus, suppose @xmath is not simply connected. The
@xmath correspond to two points of @xmath , the roots of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are still fixed. Here we need to assign the
roots to @xmath , @xmath , say @xmath and @xmath . Choose a cover @xmath
, @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . To define @xmath we use
what is called the Ward ansatz in Woodhouse & Mason [ 49 , Sec. 5.5] .
With given patching data @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we have patching
matrices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now instead of looking for splitting matrices for @xmath , we first do a
transformation to our patching matrices. Let @xmath and @xmath , and
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath , @xmath , is holomorphic and invertible on @xmath and
@xmath is holomorphic and invertible on @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore,
since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly @xmath , we get @xmath so that @xmath is unchanged by
using @xmath instead of @xmath . Yet, @xmath , which means we can reduce
our open cover to @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . For the evaluation of
@xmath we seek a splitting @xmath and @xmath of the new patching matrix
@xmath which is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , @xmath are holomorphic in @xmath and non-singular in
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. As before, we set @xmath , and obtain
a solution of ( 5.11 ). A different labeling of the roots of ( 7.15 )
yields a different solution @xmath , yet these different solutions are
analytic continuations of each other and one can show that they are
different parts of the Penrose diagram of the maximal analytic extension
of the metric (this will be considered again in Chapter 8 from a
slightly different point of view).

From the interpretation of @xmath as the matrix of inner products of
Killing vectors in general relativity, we require @xmath to be real and
symmetric. Therefore, the questions arises which conditions we have to
impose on our bundle to obtain solutions with the desired properties.
The following can be immediately read off from the splitting procedure
in any dimension (restriction to @xmath not necessary).

Let @xmath be the map that interchanges the spheres, that is it is the
identity on @xmath and otherwise the two points of @xmath that
correspond to the same @xmath are interchanged. Then @xmath is obtained
from the pullback bundle @xmath and furthermore @xmath is obtained from
the dual bundle @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or in other words @xmath is symmetric, which means @xmath , if and only
if @xmath , that is @xmath is symmetric.

Remember in general for a holomorphic function @xmath we have that
@xmath is real on the real numbers if and only if @xmath . So, if @xmath
is real in the sense @xmath , then by ( 7.16 ) we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

So, @xmath must be real as well, provided @xmath or @xmath , @xmath . In
terms of the bundle this is the condition @xmath where @xmath is the
complex conjugate bundle of @xmath and @xmath is the pullback with the
complex conjugation on the spheres

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The converse, that is a real @xmath implies a real @xmath , is then also
obvious.

Moreover, for @xmath it can be shown that (see for example [ 49 ] , but
as cited here it is taken from [ 17 ] ):

-   If @xmath , then @xmath .

-   If @xmath is obtained from an axis-regular space-time and if the
    definition of @xmath is such that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and
    all @xmath , then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath on the rotational axis
    or on the horizon. Here, @xmath is the Ernst potential. Thus, @xmath
    is the analytic continuation of the boundary values of the Ernst
    potential.

    As an argument in Fletcher [ 16 ] shows, this can be seen from the
    determinant condition above and the fact that @xmath is bounded on
    the axis. The determinant condition implies @xmath and an asymptotic
    relation between @xmath and @xmath reveals that if @xmath is bounded
    as @xmath then @xmath and @xmath must be non-negative. So, either
    @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , @xmath . We can assume that the
    trivialization over @xmath and @xmath can be chosen such that the
    first holds. The same argument implies that the twistor data
    obtained from @xmath has @xmath , since @xmath . This goes along
    with the interesting effect that the gauge groups for @xmath and
    @xmath (in their Yang-Mills interpretation) are different [ 49 ,
    Sec. 6] .

-   If @xmath comes from an asymptotically flat space-time in the sense
    that its Ernst potential has the same asymptotic form as the Ernst
    potential of Minkowski space with rotation and translation as
    Killing vectors, then @xmath , and conversely.

These results can be used to look at some examples.

###### Example 7.3.

1.   Minkowski Space with Translation and Rotation
    Written in cylindrical polar coordinates

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we can take the Killing vectors to be @xmath , @xmath . The matrix
    of inner products and the Ernst potential are then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since it is axis-regular we also have @xmath and @xmath with @xmath
    the entire complex plane.

2.   The Kerr solution
    The patching data for the Kerr solution is (without proof)

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath for @xmath . Axis-regularity implies again @xmath and
    @xmath . The open set @xmath is the complement of @xmath where
    @xmath and @xmath .

## Chapter 8 Twistor Approach in Five Dimensions

Most of what we have seen about the twistor construction at the end of
Chapter 7 generalizes without any effort to five and higher dimensions.
Only, instead of two, the rank of the bundle will be three so that we
have three integers instead of only @xmath and @xmath in our twistor
data (respectively @xmath in higher dimensions). The splitting procedure
itself is not affected by increasing the rank. However, since the
splitting itself is complicated, we have seen that the Ernst potential
@xmath is a crucial tool for any practical application of the twistor
characterization of stationary axisymmetric solutions of Einstein’s
field equations, and the way we obtained @xmath in Chapter 5 seemed to
be tailored to four dimensions with two Killing vectors. So, in order to
pursue this strategy we have to define an Ernst potential in five
dimensions. First, we are going to say a few words about Bäcklund
transformations, because we will see that we secretly used them to
obtain @xmath . Since some of the following extends immediately to
higher dimensions as well, we will present most of it in @xmath
dimensions.

In the last part of this section we generalize results from Fletcher [
16 , Sec. 2.4] in order to conclude the important fact that the integers
in the twistor data are non-negative as in four dimensions.

### 8.1. Bäcklund Transformations

In Chapter 5 we derived Yang’s equation as one way of writing the ASDYM
equations with gauge group @xmath . It has a number of ‘hidden’
symmetries one of which is the Bäcklund transformation.

As in Mason & Woodhouse [ 33 , Sec. 4.6] we can decompose a generic
@xmath -matrix in the following way ¹ ¹ 1 Using @xmath .

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.1)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath is a @xmath non-singular matrix ( @xmath ), @xmath is
@xmath non-singular matrix with @xmath . Then, @xmath is a @xmath and
@xmath a @xmath matrix. The term ‘generic’ rules out for example cases
where @xmath is not invertible. Substituting this in Yang’s equation (
5.2 ) we get the coupled system of equations

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.2)
  -- -- -- -------

where an index denotes a partial derivative (see Appendix I for detailed
calculation). The first two equations are integrability conditions and
they imply the existence of matrices @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Definition 8.1.

Together with @xmath and @xmath we define the other primed quantities as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We call the matrix @xmath , that is obtained from @xmath by ( 8.1 ) with
the primed blocks instead of the unprimed, the Bäcklund transform .

###### Proposition 8.2 (Section 4.6 in Mason & Woodhouse [33]).

1.  @xmath is again a solution of Yang’s equation.

2.  @xmath

###### Proof.

1.  Substitute the unprimed by the primed versions in ( 8.2 ).

2.  Noting that @xmath and similar for the other integrability
    equations, this statement is obvious.

∎

However, the connection between ASDYM and Einstein’s field equations in
the stationary and axisymmetric case was given by the reduced Yang’s
equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

see ( 5.11 ). The reduction was induced by the coordination
transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we have to be careful, because the @xmath -derivatives also act on
the @xmath -factors appearing. But an analogous calculation as above
(see Appendix J ) shows that the reduced Yang’s equation is equivalent
to a similar set of equations

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.3)
  -- -- -- -------

where all matrices are functions of @xmath and @xmath . The
integrability conditions are now

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

So, we have to adapt the transform, namely we define @xmath , @xmath and
the rest as above ² ² 2 Note that this modification is not mentioned in
[ 33 , Sec. 4.6] , but necessary to obtain the correct result in Example
8.4 . . Again by substitution it can be checked that this gives a
solution of the reduced Yang’s equation. However, one should note that
this modified Bäcklund transformation is not an involution anymore since
the definition for @xmath , @xmath is not involutive. The definition for
@xmath , @xmath is still an involution so that the inverse Bäcklund
transformation is obtained by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

###### Proposition 8.3.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Note that for the decomposition of a general matrix in block matrices we
know from basic linear algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath is invertible. Applied to our decomposition ( 8.1 ) this
yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now using the fact that @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

###### Example 8.4 (Bäcklund Transformation in Four Dimensions).

As in [ 33 , Sec. 6.6] , we consider the four-dimensional case with two
Killing vectors. As in ( 5.21 ) we set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Then
the integrability equations take the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

like in ( 5.22 ). The blocks for the Bäcklund transform are @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the existence of @xmath is ensured by the integrability condition
as above. Hence, our Ernst potential is obtained by a Bäcklund
transformation.
@xmath

### 8.2. Higher-Dimensional Ernst Potential

Let us first recall the definition of twist 1-forms, twist potentials
and some of their properties.

###### Definition 8.5.

Consider an @xmath -dimensional (asymptotically flat) space-time @xmath
with @xmath a stationary and @xmath axial Killing vectors, all mutually
commuting. The twist @xmath -forms are defined as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , according to ( 5.18 ). ³ ³ 3 Note that in [ 24 ] the
notation is taken from [ 45 ] where @xmath is already the volume
element.

Adopting a vector notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , @xmath , be the dual to @xmath , that is @xmath .

###### Proposition 8.6.

1.   The twist 1-forms can be written as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

2.  @xmath is closed.

3.  @xmath annihilates the Killing vector fields @xmath .

###### Proof.

1.  Suppressing the @xmath -index for @xmath , we note that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    as we use the Levi-Civita connection for which @xmath . But @xmath
    are the components of @xmath so that from the definition of the
    Hodge dual we see that ( 8.5 ) is an equivalent way of writing the
    twist 1-forms.

2.  Analogously to the proof of [ 45 , Thm. 7.1.1] implied by the vacuum
    field equations.

3.  We denote by @xmath the coordinate belonging to @xmath , @xmath ,
    and for @xmath we use again @xmath and @xmath as coordinates. It is
    sufficient to show that @xmath with all other components vanishing.
    We will do the following calculations a bit more in detail as the
    results will proof useful later on. Using

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we first calculate

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    This gives for @xmath the following

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    where the summation over capital latin indices runs from 0 to @xmath
    . At this point we can already see that only @xmath , @xmath are
    non-zero, but let us determine them somewhat more precisely. Our
    volume form is

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    so that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    since the left-hand side contains @xmath spacelike and one timelike
    component. Thus

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    similar for @xmath but with the opposite sign. Whence we obtain

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      (8.6)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath are the permutations of @xmath elements. An analogous
    equation holds for @xmath .∎

The last statement in the above proposition implies that @xmath can also
be regarded as 1-forms on the interior of @xmath . Due to the form of
the @xmath -model metric there should be no confusion if we denote both
the form on @xmath and the one on @xmath by the same symbol. Being a
form on @xmath means that @xmath has only non-vanishing components for
the @xmath - and @xmath -coordinate, and of course as a form on @xmath
it will again be a closed. This gives rise to the following definition.

###### Definition 8.7.

Locally there exist functions on @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or equivalently in vector notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These functions @xmath are called twist potentials .

The construction of the Ernst Potential in Example 8.4 is tailor-made
for dimension four, and it is not immediately obvious how to generalize
it to higher dimensions. Nevertheless, there is an ansatz in Maison [ 31
] , where it is noted that the full metric on space-time, that is
essentially @xmath , can be reconstructed from knowing the two twist
potentials (in five dimensions) @xmath , the @xmath -matrix @xmath and
its non-vanishing determinant @xmath on the factor space @xmath . The
matrix in [ 31 , Eq. (16)] will then be our candidate for the
higher-dimensional Ernst Potential. Note, however, that the condition
@xmath needs further investigation.

Closely connected to the non-vanishing determinant is the concept of
adaptations to certain parts of the axis @xmath . Recall that the
assumption of axis-regularity was an important one. It said that the
region where the two spheres of the reduced twistor space are identified
can be enlarged to a simply connected patch such that this
identification also extends to the fibres of the bundle. The exact shape
of @xmath is not important, however, there is still an ambiguity if we
have a nut on @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4 Remember that we assume that there is only
a finite number of isolated nuts. Figure 8.1 shows how we can choose
different extensions of @xmath .

From Example 6.8 we learn that the choice of @xmath matters, that is we
obtain different Ernst potentials @xmath for different extensions.

###### Definition 8.8.

In any dimension given an axis-regular @xmath we shall call it adapted
to the rod @xmath if @xmath .

For a rod corresponding to a rotational axis we know that along this rod
a linear combination of the axial Killing vectors vanishes. By a change
of basis we can always assume that without loss of generality this
vector is already in the basis, say @xmath , @xmath . Then we make the
following definition.

###### Definition 8.9.

In dimension @xmath we call @xmath adapted to @xmath the @xmath -matrix
that is obtained from @xmath by

1.  cancelling the @xmath column and row, if @xmath is a rotational axis
    and @xmath the corresponding rod vector;

2.  cancelling the @xmath column and row, if @xmath is the horizon.

The following lemma shows the reason for the latter definition.

###### Lemma 8.10.

@xmath adapted to @xmath is invertible on @xmath and becomes singular at
the limiting nuts.

###### Proof.

This is a simple consequence of what we have seen in Section 6.2 .
First, consider a rod corresponding to a rotational axis @xmath . Here
@xmath is an @xmath matrix and has rank @xmath . Since @xmath on @xmath
, we cancelled a zero column and row, thus it follows that @xmath has
full rank and @xmath on @xmath . Of course, where the rank of @xmath
drops further, that is where @xmath , the matrix @xmath cannot have full
rank anymore and @xmath . So, this adaptation becomes singular as soon
as we reach one of the nuts limiting this rod.

Second, consider the horizon rod @xmath . Here the first row and column
of @xmath , that is the one with the asymptotically timelike Killing
vector in it, becomes zero. Then @xmath adapted to @xmath has full rank
on @xmath , and becomes singular at the nuts where the rotational axes
intersect the horizon. ∎

Note that at the beginning of this section we defined the twist 1-forms
by singling out @xmath . However, the definition works just as well with
the set @xmath of Killing vectors. For an adaptation to a certain rod we
obtain in the same way as above @xmath twist potentials by omitting the
rod vector for this rod.

Now, we have collected all the components for the following definition,
which is a modification of [ 31 , Eq. (16)] .

###### Definition 8.11.

In @xmath dimensions and for a given rod @xmath we call the matrix

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.7)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath is adapted to @xmath and @xmath is the vector of twist
potentials for @xmath , higher-dimensional Ernst potential adapted to
@xmath .

###### Remark 8.12.

1.  For @xmath this is becomes on the horizon rod

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

2.  Note that @xmath is a matrix of scalar quantities, hence @xmath is
    bounded for @xmath . So, the domain of @xmath is only restricted by
    @xmath and by the arguments above we see that for an adaptation to
    @xmath the limit @xmath is well-defined for @xmath .

###### Lemma 8.13 (Maison [31]).

@xmath , @xmath and

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

The first part is obvious, the second part is an easy calculation and
Proposition 8.3 implies for @xmath that @xmath . ∎

Even though ingredients and the matrix @xmath itself were known already
before, the crucial new step for the twistor construction is to
recognize the following.

###### Theorem 8.14.

@xmath is obtained from @xmath by a Bäcklund transformation.

###### Proof.

Consider without loss of generality @xmath adapted to the horizon. We
decompose @xmath according to ( 8.1 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath as above the spatial part of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath , @xmath . In order to calculate @xmath remember that the
inverse of a general matrix was given

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath with @xmath being the matrix obtained from @xmath by
crossing out the @xmath row and @xmath column.

As a first step towards @xmath we do a Laplace expansion of @xmath along
the first row

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by another Laplace expansion (also using that @xmath is symmetric)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting the latter one in the expression for @xmath yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

which is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we can, in line with the Bäcklund transformation, define

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

To complete our proof of showing that @xmath is a Bäcklund transform we
have to verify that the integrability conditions yield the right
expression for the twist potentials. They take the form

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and @xmath . We are done if we can show that @xmath because then our
constructed @xmath coincides with the Bäcklund transform (apart from
swapping the first and last row, respectively column, which does not
affect our considerations).

So, it remains to show

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Starting from the left-hand side of ( 8.8 ) we Laplace expand the
determinant in ( 8.6 ) twice; first along the last column and then along
the first row

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

However, the last line is the @xmath component of

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
                 
  -- -------- -- --

which corresponds to the right-hand side of ( 8.8 ). An analogous
computation verifies the second equation of ( 8.8 ). ∎

This completes the justification to call the @xmath defined in ( 8.7 )
Ernst potential — by Proposition 8.2 it satisfies Yang’s equation and by
Lemma 8.13 it is symmetric and has unit determinant.

### 8.3. Properties of @xmath and the Bundle

Having different adaptations of @xmath which are related to different
extenstions of @xmath the question arises whether these yield equivalent
bundles over the reduced twistor space. To see that is true is not very
hard using results in Fletcher [ 16 ] .

###### Proposition 8.15 (Proposition 3.1 in Fletcher [16]).

Suppose @xmath , the bundle corresponding to a solution @xmath of Yang’s
equation on the set @xmath , can be represented as the pullback of the
bundles @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are simply connected
open sets which intersect the real axis in distinct intervals. Then
@xmath and @xmath are the pullbacks of a bundle @xmath where @xmath .
Moreover, we can express @xmath in standard form in two different ways;
and one of the collections of patching matrices is identical to the
collection used to describe @xmath and the other collection is identical
to that used to describe @xmath .

###### Sketch of Proof.

The proof in Fletcher [ 16 ] only makes use of the construction for the
reduced twistor space and not of the rank of the bundle. So, it carries
over to higher dimensions.

Roughly speaking the argument is that for two different adaptations with
reduced twistor spaces @xmath and @xmath , as in Figure 8.1 , their
pullbacks to @xmath have to be equivalent (in the sense of Proposition
2.5 ), since in both cases it yields the bundle defined by the solution
@xmath for ( 5.11 ). But if they are equivalent on @xmath and are both
analytical continuations, then they have to belong to the same bundle
and are only two different representations of it. ∎

The bridge between Ernst potential and patching matrix is built by
analytic continuation.

###### Proposition 8.16 (Proposition 7.2 in Woodhouse & Mason [49]).

In five as well as in four dimensions if @xmath is a patching matrix of
an axis-regular Ernst potential @xmath on @xmath , then @xmath is
analytic on (a choice of) @xmath and @xmath for real @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is literally the same as for Woodhouse & Mason [ 49 ] , since it
does not make use of the rank of the bundle. Note that even though in
the statement there the assumption of @xmath being positive definite is
made, it in fact is not necessary for the proof. ∎

###### Corollary 8.17.

A patching matrix @xmath has real singularities, that is points @xmath
where an entry of @xmath has a singularity, at most at the nuts of the
rod structure.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath corresponds to the bundle @xmath , where @xmath is the
maximally extended region over which the spheres can be identified.
Suppose further that @xmath has a real singularity @xmath which is not
one of the nuts, say without loss of generality @xmath . Then from
Proposition 8.15 we know that @xmath can on @xmath be expressed in
standard form. But using Proposition 8.16 that means that @xmath for
@xmath . On the other hand we have seen earlier already that @xmath is
regular on @xmath and only becomes singular when approaching the nut.
Contradiction!

For every other bundle @xmath it must be @xmath , hence @xmath is the
pullback of @xmath and as such the patching matrix of @xmath cannot have
poles where the patching matrix of @xmath has not. ∎

As in Fletcher [ 16 ] we sometimes also call the singularities of @xmath
double points , because the singularities of @xmath are the points where
the two Riemann spheres of the reduced twistor space cannot be
identified.

###### Proposition 8.18.

The real singularities of a patching matrix @xmath are simple poles.

###### Proof.

We have seen above that on the real axis @xmath the singularities of
@xmath are caused by the term @xmath . So, consider the rod @xmath where
@xmath has full rank. The determinant of a matrix equals the product of
its eigenvalues. Furthermore, towards the nuts @xmath , @xmath we know,
also from above, that the rank of @xmath drops precisely by one which is
the case if and only if @xmath contains the factors @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, with multiplicity one. ∎

Note that if @xmath has a pole with @xmath , then it is obviously not
splittable at this point, see ( 7.12 ), hence we do not obtain @xmath at
this point by the splitting procedure which means the metric might be
singular at this point. We would like to exclude such situations.
However, referring again to ( 7.12 ) it is evident that the splitting
procedure in general does break down for @xmath . So, one has to study
this limit by means of other tools, see Section 8.4 , and we have seen
in Example 6.8 even for regular space-times it is possible that @xmath
has real poles. But as in Chapter 7 we assume that there are only
finitely many of them.

### 8.4. Patching Matrix near the Axis and Twistor Data Integers

In this last part we will sketch a generalization of the asymptotic
formula of @xmath for @xmath . Originally, the result in four dimensions
goes back to Ward [ 46 ] , but here we will follow the lines of Fletcher
[ 16 , Sec. 2.4] .

In Section 8.2 we defined

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . We have shown above that @xmath is the analytic
continuation of @xmath , hence we can assume that it also takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

but the entries being functions of @xmath . Analogously to Chapter 7 we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, we assume for the integers @xmath , which is just a
question of ordering. Following exactly the lines as in Chapter 7 we
obtain

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the left-hand side is a function of @xmath . With

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this can be rewritten as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Suppose we can split @xmath , where @xmath is holomorphic in @xmath ,
that is on @xmath , and @xmath is holomorphic in @xmath , that is on
@xmath . This may be achieved by the use of a Laurent series. We claim
that then @xmath can be split as follows

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
                 
  -- -------- -- --

where @xmath is holomorphic in @xmath , that is on @xmath , and lower
triangular, and @xmath is holomorphic in @xmath , that is on @xmath ,
and upper triangular. All these steps generalize straight-forwardly to
more than five dimensions. In the case of @xmath dimensions the range of
integers is @xmath . In the following paragraphs it does not simplify
the notation if we restrict to @xmath , therefore we will consider the
more general setting.

The matrices @xmath , @xmath are not necessarily holomorphic and
non-singular on @xmath or @xmath , respectively. Yet, we can expand
@xmath and the off-diagonal entries of @xmath around @xmath which yields
⁵ ⁵ 5 Remember @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly for the entries of @xmath . Here @xmath denotes the @xmath
derivative.

Denote by @xmath the @xmath -entry of @xmath ( @xmath ). Now consider
the @xmath -entry of @xmath where @xmath and without loss of generality
@xmath . This entry gets multiplied by @xmath , where @xmath by the
chosen order of the @xmath and because @xmath is lower triagonal. Hence,
all the terms up to @xmath in the Taylor series for the @xmath -entry
are indeed holomorphic on @xmath and the terms up to @xmath vanish at
@xmath . Therefore the lowest order contribution for @xmath for this
entry is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Analogous arguments work for @xmath . Thus the obtained asymptotic
behaviour as @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath with the entries of @xmath as in ( 8.9 ) and analogously for
@xmath .

Note that all exponents of @xmath in @xmath are greater than 0. Thus on
a part of the axis @xmath where @xmath is not singular, that is
everywhere apart from the nuts, we see that boundedness of @xmath
implies @xmath .

It remains to justify the claim about the splitting of @xmath . As [ 16
, Sec. 2.4] shows it is not hard to find a splitting in the
four-dimensional case under the assumption that @xmath splits
appropriately

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To obtain a splitting in the five-dimensional case we make the following
inductive ansatz

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the upper ( @xmath )-block whose splitting @xmath we
know. The indices nought and one bear the same meaning as above. Then
@xmath and @xmath are fixed by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It
is not hard to see that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath can be found
such that they are holomorphic on the appropriate sphere. One has to
ensure that certain entries of @xmath are non-zero, which can without
loss of generality be assumed if we choose the adaptation to the right
part of the axis. This inductive argument can then be continued to
obtain splittings higher dimensions if needed.

For @xmath we get for example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that we assumed the metric to be analytic throughout the space-time
(up to and including the axis), so that it is not necessary to split
@xmath or the twist potentials.

Using the freedom in choosing the splitting matrices as in Chapter 7 so
that @xmath and assuming that @xmath we obtain from the above splitting
formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, if all @xmath are non-negative this forces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case the asymptotic formula simplifies to

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the same as in the definition of @xmath .

If @xmath as for the Ernst potential we get back our analytic
continuation formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 9 Patching Matrix for Relevant Examples

In the previous chapter we have discussed how to extend the twistor
construction to five dimensions. Let us now look at some examples. For
all the space-times we first need to know the metric in the @xmath
-model form, that is we have to calculate @xmath . After that the Ernst
potential, respectively the patching matrix, can be computed which
mainly means determining the twist potentials on the axis. The easiest
to start with is flat space in five dimensions.

### 9.1. Five-Dimensional Minkowski Space

The real five-dimensional Minkowski space is the manifold @xmath with
metric given in the standard basis as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Along the lines of [ 24 , Sec. 4] we define the Killing vector fields
@xmath , @xmath as generating the rotations in the (12)-plane and the
(34)-plane, that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To obtain the @xmath -model coordinates we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus we get the relations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now by the definition of the symmetries we have @xmath , @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Summing up, the metric in @xmath -model form is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (9.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath only for @xmath , we can read off that the metric admits
two semi-infinite rods, namely @xmath and @xmath . Because @xmath is
diagonal @xmath as it contains an overall factor of the form @xmath . It
follows that the twist potentials are constant on all of Minkowski space
and thereby we obtain the patching matrix as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the upper sign combination is for @xmath adapted to @xmath , and
the lower one for @xmath .

### 9.2. Twist Potentials on the Axis

As part of the algorithm for obtaining @xmath from the metric we need to
calculate the twist potentials just on the axis. Explicit expressions
for twist potentials have been obtained for example in [ 42 , 43 ] , but
these are given only for the black ring and not in Weyl coordinates
which we need here. Therefore it is simpler to rederive some results,
not only for completeness but also for providing a way of calculating
the twist potentials on the axis for other space-times where they are
not yet in the literature.

First we derive general formulae. Assume that the metric takes the form

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and rewrite it as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The latter form has been chosen to facilitate calculating @xmath adapted
to part of the axis where @xmath and @xmath . In terms of the
orthonormal frame

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

the Killing 1-forms take the form

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Using @xmath , @xmath this yields for the first twist potential

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and for the second

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath all the functions depend only on @xmath , @xmath , hence so
do @xmath and @xmath . Then the total derivatives are @xmath and
analogous for @xmath . Furthermore, noting that @xmath , @xmath the
above equations read

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
                       
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with @xmath only depending on the chosen orientation of our orthonormal
tetrad. Here comes the point where we need to specify our metric
functions in order to calculate the twist potentials. First we are going
to look at the asymptotics since they will give us important information
later.

### 9.3. Asymptotic Minkowski Space-Times

For a stationary and axisymmetric space-time in five dimensions we learn
from [ 21 , Sec. IV.C] not only that it asymptotes Minkowski space but
also how. In @xmath -model form @xmath for @xmath and @xmath finite
@xmath the metric coefficients converge as follows

  -- -- -- -------
           (9.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Furthermore, @xmath is the mass of the space-time configuration and
@xmath , @xmath are the angular momenta; @xmath and @xmath are constant
where @xmath is not gauge-invariant, that is it changes under @xmath ,
unlike @xmath ; the periodicity of @xmath and @xmath is assumed to be
@xmath (the case when it is @xmath is given in [ 21 , Sec. IV.C] as
well).

Our aim is to integrate @xmath along the @xmath -axis, therefore we
first need the metric coefficients in the limit @xmath for fixed @xmath
. In this case @xmath which yields for the leading order terms in @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We observe that the leading order terms in @xmath of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath are @xmath and of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are @xmath . So, the
terms containing @xmath can for @xmath be neglected. ¹ ¹ 1 Taking two
limits successively is not ambiguous in this case, since we remember
that

@xmath

if all the limits exist and if at least one of the limits converges
uniformly keeping the second variable fixed. The above functions meet
these conditions. Furthermore we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where in the last step again only the leading order term in @xmath was
kept. Integration is easy and gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can play the same game for @xmath and get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which can to leading order in @xmath be integrated to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we can go straight on to calculate @xmath and obtain again by only
considering the leading order in @xmath the following

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

So, finally we obtain the patching matrix to leading order in @xmath
beyond ( 9.3 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The index indicates that the patching matrix is adapted to the top
asymptotic end. The adaptation @xmath to the bottom asymptotic end, that
is the one which extends to @xmath , is obtained by swapping @xmath and
@xmath in their roles. This leads to @xmath , @xmath . Furthermore, one
has to check what happens with @xmath and @xmath in this case. From [ 21
, Eq. (5.18)] we see that @xmath and @xmath for the Myers-Perry
solution. But all asymptotically flat space-times have the same fall off
up to the order ( 9.4 ), so this behaviour must be generic. For the ease
of reference later on we will include @xmath again explicitly

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Myers-Perry solution, which we will study next, is the
five-dimensional pendant of the Kerr solutions, that is it describes a
five-dimensional spinning black hole.

### 9.4. Five-Dimensional Myers-Perry Solution

It was in 1986 that the Schwarzschild solution in dimension greater than
four was extended from the static to the stationary case by Myers and
Perry Myers & Perry [ 34 ] . The calculations in the first part of this
example up to the expression for @xmath is based on Harmark [ 21 ] .
Myers-Perry space-time is asymptotically flat and has horizon topology
@xmath . Its metric is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the coordinate ranges are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A straight forward computation shows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second coordinate @xmath is obtained via the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be verified either by direct substitution into ( 9.9 ) or by a
more general approach as sketched in [ 21 , App. H] . This determines
the metric in @xmath -model coordinates. However, expressing it in
prolate spherical coordinates @xmath , @xmath is more convenient. They
are defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a constant and the ranges are taken to be @xmath ,
@xmath . With the ansatz @xmath , @xmath this is solved by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of @xmath , @xmath it can be shown (see [ 21 , App. G] ) that
this is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In terms of prolate spherical coordinates the @xmath
-matrix and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( 9.11 ) yields @xmath .

The rod structure consists of three components @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
as we will see from the explicit expressions for the rod vectors below.
First note that @xmath implies @xmath .

1.  If @xmath lies in the semi-infinite spacelike rod @xmath , we have
    @xmath , @xmath , thus @xmath for @xmath . Therefore the rod vector
    is @xmath .

2.  If @xmath lies in the finite timelike rod @xmath , we have @xmath ,
    @xmath . Thus the kernel of @xmath is spanned by the vector

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath are the angular velocities

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It can be shown that this rod corresponds to an event horizon with
    topology @xmath (a brief reasoning can be found in [ 24 , proof of
    Prop. 2 in Sec. 3] ).

3.  If @xmath lies in the semi-infinite spacelike rod @xmath , we have
    @xmath , @xmath , thus @xmath for @xmath . Therefore the rod vector
    is @xmath .

From the given eigenvectors it becomes clear that @xmath . The conserved
Komar quantities are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having done this preparation the patching matrix can be obtained in the
same way as before for the asymptotic metric. The limit @xmath can here
be regarded as @xmath , then with @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We observe that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are @xmath and @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath are @xmath . So, the terms containing @xmath can for @xmath be
neglected. Furthermore we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, using @xmath , also

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a last preparation we rewrite

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Finally, this enables us to calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which can easily be integrated to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the second twist potential we need

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

integration

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On @xmath it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so the notation in the following calculation of @xmath can be somewhat
streamlined by introducing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This implies

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where in the last step

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath as in [ 21 , Eq. (5.15)] . We then obtain for @xmath ,
@xmath and with @xmath the following (the index refers to the numbering
as above for the rod structure)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

using @xmath with ² ² 2 Here @xmath are only the entries of the patching
matrix and not the transition matrices of the bundle.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the last step comes from

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

thus

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The Myers-Perry solution with vanishing angular momenta is as in four
dimensions the Schwarzschild solution, sometimes also called
Schwarzschild-Tangherlini solution.

#### Five-Dimensional Schwarzschild Space-Time

In the case of @xmath the Myers-Perry metric becomes

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and from ( 9.12 ) we can read off the @xmath -matrix as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The twist potentials are globally constant and we set them without loss
of generality to zero. The adaptations to the three different parts of
the axis, then take the following form.

1.  Spacelike rod @xmath : Here we get with @xmath that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    hence with @xmath we obtain

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  Horizon rod @xmath : Using that @xmath on this part of the axis the
    above definition gives

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    hence with @xmath we obtain

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  Spacelike rod @xmath : Here we get with @xmath that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    hence @xmath yields

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Last comes the example that features a major novelty of
higher-dimensional relativity in comparison with four dimensions.

### 9.5. Black Ring Solutions

A five-dimensional black ring is a space-time with a black hole whose
horizon has topology @xmath . This solution was originally obtained from
the Kaluza-Klein @xmath -metric solutions via a double Wick rotation of
coordinates and analytic continuation of parameters Emparan & Reall [ 10
] . Because the ranges of mass and angular momenta of the black ring
overlap with the Myers-Perry solution, it is an example for the problem
in higher-dimensional general relativity that a black hole space-time is
not uniquely determined only by mass and angular momenta. This is
because their different horizon topologies do not allow a smooth
transition of both solutions into one another by changing the parameters
smoothly. A detailed analysis of the black ring solution and its
properties can be found in [ 9 , 12 ] . For the first part of this
section we take the results and notation from [ 21 , Sec. VI] .

One way of defining the black ring solution is the following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the parameters vary in the ranges

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The parameter @xmath has the dimension of length and for thin rings it
is roughly the radius of the ring circle. The constant @xmath is given
in terms of @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the coordinate ranges for @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with asymptotic infinity recovered as @xmath . For the @xmath
-coordinate the axis of rotation is @xmath , and for the @xmath
-direction the axis is divided in two components. First @xmath which is
the disc bounded by the ring, and second @xmath which is the outside of
the ring, that is up to infinity. The horizon is located at @xmath and
outside of it at @xmath lies an ergosurface. As argued in [ 13 ,
Sec. 5.1.1] three independent parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is one
too many, since for a ring with a certain mass and angular momentum we
expect its radius to be dynamically fixed by the balance between
centrifugal and tensional forces. This is here the case as well, because
in general there are conical singularities ³ ³ 3 A brief note on the
nature of those singularities and why they are called conical can be
found in Appendix G . on the plane containing the ring, @xmath . In
order to cure them @xmath and @xmath have to be identified with
periodicity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the two parameters have to satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leaves effectively a two-parameter family of solutions as expected
with the Killing vector fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Henceforth,
however, we will keep the conical singularity in and regard the
parameter @xmath as free. By ( 9.16 ) it can be replaced at any time.

A straight forward calculation shows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The harmonic conjugate can be calculated in the same way as for the
Myers-Perry solution (for details see [ 21 , App. H] ) and one obtains

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using expressions for @xmath , @xmath in terms of @xmath , @xmath (see [
21 , App. H] )

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the @xmath -matrix can be computed as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with the remaining components vanishing, and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The rod structure consists of four components @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

1.  For @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath which implies @xmath . Hence,
    the interval @xmath is a semi-infinite spacelike rod in direction
    @xmath .

2.  For @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath which implies @xmath . Hence,
    the interval @xmath is a finite spacelike rod in direction @xmath .

3.  For @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath which implies that the kernel
    of @xmath in this range is spanned by the vector

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is again the angular velocity. Thus, @xmath is a finite timelike rod
    and it can be shown that it corresponds to an event horizon with
    topology @xmath (a brief reasoning can be found in [ 24 , proof of
    Prop. 2 in Sec. 3] ).

4.  For @xmath and @xmath we have @xmath which implies @xmath . Hence,
    the interval @xmath is a semi-infinite spacelike rod in direction
    @xmath .

We see that on the top rod one twist 1-form vanishes and for the other
one we obtain as before

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath . On @xmath we also see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath the moduli signs can be dropped. Then the metric
coefficients behave as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now, if @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to determine @xmath we do some auxiliary calculations. Denote
@xmath , @xmath . Then with @xmath and to leading order in @xmath it is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Second we compute

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Last, we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using these results ( 9.17 ) can be integrated to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that this agrees up to a constant with [ 42 , Eq. (25)] . Now we
can compute the quantities which go in the patching matrix. The
restriction @xmath is not explicitly mentioned, but still assumed in the
following.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For the last matrix entry we first calculate some auxiliaries. From (
9.18 ) we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which in turn justifies the following factorization

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and eventually

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The patching matrix for @xmath and @xmath now is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the index again only indicates that it is adapted to the part of
the axis which extends to @xmath and where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this is based on the assumption that the periodicity of @xmath
, @xmath is @xmath , otherwise it has to be modified according to [ 21 ,
Eq. (4.17)] .

From ( 9.6 ) we read off the conserved Komar quantities as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 10 The Converse

First let us recall the twistor construction for five-dimensional
space-times as obtained in Chapter 7 and 8 . It can be summarized as
follows.

###### Summary 10.1.

There exists a one-to-one correspondence between five-dimensional
stationary and axisymmetric space-times and rank-3 bundles @xmath over
the reduced twistor space @xmath , which consists of two Riemann spheres
identified over a certain region.

For @xmath being the matrix of inner products of Killing vectors, we
define the Ernst potential as (see Definition 8.11 )

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is obtained from @xmath by cancelling an appropriate row
and column, and @xmath are the twist potentials.

If @xmath is the patching matrix of @xmath , then @xmath where both are
non-singular for @xmath .

Remember that the bundle @xmath was characterized by the so-called
twistor data consisting of the patching matrix and three integers. For
the bundle corresponding to @xmath itself these integers are @xmath ,
@xmath and for the bundle corresponding to the Ernst potential @xmath
these are @xmath . Hence it comes down to determining @xmath when
parameterizing the bundle.

###### Corollary 10.2.

The patching matrix @xmath (adapted to any portion of the axis @xmath )
determines the metric and conversely.

###### Sketch of Proof.

@xmath is obtained from @xmath by the splitting procedure (see Section
7.2 ) and conversely @xmath is the analytic continuation of @xmath . ∎

As seen in Chapter 6 the classification of black holes in four
dimensions (see Theorem 6.2 ) does not straight-forwardly generalize to
five dimensions. The Myers-Perry solution and the black ring are
space-times whose range of parameters (mass and angular momenta) do have
a non-empty intersection, but their horizon topology is different, which
means they cannot be isometric. In order to address this issue the rod
structure (see Definition 6.5 ) is introduced to supplement the set of
parameters.

Using this extended set of parameters the following theorem is a first
step towards a classification.

###### Theorem 10.3 (Hollands & Yazadjiev [24]).

Two five-dimensional, asymptotically flat vacuum space-times with
connected horizon where each of the space-times admits three commuting
Killing vector fields, one time translation and two axial Killing vector
fields, are isometric if they have the same mass and two angular
momenta, and their rod structures coincide.

Note, however, that [ 7 , Prop. 3.1] suggests that by adding the rod
structure to the list of parameters the mass becomes redundant, at least
for connected horizon.

Theorem 10.3 answers the question about uniqueness of five-dimensional
black holes, but not existence. In other words, we do not yet know
whether rod structure and angular momenta determine the twistor data,
that is essentially @xmath , and thereby the metric.

###### Conjecture 10.4.

Rod structure and angular momenta determine @xmath (even for a
disconnected horizon).

### 10.1. From Rod Structure to Patching Matrix — an Ansatz

In the following we will present an ansatz for this reconstruction of
the patching matrix from the given data, exemplified in cases where the
rod structure has up to three nuts.

Given a rod structure with nuts at @xmath we know that @xmath can at
most have single poles at these nuts (see Corollary 8.17 and Proposition
8.18 ). We shall see that this can also be derived from the switching
procedure (Theorem 10.15 ) and thus we make the ansatz

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and the entries of @xmath are holomorphic in @xmath . If we
now, moreover, choose @xmath to be adapted to the top outermost rod
@xmath , then Section 9.3 tells us its asymptotic behaviour as @xmath ,
that is @xmath asymptotes @xmath given in ( 9.5 ). This implies that the
entries of @xmath are in fact polynomials,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a polynomial of degree @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 The notation shall
just indicate the degree of the polynomials, that is @xmath and @xmath
in different entries of the matrix can still be different polynomials,
and if @xmath then it shall be the zero-polynomial. In fact, from ( 9.5
) we can not only deduce the degree of the polynomials but also their
leading coefficients. The diagonal entries will have leading coefficient
@xmath , @xmath , and 2, respectively, and the leading coefficients on
the superdiagonal will be proportional to the angular momenta.
Similarly, one can use ( 9.6 ) for @xmath adapted to the bottom
outermost rod @xmath . Note that this does not impose any further
restrictions on the coefficients of the space-time metric apart from
being analytic.

The number of free parameters in @xmath equals the number of independent
coefficients in the polynomials. Our aim must be to tie our space-time
metric by expressing all those parameters in terms of not more than the
@xmath and the angular momenta @xmath , @xmath . Any free parameter left
in @xmath means another free parameter in our (family of) solutions.

###### Example 10.5 (One-Nut Rod Structure).

Consider the case where the rod structure has one nut, which is without
loss of generality at the origin (remember that a shifted rod structure
corresponds to a diffeomorphic space-time), see Figure 10.1 . We do not
make assumptions about the angular momenta @xmath , @xmath .

According to our ansatz we have for the patching matrix on the top part
of the axis

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies @xmath . On the other hand for the bottom part it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore necessarily @xmath , thus @xmath . This forces the
patching matrix to be diagonal and since it has to have unit
determinant,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

we obtain @xmath . But this is the patching matrix for flat space (see
Section 9.1 ).

Hence we have shown that for a rod structure with one nut not all values
for the conserved quantities are allowed, in fact they all (including
mass) have to vanish, which in turn uniquely determines the space-time
as Minkowski space.
@xmath

Attempting the same for a rod structure with two nuts one will quickly
notice that more tools are necessary in order to fix all the parameters.

###### Theorem 10.6.

If @xmath is the patching matrix adapted to @xmath , then @xmath with
@xmath is the patching matrix adapted to @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof is based on the twistor construction as we have seen it in
Chapter 7 . For ease of reading we will review some of the elements
involved.

The considerations in Section 7.2 started with a map from the
correspondence space to the reduced twistor space @xmath , where @xmath
is a two-dimensional conformal manifold, @xmath a solution of the
Laplace equation on @xmath , @xmath its harmonic conjugate and @xmath a
Riemann sphere. For a fixed @xmath this map can be restricted to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given a bundle @xmath one had to assume that @xmath , the pullback of
@xmath to @xmath , is trivial in order to construct @xmath . Then the
splitting procedure will provide a @xmath , which depends smoothly on
@xmath and @xmath .

@xmath consists of two Riemann spheres that are identified over a
certain set. There will always be points, like @xmath , where the
spheres cannot be glued. These points are for obvious reasons called
double points and the case that is interesting for us is when these
points are real and there is only a finite number of them. In other
words the two spheres are glued together up to the set @xmath .

Therefore, @xmath is only well-defined if one specifies the assignment
of these poles to the spheres. The roots of the double points @xmath
satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so they are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note two things. First, the spheres are labelled by saying that the
roots of @xmath , namely @xmath and @xmath , are mapped to @xmath and
@xmath . Second, @xmath and @xmath are chosen as parameters in the very
beginning, but the obtained expressions depend smoothly on @xmath and
@xmath so that we can vary them and follow the consequences. One
observation of this kind is that for @xmath one of the roots in ( 10.1 )
tends to zero and one to infinity.

Hence, given a solution @xmath of Yang’s equation ( 5.11 ) and the
corresponding bundle @xmath , @xmath the region where the spheres are
identified and @xmath not simply connected, then the description of the
twistor space as @xmath and the patching matrix @xmath are adapted to
the component @xmath of the real axis if those @xmath that tend to zero
for @xmath on @xmath are assigned to @xmath and those that tend to
infinity are assigned to @xmath ; see also [ 16 , Prop. 3.2] . This is
merely a requirement of consistent behaviour under the variation of
@xmath and @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath . Note that in this case on
@xmath it is @xmath .

More explicitly this can be stated as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for an adaptation to @xmath and for @xmath on @xmath .

This allows to draw the conclusion that for a given a bundle a change of
adaptation from @xmath to @xmath is achieved by swapping the assignment
of @xmath to the spheres; see [ 16 , Sec. 3.2] . Following this idea,
one then obtains the adaptation to @xmath from an adaptation to @xmath
by swapping all double points @xmath , @xmath . However, the latter is
the same as swapping the double point at infinity which means
relabelling the spheres by saying @xmath and @xmath .

Now let us step back from this line of ideas and have a look from
another side. Note that if @xmath is a solution of Yang’s equation (
5.11 ) with @xmath and @xmath is symmetric, @xmath , then @xmath is a
solution of Yang’s equation as well with @xmath . On the other hand,
just by inspection of the splitting procedure one notices that @xmath is
defined as a linear map @xmath , where @xmath is the fiber of @xmath
over @xmath , and that @xmath is the solution of Yang’s equation
generated by the bundle where the spheres are swapped, @xmath (see also
property (3) in [ 49 , Sec. 4] ). But this is precisely what we have
done above.

The last point to note is that even though we have shown that @xmath is
adapted to @xmath it does not necessarily have to be in our standard
form due to the gauge freedom in the splitting procedure. Using the
asymptotic form of @xmath in ( 9.5 ) and comparing the fall-off of
@xmath with ( 9.6 ) one sees that a flip of the first and third row and
column brings @xmath into the desired standard form. This is implemented
by the conjugation with @xmath , which completes the proof. ∎

###### Corollary 10.7.

If @xmath is the patching matrix adapted to @xmath , then @xmath divides
all @xmath -minors of @xmath .

###### Proof.

From Theorem 10.6 and Proposition 8.18 it follows that @xmath has at
most simple poles at the nuts. But by the general formula for the
inverse of a matrix the entries of @xmath are (up to a sign) @xmath ,
where @xmath is the @xmath -minor of @xmath obtained by cancelling the
@xmath row and @xmath column. Hence one factor of @xmath has to cancel.
∎

This turns out to be a powerful tool as seen in the next example. But
before we would like to point out an implication of the last corollary.

###### Remark 10.8.

Taking the Ernst potential ( 8.7 ) in five dimensions and writing it in
the following way

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the matrix of metric coefficients @xmath as a function of @xmath is
obtained as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

All entries of @xmath are @xmath -minors of @xmath , hence @xmath
divides them. Thus @xmath where the entries of @xmath are polynomials in
@xmath . We remember from Section 8.3 that @xmath blows up when we
approach @xmath , that means @xmath cannot have a factor @xmath . So,
the entries of @xmath are bounded as @xmath , a feature which is
consistent with our picture of space-time.

Note, however, that we cannot extend that to other nuts without changing
the adaptation, that is to say, the expression for a metric coefficient
@xmath , @xmath , might contain poles for @xmath as the @xmath for the
black ring shows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The terms in the denominators vanish for certain values of @xmath , but
these are not singularities of the metric since they are not in the
domain of the respective expression. The reason for pointing out this is
that when we try to fix the free parameters in our ansatz one cannot
take ( 10.2 ) and say because the metric is regular the denominator has
to divide the numerator up to a constant.

Note further that even though Theorem 10.6 and Corollary 10.7 generalize
directly to @xmath dimensions, the conclusion for the metric
coefficients in @xmath does not. This is because in higher dimensions
the entries of @xmath will still consist of certain @xmath -minors of
@xmath as in ( 10.2 ), whereas @xmath being a patching matrix requires
@xmath to divide the @xmath -minors of @xmath . This coincides in five
dimensions, but is not implied automatically for dimensions greater than
five. Yet, the boundedness of the metric coefficients ought to hold
always, so that it at most gives extra conditions on the free
parameters.
@xmath

Now lets turn to the example promised earlier.

###### Example 10.9 (Two-Nut Rod Structure).

Consider the rod structure as in Figure 10.2 .

In line with the above ansatz we start off from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we assume to be adapted to @xmath and where the orientation of the
basis is without loss of generality chosen such that @xmath in ( 9.5 ).

We now make use of Corollary 10.7 which for the minor obtained by
cancelling the third row and first column yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Comparing the (ratio of) coefficients returns

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (10.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (10.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Choosing the minor obtained from cancelling second row and third column
we repeat this and get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (10.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (10.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These four equations allow us to express @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath in terms of @xmath .

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath can be fixed by the minor which
results from cancelling the second row and the first column

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is some constant. Again the ratios of the coefficients for
the linear over the cubic and the constant over the quadratic term give

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (10.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (10.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The last coefficient that remains undetermined is @xmath , but the
determinant is going to help us for this. The requirement @xmath implies

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The quintic term immediately gives the desired expression

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Exploiting furthermore the quartic term we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which, by using the above obtained relations, is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us relabel the parameters in accordance with [ 21 ] as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that from the asymptotic patching matrix we see that @xmath is
proportional to the mass which justifies the implicit assumption about
its positiveness in the above definition. However, the parameters @xmath
are not unconstrained as we will see soon.

By ( 10.4 ) it is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equations ( 10.7 ), ( 10.11 ), ( 10.12 ) imply

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, from ( 10.6 ) and ( 10.10 ) we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Continuing with ( 10.5 ) yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so do ( 10.8 ) and ( 10.9 ) give

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

With these parameters being determined and with the help of ( 10.11 ) we
can write @xmath explicitly as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparing those expressions with ( 9.14 ) one will find that they
coincide. However, note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies that for real non-zero @xmath we need the left hand side
to be positive and therefore @xmath , a condition on the asymptotic
quantities familiar from the discussion of the Myers-Perry solution in [
13 ] and [ 35 ] , or we need @xmath . This latter possibility is ruled
out in [ 13 ] and [ 35 ] by the additional requirement that @xmath , and
it is also forbidden by [ 7 , Prop. 3.1] . Yet, it is allowed by our
analysis. So, characterizing our solution by the mass and the two
angular momenta we obtain next to the Myers-Perry space-time another
branch, which is unphysical.

Mass and angular momenta form a set of three parameters and the position
of the nuts can be expressed in terms of these three parameters. This is
more than one would have expected by only regarding Theorem 10.3 .
However, we stated already that by [ 7 , Prop. 3.1] the mass is
redundant in the set of parameters. Here we did not actually eliminate
the mass, but the rod length. If one tries vice versa, that is one tries
to replace @xmath by @xmath in the set of parameters, then by
rearranging ( 10.13 ) one is looking for all positive @xmath which
satisfy a @xmath order polynomial. As shown in Appendix J.1 , with no
further conditions on @xmath there are also two positive solutions for
@xmath (unless @xmath when there is only one). Thus, we are facing the
same problem as before, and this suggests that further conditions need
to be imposed on the parameters in order to rule out the unphysical
solutions.

Some of the steps above, when we determined all the parameters in the
patching matrix, only work for @xmath . Assuming that one of the angular
momenta vanishes leads to dichotomies at certain steps when tracing back
the parameters. Some of the branches in this tree of possibilities are
dead ends others lead to valid solutions such as the Myers-Perry
solution with one vanishing angular momentum or an ultrastatic solution,
that is where @xmath , @xmath (but this is not physical as the mass is
zero). On the other hand at no point we used the fact that the middle
rod is a horizon.

Note also that issues of conicality cannot arise here as the
periodicities of @xmath are chosen to be @xmath on the outer parts of
the axis and no further spatial rods are left. When we turn to higher
numbers of nuts more will be required.
@xmath

Moving on to the next level, that is to a rod structure with three nuts,
we will consider the simpler case where one of the Killing vectors is
hypersurface-orthogonal. This simplifies the computation in comparison
with the general case as we will.

###### Example 10.10 (Three-Nut Rod Structure with one
Hypersurface-Orthogonal Killing Vector).

We consider the rod structure as in Figure 10.3 .

Together with @xmath , @xmath this comprises our twistor data. In order
to simplify the calculations we would like to make assumptions such that
the two non-diagonal entries in the third row and column of the patching
matrix vanish (when adapted to @xmath ). One therefore needs @xmath ,
however, this cannot be concluded from @xmath , as the Black Saturn
shows [ 8 ] . The Black Saturn is non-static, but allows vanishing total
angular momentum. We thus make the assumption that @xmath is
hypersurface-orthogonal, that is @xmath , and in Appendix K it is shown
that this implies @xmath .

These assumptions turn our ansatz into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Theorem 10.6 gives the following conditions

  -- -- -- ---------
           (10.14)
  -- -- -- ---------

The condition for the patching matrix to have unit determinant then
implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, as @xmath is a quadratic, there are six possibilities for it to be
a product of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . But @xmath on @xmath , thus
@xmath for @xmath . To guarantee this @xmath has to divide @xmath ,
which rules out three of those six possibilities. Furthermore, by
Theorem 10.6 we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is obtained from @xmath by cancelling the rows and columns
containing inner products with @xmath . But from the general theory we
know that the entry of @xmath with the inverse determinant contains a
simple pole when approaching the nut, that is @xmath , so that @xmath .
This immediately yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now observe that there is a factor of @xmath in @xmath but not in @xmath
, so that by ( 10.14 ) the monic @xmath has to divide @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . We write this as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first equation in ( 10.14 ) then turns into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Comparing the coefficients one sees

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Writing @xmath , we see that since @xmath , this last polynomial has to
have at least one (positive) real root (see Figure 10.4 ).

Now from @xmath one concludes that the local maximum of @xmath is at

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, note that since @xmath , it is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which implies that if @xmath has two more real roots, they will both be
smaller than @xmath . On the other hand there is a constraint on @xmath
obtained from the asymptotics. In our patching matrix the central entry
is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using ( 9.5 ) and the relation between @xmath and @xmath this gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Positivity of @xmath thus implies @xmath and we therefore have shown
that there is a unique positive @xmath which satisfies all the
constraints.

Consequently, by our ansatz we are able to fix all the parameters in
terms of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , that is in terms of the given data,
and the patching matrix is

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Note that @xmath and @xmath are zeros of the same polynomial and are
restricted by the same inequality involving the mass, so this is the
patching matrix for the black ring with the conical singularity not
fixed, see ( 9.19 ). ² ² 2 I am grateful to Harvey Reall for suggesting
this possibility, which turns out to be correct. For the regular black
ring the angular momentum can also be expressed in terms of @xmath and
@xmath . We will see in Section 10.5 how this can be done in the twistor
picture.
@xmath

### 10.2. Local Behaviour of @xmath around a Nut

For the general case of a rod structure with three nuts and especially
as the number of nuts gets higher, one will find it increasingly
difficult to reduce the number of free parameters to a minimum and would
therefore like to obtain more constraints from the inner rods. With this
desire in mind it would be useful to have an understanding of how the
patching matrices with adaptations to adjacent rods are related to each
other. We have seen an example in Theorem 10.6 , which can be considered
as such a switch at the nut at infinity. The proof gives an idea of what
is happening when changing the adaptation, yet it will be more difficult
for interior nuts, that is nuts for which @xmath is finite.

A strategy of how to achieve this is describred in Fletcher [ 16 ,
Ch. 3] . There the essence is that “… redefining the sphere @xmath and
@xmath by interchanging double points alters the part of the real axis
to which the bundle is adapted.” [ 16 , Sec. 3.2] . However, as the
example in [ 16 , Sec. 5.1] shows, this comes down to a Riemann-Hilbert
problem which will be rather hard and impractical to solve in five or
even higher dimensions. Thus we will approach this task in a different
way. The idea is that we start off as above on the outermost rods where
@xmath , determine as many free parameters as possible by the
constraints which we have got on these rods, then take the resulting
@xmath -matrix (still having free parameters in it which we would like
to pin down), calculate its adaptation to the next neighbouring rod and
apply analogous constraints there. But before looking at the patching
matrix itself let us first study how @xmath behaves locally around a
nut.

Consider first a nut where two spatial rods meet, that is like in Figure
10.5 .

Without loss of generality assume that the nut is at @xmath . In this
case a suitable choice of coordinates are the @xmath -coordinates
defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the signs on the right-hand side are either both plus or both
minus. If we choose both signs to be plus, then the rod @xmath
corresponds to @xmath and @xmath to @xmath . The metric in the most
general case has the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

or equivalently

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We assume that @xmath have period @xmath .

###### Theorem 10.11.

For a space-time regular on the axis the generic form of @xmath in
@xmath -coordinates around a nut, where two spacelike rods meet, is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, furthermore, one needs

-   @xmath as a function of @xmath on @xmath ,

-   @xmath as a function of @xmath on @xmath .

If one of the rods is the horizon instead of a spacelike rod
corresponding statements hold.

The second part of the theorem is closely tied to the problem of
conicality, which we will investigate shortly.

###### Proof.

Introduce Cartesian coordinates

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.18)
  -- -------- -- ---------

then the metric becomes in these coordinates

  -- -- -- ---------
           (10.19)
  -- -- -- ---------

The @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are not to be confused with the
earlier use of the same symbols. Set @xmath . Now as @xmath for constant
@xmath we immediately see that in order for @xmath and @xmath to be
bounded we need @xmath and @xmath for bounded @xmath , @xmath . ³ ³ 3
Remember that for polar coordinates @xmath the angle @xmath is bounded
in the limit to but not continuous (or even differentiable) at the
origin @xmath . Thus @xmath is not bounded towards the origin. The
remaining singular terms are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the fourth-order pole not to be dominant we need @xmath for bounded
@xmath ; then it is required

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

to remove the remaining second-order pole.

Repeating this for @xmath with fixed @xmath yields @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the minimum that we can demand in terms of regularity of @xmath
on the axis and near the nuts.

Assuming now without loss of generality that in Figure 10.5 the axis
segment where @xmath is the horizon, we have seen in Chapter 8 that then
the first row and first column degenerate. So, we substitute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a constant with no further restriction. The coordinates
@xmath and @xmath choose as in ( 10.18 ). Now the above argument works
analogously with all results equivalent, but

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

### 10.3. Conicality and the Conformal Factor

Returning to the case as depicted in Figure 10.5 , we saw in ( 10.20 )
that regularity at an axis seqment where @xmath vanishes forces a
relation between @xmath and the conformal factor @xmath of the @xmath
-metric. In this section we first establish the following.

###### Proposition 10.12.

On a segment of the axis where @xmath we have @xmath .

###### Proof.

To prove this we need to consider how the conformal factor varies on the
axis and this is obtained from ( 5.19 ) which we may write as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It will be convenient to work with @xmath where @xmath and concentrate
on the conformal factor of the @xmath -metric which is @xmath by ( 10.19
). Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Close to the axis segment @xmath we substitute from ( 10.17 ) and expand
in powers of @xmath to find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The right hand side of the first equation follows from the determinant

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking in ( 10.22 ) the limit on to @xmath we obtain just

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Thus ( 10.20 ) will hold at all points of the axis segment if it holds
at one. The following proposition is an analysis similar to [ 21 ,
App. H] , but it is simpler and more self-contained to rederive it than
translate it.

###### Proposition 10.13.

As a function on the axis @xmath , that is as a function of one
variable, the factor @xmath is continuous at the nut @xmath .

###### Proof.

Near the nut introduce polar coordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that from ( 10.21 ) and with the help of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Again we expand this using ( 10.17 ) to find

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now the jump in @xmath round the nut is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath does not jump either.

On @xmath , @xmath is continuous and by Proposition 10.12 @xmath , so
@xmath must be bounded there. Similarly, on @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
. Thus, @xmath is continuous on the two rods and has no jump across the
nut, so it is continuous on the axis. ∎

The strategy for removing conical sigularities is now clear: We start by
assuming that @xmath and @xmath both have period @xmath . On the part of
the axis extending to @xmath , where the Killing vector @xmath vanishes,
we have @xmath by Proposition 10.12 and the asymptotic conditions we are
imposing make this constant one. The corresponding statement holds on
the part of the axis extending to @xmath for the same reason. When
passing by a nut between two spacelike rods we may suppose, by choosing
the basis of Killing vectors appropriately, that @xmath vanishes above
the nut and @xmath below and we know by Proposition 10.13 that @xmath is
continuous at the nut. If there is no conical singularity above the nut
we have @xmath there and we want @xmath below the nut. Therefore we
require the limits of @xmath from above and @xmath from below to be
equal.

###### Corollary 10.14.

With the conventions leading to ( 10.17 ), the absence of conical
singularities requires

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is what we have just shown. At a nut where one rod is the horizon
we do not obtain further conditions as we have no reason to favour a
particular value of @xmath . To see how this is applied to the case of
the black ring we need a better understanding of going past a nut.

### 10.4. Local Behaviour of @xmath around a Nut: Switching

In this section we establish a prescription for obtaining the matrix
@xmath adapted to the segment of the axis below a nut from the matrix
@xmath adapted to the segment above. We call this process ‘switching’.
Once we have the prescription we can impose the condition of
non-conicality found in Corollary 10.14 . We then apply this to the
black ring, but it is clear that with this prescription we have an
algorithm for working systematically down the axis given any rod
structure so that we obtain all the matrices @xmath adapted to the
different rods labelled by @xmath . The result is the following.

###### Theorem 10.15.

Let at @xmath be a nut where two spacelike rods meet, as in Figure 10.5
, and assume that we have chosen a gauge where the twist potentials
vanish when approaching the nut. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is adapted to @xmath and @xmath is adapted to @xmath .

We begin by motivating this prescription from a consideration of ( 10.16
). First calculate the twist potentials in the same way as in Chapter 9
. The metric ( 10.16 ) can be rearranged in orthonormal form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The orthonormal frame is again

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Adapted to @xmath , then for small @xmath it is @xmath , hence @xmath ,
⁴ ⁴ 4 In order to see that @xmath , derive from @xmath and @xmath that
@xmath . and the other terms @xmath . This implies @xmath as @xmath .

Now the 1-forms are

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

hence

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which with @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We switch again to @xmath -coordinates by using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On @xmath this yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now use ⁵ ⁵ 5 NB: If we did not have @xmath already, then we could
impose it here without loss of generality, since a smooth metric invokes
smooth twist 1-forms, but @xmath becomes singular for @xmath if only
@xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Analogous steps lead to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For @xmath we only have to swap @xmath , @xmath . With @xmath the above
can be summarized as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Note that here we dropped without loss of generality the
constant terms of the twist potentials @xmath . This can be done just by
a gauge transformation to @xmath of the form @xmath with constant
matrices @xmath and @xmath , namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath in standard form this results in @xmath . Removing the
constant term in the twist potentials allows us to assume that without
loss of generality the entries which become zero or blow up towards a
nut are only on the diagonal. The off-diagonal entries are bounded
towards the nut.

Without loss of generality assume that the nut is at @xmath . Then the
calculations above show that to leading order in @xmath the patching
matrices below and above the nut are ⁶ ⁶ 6 Chosen the right orientation
for the basis such that the signs which are recorded by @xmath work out.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using that @xmath in ( 10.17 ) and thus @xmath to leading order in
@xmath we see that the switching is correct to leading order in @xmath .
(This is consistent with the different adaptations we calculated for
example for the Schwarzschild space-time or flat space, see Section 9.4
.)

###### Proof of Theorem 10.15.

To prove Theorem 10.15 the strategy is to follow the splitting procedure
outlined in Section 8.4 .

We first observe that splitting @xmath as in ( 10.23 ) will lead not to
@xmath as desired, but to @xmath with its rows and columns permuted.
This can be seen by looking at the diagonal case. To obtain @xmath with
the rows and columns in the order @xmath we need to permute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly for @xmath by ( 10.24 ), we permute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that now the prescription in Theorem 10.15 translates to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that we have set @xmath . Following Chapter 8 , to obtain @xmath
we split the matrices

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The location of the diagonal entries which are not one is dictated by
the position of the Killing vector which vanishes on the section of axis
under consideration within the basis of Killing vectors @xmath . In the
language of Section 8.4 , the integers @xmath are, as we know, a
permutation of @xmath and the location of the 1 is determined by the
prescription just given.

Assembling ( 10.25 ) and ( 10.26 ) to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

all that is needed for completing the proof is to show that splitting
the left and right hand side of this last equation yield the same @xmath
-matrix. To perform the splitting, we replace all appearances of @xmath
by @xmath and make the substitution ( 7.14 ). Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus @xmath is holomorphic and nonsingular in the neighbourhood of
@xmath with @xmath , and @xmath is holomorphic and nonsingular in the
neighbourhood of @xmath with @xmath . Consequently, if @xmath splits as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath holomorphic and nonsingular in the neighbourhood of @xmath
and @xmath holomorphic and nonsingular in the neighbourhood of @xmath ,
then a splitting of @xmath is given by taking

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The corresponding expressions for @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These are the same. ∎

### 10.5. Application to the Black Ring

Now we see how to apply the prescription for switching and the
discussion of conicality to @xmath for the black ring as in ( 9.19 ). We
are interested in the nut with largest @xmath -value, which is the one
at @xmath . The first step is to make an additive shift to the twist
potential @xmath to ensure that the term @xmath in ( 9.19 ) is finite at
@xmath . This needs

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

when

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is indeed finite at @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is also finite at @xmath . We are in position to make the switch
as in Theorem 10.15 with @xmath in place of @xmath and the result is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have completed the switching and obtained @xmath , the transition
matrix adapted to the section of axis @xmath . We could continue to find
the transition matrix adapted to the other segments but that is
straightforward and we do not need it. Instead we shall return to the
question of conicality addressed in Corollary 10.14 . Compare with
Theorem 10.11 to find from @xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where now @xmath and from @xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where now @xmath . Corollary 10.14 implies that there is no conical
singularity on the axis section @xmath provided

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which here requires

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using ( 9.20 ) this condition can be solved for @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is known [ 10 ] (or [ 21 , Eq. (6.20)] ) to be the right
condition.

## Chapter 11 Summary and Outlook

In this work we have presented a possible way for the reconstruction of
five- or higher-dimensional black hole space-times from what are at the
moment believed to be the classifying parameters, rod structure and
angular momenta. The method is based on a twistor construction which in
turn relies on the Penrose-Ward transform.

Our idea assigns a patching matrix to every rod structure where, apart
from the possible poles at the nuts, the entries of the patching matrix
have to be rational functions with the same denominator @xmath — Chapter
10 . By imposing boundary conditions the aim is to determine all the
coefficients of the polynomials in the numerator of these rational
functions in terms of the nuts and angular momenta.

However, with an increasing number of nuts one needs increasingly
sophisticated tools and it is of particular importance to gain a
detailed understanding of how the patching matrices, adapted to two
neighbouring rods, are related. In Theorem 10.15 we show how to do this
and Theorem 10.6 provides this statement for the nut at infinity, that
is, it relates the patching matrices which are adapted to the outer
rods. By means of that we are able to reconstruct the patching matrix
for a general two-nut rod structure (up to one restriction on the
parameters for the physical Myers-Perry solution) and we can show that a
three-nut rod structure with one Killing vector hypersurface-orthogonal
fixes, together with a given angular momentum, the space-time to be the
black ring.

Also in Chapter 10 we discuss conical singularities on the axis and show
how to obtain necessary and sufficient conditions for their removal.
Applying this to the black ring we obtain the known relation between the
parameters. In particular, this implies a relation between the rod
structure and the asymptotic quantities for a non-singular solution
known to exist.

Further questions which are interesting to pursue in this context are
for example:

Which rod structures are admissible? In other words, are there any
restrictions on the rod structures which one allows in the set of
parameters?

Can we construct a Lens space-time this way, that is a space-time whose
horizon is connected and has the topology of a Lens space [ 24 ,
Prop. 2] ? We know what the corresponding rod structure looks like, but
are we able to fix enough parameters and can we see whether the
resulting patching matrix does give rise to a space-time without
singularities? The latter question seems to be difficult to address as
by the analytic continuation one can guarantee the existence of the
solution with all its nice regularity properties only in a neighbourhood
of the axis, but further away from the axis there might be so-called
“jumping lines”, where the mentioned triviality assumption of the bundle
does not hold.

How many dimensions does the moduli space for an @xmath -nut rod
structure have? Can we find upper and lower bounds on that depending on
the imposed boundary conditions? This also does not seem to be an easy
questions as most of the conditions we impose on the patching matrix are
highly non-linear, for example the determinant condition.

Which parts of the theory extend to higher dimensions? We have already
pointed out along the way that some statements straight-forwardly
generalize to more than five dimensions as well, but some others do not.
A closer look at those points is certainly interesting.

Also stepping a dimension down leads to a question for which this set of
tools might be appropriate. Are we able to disprove the existence of a
double-Kerr solution in four dimensions? It is conceivable that for
example the imposed compatibility requirements as one switches at the
nuts lead finally to an overdetermined system of conditions and thereby
provoke a contradiction.

## Appendix

### A. Conformal Metrics and Null Separated Points

We show that two symmetric (0,2)-tensors are conformally equivalent if
and only if their sets of null vectors are identical (assuming that we
have a bijection or a diffeomorphism between the underlying manifolds).
If the (pseudo-) metrics are conformally equivalent, then the null
vectors are obviously identical. Conversely, if we know that the
(pseudo-) metrics @xmath , @xmath leave the null cones invariant, then
timelike or spacelike vectors, respectively, in @xmath correspond to
timelike or spacelike vectors, respectively, in @xmath . We are
interested in the Lorentzian case, and choose an orthonormal tetrad
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for @xmath such that @xmath is
timelike and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are spacelike. By the assumption
that null cones are preserved this is also orthogonal tetrad for @xmath
, and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath is null for @xmath hence for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This shows that all nonzero coefficients for @xmath are the same, that
is @xmath and @xmath are conformally equivalent.

### B. Characterization of Simple Bivectors

A bivector @xmath is simple @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath is simple @xmath @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath @xmath @xmath is simple: First note that @xmath has to have rank
0, 2 or 4, because it is skew-symmetric (its non-degenerate part defines
a symplectic bilinear form and symplectic vector spaces are
even-dimensional). This implies that if @xmath has an eigenvector with
eigenvalue 0, then @xmath has to be of rank 2 or 0. Supposing that
@xmath is nonzero we can set 2 rows and 2 columns zero. But then @xmath
has to be of the form @xmath . It remains to show that such an
eigenvector exists. Using relations for the alternating symbol one can
verify that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for bivectors @xmath , @xmath . Setting @xmath and using @xmath , @xmath
yields immediately

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, our assumption implies that @xmath is an eigenvector with eigenvalue
0 for an arbitrary @xmath . ∎

### C. Computation for Reduced Einstein Equations

Using ( 5.15 ) and the Ricci identity we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Expanding by Leibniz rule

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and using ( 5.14 ) together with the expression for the Laplace-Beltrami
operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

this yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Some further substitutions and cancellations lead to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and eventually

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

as claimed. Note that the covariant derivative for the functions @xmath
is the same as the partial derivative.

### D. Isothermal Coordinates

Isothermal coordinates on a manifold are local coordinates where the
metric has the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a smooth function. In the real case the manifold should be
Riemannian so that isothermal coordinates are conformal to the Euclidean
metric.

For a 2-surface isothermal coordinates always exist locally, which can
be seen as follows. The coordinates @xmath and @xmath are isothermal if
they satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is again the Hodge star operator. Suppose @xmath is the
Laplace-Beltrami operator on functions, ¹ ¹ 1 Here @xmath denotes the
codifferential according to the differential @xmath . As the
codifferential lowers the grade of a form, we get on functions @xmath .
One can proof that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent when acting on
scalar functions. then by standard elliptic theory, we can choose @xmath
to be harmonic near a given point, that is @xmath , with non-vanishing
gradient @xmath . In our case we were given such an @xmath . By the
Poincaré lemma @xmath has a local solution @xmath if and only if @xmath
. Because of @xmath , this is equivalent to @xmath , thus local
solutions exists. From the facts that @xmath is non-zero and @xmath on
1-forms, we conclude that @xmath and @xmath are necessarily linearly
independent, and therefore give local isothermal coordinates.

In our case the overall sign of the metric is not fixed, because we only
asked the orthogonal 2-surfaces to be non-null. But the exclusion of
null vectors still leaves two possibilities for the signature, @xmath or
@xmath .

### E. Integrability of Einstein Equations

The second part of the reduced vacuum Einstein equations ( 5.19 ) are in
full

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By use of ( 5.11 ) and the constraint @xmath , we have to show that they
are integrable, that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (App1)
  -- -------- -- --------

With

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we first rewrite ( 5.11 ) in the following way

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This is applied in the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (App2)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the derivatives act only on the variable immediately to its right
if no further parenthesis indicate it differently. Note that by @xmath
for a matrix @xmath , equation ( App1 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can now be proved with ( App2 ) by expanding the derivatives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

All terms cancel so that ( App1 ) is integrable.

### F. Criterion for Orthogonal Transitivity

We use the following theorem.

###### Theorem.

Let @xmath , @xmath , be @xmath commuting Killing vectors in an @xmath
-dimensional real or complex manifold such that

1.  the tensor @xmath vanishes at least at one point for every @xmath
    and

2.  the tensor @xmath for all @xmath ,

then the 2-planes orthogonal to the Killing vectors @xmath , @xmath ,
are integrable.

For dimension four this is proven in [ 45 , Thm. 7.1.1] using Frobenius’
theorem on integrable submanifolds; the generalization is due to Emparan
and Reall [ 11 ] . In the Einstein vacuum case condition ( 2 ) is
automatically satisfied. Condition ( 1 ) is moreover satisfied if for
example one of the Killing vectors corresponds to an axisymmetry, hence
it vanishes on its “rotation axis”. If we suppose both holds, then the
obtain the metric in the @xmath -model form. In the real case we want
our space-time also stationary (to get isothermal coordinates on
space-time modulo symmetries).

### G. Conical Singularities

Suppose we parameterize the flat, real, three-dimensional space in
conical coordinates. Then the metric takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is singular at @xmath . Apparently, this is only a coordinate
effect. So, conversely given a metric

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, this requires that the periodicities of @xmath and @xmath are
in a ratio of @xmath . If they do not have the correct periodicity, then
a singularity at the apex @xmath appears which is of the form “ @xmath
”. That is, there are diffeomorphism invariant quantities which become
singular at the origin but their limit towards it is finite. Lastly, a
short picture how the above form of the metric relates to the picture of
a cone. In cylinder coordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a cone with aperture @xmath is given by @xmath , see Figure 11.1 . With
@xmath the metric on the cone becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . This is exactly our conical parameterization of the
@xmath -plane above with the relation @xmath .

### H. Rod Structure of Schwarzschild Solution

With the substitution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the Schwarzschild metric

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But from the metric we see

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then @xmath takes the desired form.

### I. General Bäcklund Transformation

Starting from the given decomposition we have ² ² 2 Using @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath . This yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

From this we can read off the form of Yang’s equation ( 5.2 ). The
(12)-entry of the matrix yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the second equation in ( 8.2 ). Using this we get for the
(11)-entry

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which corresponds to the last equation in ( 8.2 ). Again using @xmath we
get for the (22)-entry

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

corresponding to the third equation in ( 8.2 ). Lastly, with the
vanishing of the (11)-entry we obtain for the (21)-entry

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
                       
                       
                       
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

Multiplying with @xmath from left and @xmath from right gives

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

that is the first equation in ( 8.2 ).

### J. Reduced Bäcklund Transformation

To obtain the reduced form of the Yang’s equation in terms of the
Bäcklund decomposition we proceed as above. By taking @xmath we
immediately get the last three equations and the part with the @xmath
-derivatives in the first equation. Only the @xmath -derivatives in the
first equation need a closer look. But there we have in the same way as
above

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
              
              
  -- -------- --

which yields the claimed form of the equations.

#### j.1. Two-Nut Spacetime: Parameter Configurations

Given the set of parameters @xmath , we would like to see whether the
mass, that is @xmath , is uniquely determined. If we set @xmath , then
from ( 10.13 ) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath . This is equivalent to finding the positive
zeros of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Rewrite this as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is a third order polynomial with positive leading
coefficient, and negative value and slope for @xmath , it has to have
precisely one zero for @xmath . Therefore, @xmath has precisely two
extremal points for @xmath , a saddle point at the origin and precisely
one minimum for @xmath . At this minimum it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and because @xmath , we conclude that with no conditions on @xmath there
are two positive solutions for @xmath (unless @xmath when there is only
one).

### K. Implications of Hypersurface-Orthogonality

A Killing vector @xmath is called hypersurface-orthogonal if @xmath is
the normal of a hypersurface. By [ 45 , Thm. B.3.2] this is equivalent
to the vanishing @xmath , where we denote the Killing 1-form by @xmath
as well. To sketch how this implies the vanishing of certain metric
coefficients we write in our case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is equivalent to

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . If all three of the metric coefficients are non-zero
these equations can be integrated easily, showing that all three metric
coefficients have to be proportional. However, this is a contradiction
with respect to the asymptotic form of the metric if we regard this set
of equations for a region that extends to @xmath . Thus, some of the
metric coefficients have to vanish, and it is not hard to see that the
only possibility, which is compatible with the asymptotic form of the
metric, is when @xmath .