The @xmath nucleus is a subject of considerable interest. It is an
excellent system for testing our understanding of nuclear forces and the
structure of its ground state, as well as to study the reaction
mechanisms involved in electron-induced hadron knockout. It is a
precisely calculable nuclear system where theoretical predictions can be
compared to experimental data to ever increasing accuracy. The @xmath
nucleus has been extensively used as an effective neutron target in the
experiments dedicated to measuring properties of the neutron. The
interpretation of those measurements depends directly on the quality of
this substitution, which makes a detailed knowledge of the structure of
@xmath even more important.
This thesis is dedicated to a study of a spin-isospin structure of the
polarized @xmath . First, an introduction to the spin structure of
@xmath is given, followed by a brief overview of past experiments. The
main focus of the thesis is the E05-102 experiment at Jefferson Lab, in
which the reactions @xmath and @xmath in the quasi-elastic region were
studied. The purpose of this experiment was to better understand the
effects of the Sâ€™- and D-state contributions to the @xmath ground-state
wave-functions by a precise measurement of beam-target asymmetries
@xmath and @xmath in the range of recoil momenta from @xmath to about
@xmath . The experimental equipment utilized in these measurements is
described, with special attention devoted to the calibration of the
hadron spectrometer, BigBite. Results on the measured asymmetries are
presented, together with first attempts at their comparison to the
state-of-the art Faddeev calculations. The remaining open problems and
challenges for future work are also discussed.
