Earth was formed about 4.54 billion years ago. In less than a billion
years the first life forms appeared on a still very ‘young’ earth. Even
the simplest cells today are extremely complicated and require several
components to work coherently. It is hard to imagine how such
complexity, as seen in life, would have arisen at the origin of life.
Several approaches, experimental as well as theoretical, are being used
to explain the origin(s) of life, but a comprehensive explanation still
eludes us.

Miller’s experiment in 1953 was one of the first successful attempts to
show that some of the precursors of life, amino acids, can be produced
in simulated pre-biotic environments. Recent experiments have also
presented a possible way of producing ribonucleotides in prebiotically
plausible conditions. It has been thus far not possible to show how
these precursors can combine or self-organize to form large molecules
that are needed for life to function. Large molecules such as proteins
and nucleic acids are crucial for life. The production of these large
molecules, as we know it today, requires good catalysts, and the only
good catalysts we know that can accomplish this task consist of large
molecules. There exists no other natural process we know of that
produces large molecules and that does not itself use large molecules.
Thus the origin of large molecules is a ‘chicken and egg problem’ in
chemistry. We expect that the answer to the question lies in the
processes that occurred before life originated.

In this thesis we present a mechanism, based on autocatalytic sets
(ACSs), that is a possible solution to this problem. We present a
mathematical model describing the population dynamics of molecules in an
artificial but prebiotically plausible chemistry in a well stirred
chemical reactor. In the model large molecules can in principle be
produced by successive ligations of pairs of smaller molecules. The
smallest molecules in the chemistry compose the ‘food set’, whose
concentrations are considered to be buffered. The chemistry contains a
large number of spontaneous reactions of which a small subset could be
catalyzed by molecules produced in the chemistry with varying catalytic
strengths. Normally the concentrations of large molecules in such a
scenario are very small, diminishing exponentially with their size.
ACSs, if present in the catalytic network, can focus the resources of
the system into a sparse set of molecules. ACSs can produce a
bistability in the population dynamics and, in particular, steady states
wherein the ACS molecules dominate the population, i.e. , have higher
concentrations compared to the rest of molecules in the chemistry
(background).

In this thesis we attempt to address two main questions: First, under
what circumstances do molecules belonging to the ACSs dominate over the
background, and second, starting from an initial condition that does not
contain good catalysts, can a sparse set of large molecules (containing
several tens or a few hundred monomers) that are good catalysts arise
and be maintained in the reactor at concentrations significantly above
the background? We find that the mere existence of ACSs in the chemistry
at the level of network topology is not sufficient to guarantee their
domination at the population level (as also reported by Bagley and
Farmer in their model). We further quantitatively characterize the
interplay between ACS topology and rate constants including catalytic
strengths, dissipation rate, etc., that results in ACS domination. We
show that for ACS molecules to dominate above the background, the
catalytic strength needs to be sufficiently large, growing exponentially
with the size of the catalyst molecule.

We present a possible resolution to this problem via a hierarchy of
nested ACSs. We show that if an ACS catalyzed by large molecules
contains within it (or partially overlaps with) a smaller ACS catalyzed
by smaller molecules (we refer to this as a ‘nested ACS’ structure), the
catalytic strength required for the large ACS to dominate comes down
significantly. Effectively the small ACS reinforces the larger one. We
construct a cascade of nested ACSs with each successive and larger ACS
in the cascade containing (a part of) the smaller ACSs, thereby
receiving reinforcement from them and in turn providing reinforcement to
the next larger ACS in the cascade. We show that when the network
contains a cascade of nested ACSs with the catalytic strengths of
molecules increasing gradually with their size (e.g., as a power law), a
sparse subset of molecules including some very large molecules can come
to dominate the system. We exhibit an example in which a large catalyst
(with more than 400 monomers) arises with a significant population in
the steady state starting from only monomers in the initial state.

Thus our work presents a possible resolution to the chicken and egg
problem in chemistry posited by the existence of large molecules. It
suggests an incremental bootstrap mechanism – the existence of a
hierarchy of nested ACSs in the chemistry – through which a sparse
subset of large molecules can naturally arise starting from plausible
prebiotic initial conditions.
