We settle two problems of reconstructing a biholomorphic type of a
manifold. In the first problem we use graphs associated to Riemann
surfaces of a particular class. In the second one we use the semigroup
structure of analytic endomorphisms of domains in @xmath .

1. We give a new proof of a theorem due to P. Doyle. The problem is to
determine a conformal type of a Riemann surface of class @xmath , using
properties of the associated Speiser graph. Sufficient criteria of type
have been given since 1930’s when the class @xmath was introduced. Also
there were necassary and sufficient results which have theoretical
value, but which are hard to apply.

P. Doyle’s theorem states that a non-compact Riemann surface of class
@xmath has a hyperbolic (parabolic) type, if and only if its extended
Speiser graph is hyperbolic (parabolic). By a hyperbolic graph we mean a
locally-finite infinite connected graph, which admits a non-constant
positive superharmonic function with respect to the discrete Laplace
operator. Otherwise a graph is parabolic. The usefulness of this
criterion stems from the possibility of applying Rayleigh’s short-cut
method for graphs.

We apply Doyle’s theorem to give a counterexample to a conjecture of
R. Nevanlinna that relates the type to an excess of a Speiser graph.
More explicitely, the conjecture was that if the (upper) mean excess of
a surface of class @xmath is negative, then the surface is hyperbolic.
We provide an example of a parabolic surface of class @xmath with
negative mean excess.

2. If there is a biholomorphic or antibiholomorphic map between two
domains in @xmath , then it gives rise to an isomorphism between the
semigroups of analytic endomorphisms of these domains.

Suppose, conversely, that we are given two domains in @xmath with
isomorphic semigroups of analytic endomorphisms. Are they
biholomorphically or antibiholomorphically equivalent? This question was
raised by L. Rubel. Similar questions were studied in the setting of
topological spaces.

The case @xmath was investigated by A. Eremenko, who showed that if we
require that the domains are bounded, then the answer to the above
question is positive. It was shown by A. Hinkkanen that the boundedness
condition cannot be dropped.

We prove that two bounded domains in @xmath with isomorphic semigroups
of analytic endomorphisms are biholomorphically or antibiholomorphically
equivalent. Moreover, we generalize this by requiring only the existence
of an epimorphism between the semigroups.
