##### Acknowledgements. I would like to express my thanks to my thesis
advisor, Alex Eremenko, who provided me with very interesting problems,
sharing his enlightening ideas. It is my pleasure to thank David Drasin
for his never-ending encouragement and for his guidence through out the
years. I would like to thank Steve Bell for his mathematical discussions
and his generous support during a numerous semesters. I thank Oded
Schramm for giving his ideas concerning a counterexample to
R. Nevanlinna’s conjecture. I also thank Burgess Davis for taking part
in the broadening of my mathematical knowledge. My general thanks to the
faculty of the Department of Mathematics at Purdue University for their
help and support, especially to L. Avramov, D. Catlin, A. Gabrielov, and
L. Lempert. I am thankful to all my friends at Purdue for making my stay
at Purdue as pleasant as it was.

This page deliberately left blank

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 P. Doyle’s Theorem
    -    1.2 R. Nevanlinna’s Conjecture
    -    1.3 Analytic Endomorphisms
-    2 P. Doyle’s Theorem
    -    2.1 Background and Preliminaries
        -    2.1.1 Uniformization Theorem
        -    2.1.2 Surfaces Spread over the Sphere
        -    2.1.3 Type Problem
        -    2.1.4 Graphs
        -    2.1.5 Riemannian Surfaces
        -    2.1.6 Rough Isometry
    -    2.2 Class @xmath
        -    2.2.1 Definition
        -    2.2.2 Examples
    -    2.3 Speiser Graphs
        -    2.3.1 Definition
        -    2.3.2 Examples
        -    2.3.3 Reconstructing a surface from a Speiser Graph
    -    2.4 P. Doyle’s Theorem
        -    2.4.1 Extended Speiser Graph
        -    2.4.2 Statement of the Theorem
    -    2.5 Proof of P. Doyle’s Theorem
        -    2.5.1 Conformal Metric
        -    2.5.2 Geometric Uniformness Condition
        -    2.5.3 Rough Isometry
-    3 R. Nevanlinna’s Conjecture
    -    3.1 Background and Preliminaries
        -    3.1.1 Excess
        -    3.1.2 Integral Curvature
        -    3.1.3 Mean Excess
        -    3.1.4 Extremal length
    -    3.2 Conjecture
    -    3.3 Counterexample 1
        -    3.3.1 Speiser Graph
        -    3.3.2 Parabolicity
        -    3.3.3 Mean Excess
    -    3.4 Counterexample 2: No Asymptotic Values
    -    3.5 Counterexample 3
    -    3.6 A Non-Positive Curvature Example
-    4 Analytic Endomorphisms
    -    4.1 Semigroups
    -    4.2 Statement of the Theorem
    -    4.3 Topology
        -    4.3.1 Constant Endomorphisms
        -    4.3.2 Construction of @xmath
        -    4.3.3 Continuity of @xmath
    -    4.4 Localization
    -    4.5 Extending @xmath
        -    4.5.1 Good Elements
        -    4.5.2 Extending a Comutant
        -    4.5.3 Extending the Isomorphism
    -    4.6 System of Projections and Linearization
        -    4.6.1 Very Good Elements
        -    4.6.2 Linearization Lemma
    -    4.7 Simultaneous Linearization
    -    4.8 Solving a Matrix Equation
        -    4.8.1 Conjugations @xmath and @xmath
        -    4.8.2 Extending @xmath
        -    4.8.3 A System of Scalar Equations
        -    4.8.4 Explicit Expression for @xmath
    -    4.9 Proving that @xmath is (Anti-) Biholomorphic
    -    4.10 Generalization
-    A Speiser Graph is not Enough
-    B Upper Mean Excess
-    C A Property of Extremal Length

This page deliberately left blank

###### List of Figures

-    2.1 Speiser graph of sine
-    2.2 Speiser graph of @xmath
-    3.1 Graph Tr
-    3.2 Graph @xmath
-    3.3 Dual Graph @xmath
-    3.4 Graph @xmath
-    3.5 Hexagons
-    3.6 Tree
-    3.7 The surfaces @xmath .
-    3.8 The Speiser graph with @xmath .

This page deliberately left blank

## Chapter 1 Introduction

We study two problems, one of which deals with a class of Riemann
surfaces represented by Speiser graphs, and the other one with bounded
domains in @xmath . Their settings and the methods we use to solve these
problems are different, but there is a unifying theme. Namely, in both
cases we determine a type, conformal in the case of Riemann surfaces, or
biholomorphic in the case of domains in @xmath , using an underlying
combinatorial, respectively algebraic structure. As an application to
the first problem we give an example showing that a conjecture of
R. Nevanlinna relating the type of a surface to its excess is false. A
more detailed description of the problems follows.

### 1.1 P. Doyle’s Theorem

A well-known theorem of Complex Analysis, the Uniformization Theorem,
says that every simply-connected Riemann surface is conformally
equivalent to either the sphere, complex plane, or the unit disc. In the
first case the surface is said to be of elliptic type , in the second of
parabolic type , and in the third of hyperbolic type . When we come up
with a concrete Riemann surface, say by glueing together pieces of the
sphere along boundary parts, we would like to know how the combinatorial
pattern of glueing influences the type. One example of such a
construction of Riemann surfaces is known in classical literature as
class @xmath . These are the pairs @xmath , where @xmath is a
topological manifold, and @xmath a continuous open and discrete map from
@xmath into the sphere @xmath , so that @xmath is a covering map onto
the sphere with finitely many punctures.

A surface of this class is uniquely represented by a combinatorial
object, called a Speiser graph, also known as a line complex, which is
essentially the rule of pasting together two complementary domains on
the sphere, which share a Jordan curve as a common boundary. A Speiser
graph is a homogeneous bipartite planar graph. The components of its
complement that are bounded by a finite number of edges correspond to
critical points, and those that are bounded by an infinite number of
edges correspond to assymptotic spots. Thus we come to the question of
recovering the type from properties of a Speiser graph. This problem has
attracted a lot of attention since the 1930’s when the class @xmath was
introduced. Many results relating properties of a graph to the type of
the corresponding Riemann surface have been obtained. Usually the
criteria fall into one (and only one) of two categories: sharp but not
useful, or useful but not sharp.

In 1984 Peter Doyle suggested a criterion of type which is sharp, and,
at the same time, seems to be useful (at least we were able to use it,
unlike other known sufficient conditions, to provide a counterexample to
R. Nevanlinna’s conjecture). The original proof due to Doyle, which is
probabilistic in nature, is very intuitive and enlightening, but might
be hard to understand to non-specialists.

Doyle’s proof is based on the observation that the Brownian motion on a
Riemann surface is transient if and only if there is a system of
currents out to infinity having finite dissipation rate. A system of
currents out to infinity is a vector field, which is divergenceless
outside of a sufficiently large compact set, and such that the total
flux through the boundary of this set is positive. The dissipation rate
of the flow is the integral of the square of the current density, i.e.
the square of the Hilbert-space norm of the vector field. Similarly, the
random walk on a graph is transient if and only if there is a system of
currents through the edges of the graph out to infinity having finite
dissipation rate. The dissipation rate in this case is the sum of the
squares of the currents through the edges. Now, to prove the theorem one
needs to show how a system of currents could be transfered from the
surface to the associated graph and vice versa, without destroying the
finiteness of the dissipation rate (see hR52 for similar arguments).

We supply a new proof of Doyle’s theorem. The methods we use are
geometrical, and rely on the results due to M. Kanai that assert the
stability of type under rough isometries, when the underlying spaces
have bounded geometry. In accordance with this result, we construct a
suitable conformal metric on a given surface so that the surface
equipped with this metric is roughly isometric to the extended Speiser
graph, introduced by Doyle. An obvious choice for the metric would be
the pullback of the spherical metric, but unfortunately the surface
equipped with this metric is not roughly isometric to neither the
Speiser graph, nor the extended Speiser graph. In fact, no pullback
metric can be suitable, since the orders of critical points are in
general unbounded.

In Section 2.1 , we give the definition of a class of surfaces spread
over the sphere, formulate the type problem, and provide background
information on graphs, Riemannian surfaces, and rough isometries. In
Section 2.2 , we give a definition of the class @xmath and examples.
Speiser graphs are introduced in Section 2.3 . In Section 2.4 , the
extended Speiser graph is introduced and the formulation of Doyle’s
theorem is given. Section 2.5 , is devoted to the proof of Doyle’s
theorem.

### 1.2 R. Nevanlinna’s Conjecture

We give a counterexample to a conjecture of R. Nevanlinna that relates
the type to the excess of a graph.

For a Speiser graph @xmath , R. Nevanlinna introduces the following
characteristic. Let @xmath denote the set of vertices of the graph
@xmath . To each vertex @xmath we assign the excess

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a face with @xmath edges, @xmath , and @xmath is the set
of vertices on its boundary. This notion is motivated via integral
curvature, and thus reflects the geometric properties of the surface.

Nevanlinna also defines the mean excess of a Speiser graph @xmath . We
fix a vertex @xmath , and consider an exhaustion of @xmath by a sequence
of finite graphs @xmath , where @xmath is the ball of combinatorial
radius @xmath , centered at @xmath . By averaging @xmath over all the
vertices of @xmath , and taking the limit, we obtain the mean excess ,
if the limit exists. We denote it by @xmath . If the limit does not
exist, we consider upper or lower excess , given by the upper,
respectively lower, limit. The upper mean excess of every infinite
Speiser graph is @xmath .

R. Nevanlinna suggested a conjecture ( rN70 , p. 312) that a surface
@xmath of the class @xmath is of a hyperbolic or a parabolic type,
according to whether the angle geometry of the surface is
“Lobachevskyan” or “Euclidean”, i.e. according to whether the mean
excess @xmath is negative or zero.

O. Teichmüller gave an example of a surface of the hyperbolic type,
whose mean excess is zero, thus contradicting a part of Nevanlinna’s
conjecture. We supply three examples contradicting the other part of the
conjecture, i.e. we construct parabolic surfaces with negative mean
excess. In the first example of a surface @xmath , the function @xmath
is analytic, and in the second and third, @xmath does not have
asymptotic values. Thus we prove the following theorem. {theorem} There
exists a parabolic surface @xmath for which the upper mean excess is
negative.

In Section 3.1 , we recall definitions of the excess and the mean
excess, illustrate these notions using integral curvature, and review
extremal length. In Sections 3.3 , 3.4 , and 3.5 , we provide the
counterexamples. In Section 3.6 , we construct an example of a simply
connected, complete, parabolic surface of nowhere positive curvature,
and such that its integral curvature in a disc around a fixed point is
less than @xmath times the area of the disc, for some @xmath independent
of the radius of the disc.

### 1.3 Analytic Endomorphisms

A classical theorem of L. Bers says that every @xmath -algebra
isomorphism @xmath of algebras of holomorphic functions in domains
@xmath and @xmath in the complex plane has either the form @xmath ,
where @xmath is a conformal isomorphism, or @xmath with anticonformal
@xmath . In particular, the algebras @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic if
and only if the domains @xmath and @xmath are conformally or
anticonformally equivalent. H. Iss’sa hI66 obtained a similar theorem
for fields of meromorphic functions on Stein spaces. A good reference
for these results is mH68 .

In 1990, L. Rubel asked whether similar results hold for semigroups
(under composition) @xmath of holomorphic endomorphisms of a domain
@xmath . A question of recovering a topological space from the algebraic
structure of its semigroup of continuous self-maps has been extensively
studied kM75 .

A. Hinkkanen constructed examples aH92 which show that even
non-homeomorphic domains in @xmath can have isomorphic semigroups of
endomorphisms. An elementary counterexample is a plane with 3 points
removed and a plane with 4 points removed. They are obviously not
biholomorphically equivalent (they are not even homeomorphic for that
matter), but if the removed points are in general position, the
corresponding semigroups consist of the unit and constant maps, and
hence isomorphic. The reason for such examples is that the semigroup of
endomorphisms of a domain can be too small to characterize this domain.

However, in 1993, A. Eremenko aE93 proved that for two Riemann surfaces
@xmath , @xmath , which admit bounded nonconstant holomorphic functions,
and such that the semigroups of analytic endomorphisms @xmath and @xmath
are isomorphic with an isomorphism @xmath , there exists a conformal or
anticonformal map @xmath such that @xmath , for all @xmath . We
investigate the analogue of this result for the case of bounded domains
in @xmath . The theorems of Bers and Iss’sa, mentioned above, do not
extend to arbitrary domains in @xmath .

For a bounded domain @xmath in @xmath we denote by @xmath the semigroup
of analytic endomorphisms of @xmath under composition. We will write
that a map is (anti-) biholomorphic , if it is biholomorphic or
antibiholomorphic. We prove that if @xmath are bounded domains in @xmath
respectively, and there exists @xmath , an isomorphism of semigroups,
then @xmath and there exists an (anti-) biholomorphic map @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The existence of a homeomorphism @xmath follows from simple general
considerations (Section 4.3 ). The hard part is proving that @xmath is
(anti-) biholomorphic. In dimension 1 this is done by linearization of
holomorphic germs of @xmath near an attracting fixed point. In higher
dimensions such linearization theory exists ( vA88 , pp. 192–194), but
it is too complicated (many germs with an attracting fixed point are
non-linearizable, even formally). In Sections 4.4 , 4.5 , we show how to
localize the problem. In Sections 4.6 , 4.7 we describe, using only the
semigroup structure, a large enough class of linearizable germs.
Linearization of these germs permits us to reduce the problem to a
matrix functional equation, which is solved in Section 4.8 . In Section
4.9 , we complete the proof that @xmath is (anti-) biholomorphic.

The above mentioned result can be slightly generalized, namely one may
assume that @xmath is an epimorphism. In Section 4.10 , we prove that if
@xmath is an epimorphism between semigroups, where @xmath are bounded
domains in @xmath respectively, then @xmath is an isomorphism.

## Chapter 2 P. Doyle’s Theorem

In this chapter we give an alternative proof of a theorem due to
P. Doyle pD84a on the type of a Riemann surface of class @xmath .

### 2.1 Background and Preliminaries

#### 2.1.1 Uniformization Theorem

A Riemann surface is a 1-dimensional complex manifold, or, in other
words, it is a 2-real-dimensional manifold endowed with a maximal atlas
in which all transition maps are conformal. It is simply-connected if
the fundamental group is trivial.

The following well-known fact is called the Uniformization Theorem lA73
. {theorem} For every simply-connected Riemann surface @xmath there
exists a conformal map @xmath , where @xmath is one of the three model
surfaces:

1.  the open unit disc @xmath ;

2.  the complex plane @xmath ;

3.  the extended complex plane @xmath .

The map @xmath is called the uniformizing map . The Uniformization
Theorem has a number of applications, the main of which is that on every
Riemann surface there exists a conformal metric of constant Gaussian
curvature -1, 0, or 1. {definition} A simply-connected Riemann surface
@xmath is said to have a hyperbolic, parabolic, or elliptic type,
according to whether it is conformally equivalent to @xmath , @xmath ,
or @xmath respectively. Sometimes we simply say that @xmath is
hyperbolic, parabolic, or elliptic. Also, we refer to the type of a
simply-connected Riemann surface as a conformal type.

#### 2.1.2 Surfaces Spread over the Sphere

We are interested in the application of the Uniformization Theorem to
the following construction. A map between two topological spaces is
called open , if the image of every open set is open. It is called
discrete , if the preimage of every point is discrete, i.e. every point
of the preimage has a neighborhood that does not contain any other
points of the preimage. {definition} A surface spread over the sphere is
a pair @xmath , where @xmath is a topological surface and @xmath a
continuous, open and discrete map. The map @xmath is called a projection
. Two such surfaces @xmath are equivalent , if there exists a
homeomorphism @xmath , such that @xmath . A theorem of Stoïlow sS56
implies that for every continuous open and discrete map @xmath from a
topological surface (i.e. a 2-real-manifold) to the Riemann sphere there
exists a homeomorphism @xmath of @xmath onto a Riemann surface @xmath ,
so that the map @xmath is meromorphic. The Riemann surface @xmath is
unique up to conformal equivalence. This tells us that there exists a
unique conformal structure on @xmath (i.e. @xmath becomes a Riemann
surface), which makes @xmath into a meromorphic function. Near each
point @xmath the function @xmath is conformally equivalent to a map
@xmath , with @xmath depending on @xmath . The number @xmath is called
the local degree of @xmath at @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath is called a
critical point and @xmath a critical value . The set of critical points
is a discrete subset of @xmath .

The surface @xmath can be endowed with a metric that is the @xmath
-pullback of the spherical metric @xmath . The pullback metric is
singular, i.e. it is degenerate on a discrete set in @xmath . The
surface @xmath , endowed with the pullback metric, is a particular case
of spherical polyhedral surfaces mB00a , mB02 .

#### 2.1.3 Type Problem

If @xmath is simply-connected, what is the type of the Riemann surface
obtained as in the previous section, if @xmath is a surface spread over
the sphere? More precisely, how does the conformal type depend on the
properties of the function @xmath that are invariant under homeomorphic
changes of the independent variable? This is the formulation of the type
problem.

By uniqueness of the conformal structure, equivalent surfaces have the
same type. We notice that it is easy to single out the elliptic type as
consisting of compact Riemann surfaces. So we are down to the choice
between hyperbolic and parabolic types.

The dependence of type on curvature properties has been studied in lA73
, mB00 , yR93 . We study the type problem for surfaces of so called
class @xmath in Section 2.2 . To surfaces of this class one can
naturally associate a planar graph, Section 2.3 , called a Speiser
graph. We are interested in the dependence of type of properties of this
graph.

#### 2.1.4 Graphs

By a graph @xmath we mean a pair @xmath , where @xmath is an at most
countable set, whose elements are called vertices , and @xmath a set of
pairs of elemets from @xmath . Elements of @xmath are called edges . We
say that @xmath connects @xmath , or that @xmath is an edge between
@xmath and @xmath , if @xmath . Multiple edges between two vertices are
allowed, but loops, i.e. edges of the form @xmath are not.

Given a connected graph @xmath , we denote by @xmath , @xmath the sets
of its vertices and edges respectively. If two vertices @xmath of @xmath
are connected by an edge, we write @xmath . We denote by @xmath , the
number of edges of @xmath emanating from @xmath . A graph @xmath is said
to have a bounded degree , if @xmath . If @xmath is a connected subgraph
of @xmath , the boundary of @xmath is the set of vertices @xmath , such
that @xmath . A path in @xmath is a connected subgraph, which has degree
2 at all of its vertices with at most two exceptions, where it has
degree 1. A connected graph @xmath is a metric space with a
combinatorial distance on it, i.e. the distance between two vertices is
the number of edges of a shortest path connecting them. If @xmath is a
connected graph embedded in a topological surface @xmath , the connected
components of @xmath are called faces of @xmath ; the set of faces of
@xmath is denoted by @xmath . For a graph @xmath embedded in the plane,
we denote by @xmath its dual.

If a graph @xmath is locally-finite, a linear operator @xmath , acting
on functions @xmath on @xmath , is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is well-known that the operator @xmath enjoys many properties that
the Laplace operator possesses eD69 . A locally-finite infinite
connected graph @xmath is called hyperbolic , if there exists a positive
non-constant superharmonic function on @xmath . Otherwise it is called
parabolic . The hyperbolicity (parabolicity) for a locally-finite
infinite graph is equivalent to the transience (recurrence) of the
simple random walk on it.

#### 2.1.5 Riemannian Surfaces

A conformal metric @xmath on a Riemann surface @xmath is a metric whose
length element is given in local coordinates by @xmath , where @xmath is
a positive smooth function. Often one considers a more general conformal
metric, by allowing @xmath to vanish on a discrete set. For example,
spherical polyhedral surfaces mentioned above carry such a metric. For
our purposes conformal metrics with everywhere positive @xmath will be
sufficient.

The Gaussian curvature of a conformal metric @xmath is given by @xmath .
It is isometry invariant.

We denote by @xmath a pair, where @xmath is a Riemann surface and @xmath
is a conformal metric on @xmath . We call such a @xmath a Riemannian
surface . A Riemannian surface @xmath , not necessarily
simply-connected, is said to be hyperbolic , if there exists a positive
non-constant superharmonic function on it. Otherwise it is called
parabolic . Since the metric is conformal, a superharmonic function on
@xmath is the same as a superharmonic function on @xmath . Therefore, a
simply-connected Riemann surface @xmath is conformally equivalent to
@xmath ( @xmath ), if and only if @xmath is hyperbolic (parabolic) as a
Riemannian surface with an arbitrary conformal metric @xmath on it.
Moreover, the following fact holds.

###### Fact 1

If @xmath is an arbitrary discrete subset of an open simply-connected
Riemann surface @xmath , and @xmath is a conformal metric on @xmath ,
then @xmath is hyperbolic, if and only if @xmath is conformally
equivalent to @xmath .

This is because every positive superharmonic function on @xmath extends
to a superharmonic function on @xmath wH76 .

A Riemannian surface is complete if it is complete as a metric space. A
radius of injectivity of a Riemannian surface @xmath is the infimum over
all points @xmath of @xmath of the supremum over all non-negative @xmath
such that for all @xmath the ball centered at @xmath of radius @xmath is
homeomorphic to a Euclidean ball.

We say that a Riemannian surface @xmath satisfies the geometric
uniformness condition , if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 2.1.6 Rough Isometry

Let @xmath and @xmath be two metric spaces. {definition} A map @xmath ,
not necessarily continuous, is called a rough isometry, if the following
two conditions are satisfied:

1.  for some @xmath , the @xmath -neighborhood of the image of @xmath in
    @xmath covers @xmath ;

2.  there are constants @xmath , such that for all @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

A metric space @xmath is said to be roughly isometric to a metric space
@xmath , if there exists a rough isometry from @xmath into @xmath . This
is an equivalence relation. The notion of rough isometry was introduced
by M. Kanai mK85 and M. Gromov mG81 .

An immediate consequence of Kanai’s results mK85 , mK86 is the following
theorem. {theorem} If a non-compact Riemannian surface @xmath
satisfying ( 2.1 ) is roughly isometric to a connected locally-finite
graph @xmath of bounded degree, then @xmath is hyperbolic, if and only
if @xmath is hyperbolic. In fact, Kanai proves that a Riemannian surface
@xmath is hyperbolic, if and only if an @xmath -net in @xmath is
hyperbolic. An @xmath -net in @xmath is a maximal @xmath -separated set
@xmath in @xmath with a structure of a graph, so that vertices are
points of @xmath ; two vertices @xmath are connected by an edge, if and
only if @xmath . The graph @xmath has a bounded degree and is roughly
isometric to @xmath . A graph @xmath , roughly isometric to @xmath is,
by transitivity, roughly isometric to @xmath . Since both graphs have
bounded degree, they are pS94 simultaneously hyperbolic or parabolic.

### 2.2 Class @xmath

#### 2.2.1 Definition

We study the type problem for a particular, but rather broad, subclass
of surfaces spread over the sphere, the so called class @xmath . For a
surface of this class we investigate the dependance of type on the
properties of the associated Speiser graph (see 2.3 ). In this respect
see pD84 , aG70 , rN70 , aS30 , oT38 , lT47 , lV50 , hW68 .

Let @xmath be distinct points in @xmath . {definition} A surface @xmath
, where @xmath is open and simply-connected, belongs to class @xmath ,
if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a covering map.

Analytically surfaces of class @xmath can be characterized as those for
which the function @xmath has only finitely many critical and asymptotic
values. An asymptotic spot is an open arc contained in @xmath that
escapes from every compact subset of @xmath , and such that the limit of
@xmath along this arc exists. An asymptotic value is the limit of @xmath
at an asymptotic spot.

For each @xmath , let @xmath be a coordinate neighborhood of @xmath ,
centered at zero, so that @xmath , and @xmath . The restriction of
@xmath to a connected component @xmath of @xmath is a covering map.
Therefore oF91 this map is conformally equivalent to either @xmath , or
@xmath , where @xmath denote the punctured open unit disc, and @xmath an
open left half-plane. In particular, @xmath does not contain any
critical points of @xmath .

#### 2.2.2 Examples

The following are examples of surfaces of class @xmath .

1.  @xmath .

2.  @xmath , where @xmath is a modular function.

### 2.3 Speiser Graphs

#### 2.3.1 Definition

We fix a Jordan curve @xmath , containing the points @xmath . The curve
@xmath is usually called a base curve . It decomposes the sphere into
two simply-connected regions @xmath , called half-sheets . We assume
that the indices of @xmath ’s are cyclically ordered modulo @xmath , and
the curve @xmath is oriented so that the region @xmath is to the left.
We denote by @xmath the arc on @xmath between @xmath and @xmath . Let us
fix points @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , and choose @xmath
disjoint Jordan arcs @xmath in @xmath , such that each arc @xmath has
@xmath and @xmath as its endpoints, and has a unique point of
intersection with @xmath , which is on @xmath . Let @xmath denote the
graph embedded in @xmath , whose vertices are @xmath , and edges @xmath
, and let @xmath be the @xmath -pullback of the graph @xmath . We
identify @xmath with its image in @xmath under a sense-preserving
homeomorphism of @xmath onto @xmath . Clearly it does not depend on the
choice of the points @xmath , and the curves @xmath . The graph @xmath
has the following properties: 1. @xmath is infinite, connected, 2.
@xmath is homogeneous of degree @xmath , and 3. @xmath is bipartite.

A graph, properly embedded in the plane and satisfying properties 1, 2,
and 3, is called a Speiser graph , also known as a line complex . The
vertices of a Speiser graph @xmath are traditionally denoted by @xmath
and @xmath . Each face of @xmath , i.e. a connected component of @xmath
, has either @xmath edges @xmath , in which case it is called an
algebraic elementary region , or infinitely many edges, called a
logarithmic elementary region . Two Speiser graphs @xmath are said to be
equivalent , if there is a sense-preserving homeomorphism of the plane,
which takes @xmath to @xmath . Below we refer to an equivalence class as
a Speiser graph.

#### 2.3.2 Examples

#### 2.3.3 Reconstructing a surface from a Speiser Graph

The above construction of a Speiser graph of a surface @xmath is
reversible. Suppose that the faces of a Speiser graph @xmath are
labelled by @xmath , so that when going counterclockwise around a vertex
@xmath , the indices are encountered in their cyclic order, and around
@xmath in the opposite cyclic order. A labelling of faces induces the
one of edges: we assign a label @xmath to an edge, if it is the common
boundary for faces labelled @xmath and @xmath . We fix a base curve
@xmath in @xmath passing through @xmath in the order of increasing
indices, and denote by @xmath and @xmath the half-sheets, so that @xmath
is to the left. Then one constructs a surface @xmath in the following
way. Let @xmath be the cell decomposition of @xmath , dual to @xmath .
Each 2-dimensional cell has @xmath 1-dimensional cells on its boundary.
The 2-dimensional cells are labelled by @xmath and @xmath , and the
0-dimensional cells by @xmath . We map each 2-dimensional cell of @xmath
labelled by @xmath to @xmath , and each 2-dimensional cell labelled by
@xmath to @xmath , so that the maps agree on common boundary
1-dimensional cells and a 0-dimensional cell labelled by @xmath is
mapped to @xmath . Thus we obtain a continuous, open and discrete map
@xmath , such that @xmath is a covering map. So, @xmath , and its
Speiser graph is clearly @xmath .

It is natural to ask whether @xmath is hyperbolic if and only if its
Speiser graph @xmath is hyperbolic. The intuition behind this question
is in viewing the simple random walk on @xmath as a discrete
approximation of the Brownian motion on the Riemann surface sK49 , sK53
. Unfortunately, as we show in Appendix A , the hyperbolicity of a
surface of the class @xmath is not equivalent to the hyperbolicity of
its Speiser graph.

### 2.4 P. Doyle’s Theorem

#### 2.4.1 Extended Speiser Graph

P. Doyle pD84 suggested to use an extended Speiser graph to study the
type problem.

Let @xmath denote the set of integers, and @xmath the set of
non-negative integers.

A half-plane lattice @xmath is the graph embedded in @xmath , whose
vertices form the set @xmath . Two vertices @xmath are connected by an
edge, if and only if @xmath or @xmath . The boundary of the half-plane
lattice is the infinite connected subgraph, whose set of vertices is
@xmath . There is an action of @xmath on @xmath by horizontal shifts. A
half-cylinder lattice @xmath is @xmath . The boundary of @xmath is the
induced boundary from @xmath .

Let @xmath be given. If we replace each face of a Speiser graph @xmath
with @xmath edges, @xmath , by the half-cylinder lattice @xmath , and
each face with infinitely many edges by the half-plane lattice @xmath ,
identifying the boundaries of the faces with the boundaries of the
corresponding lattices along the edges, we obtain the extended Speiser
graph @xmath . The graph @xmath is an infinite connected graph, embedded
in @xmath , and containing @xmath as a subgraph. It has a bounded
degree, and all faces of @xmath have no more than @xmath edges.

#### 2.4.2 Statement of the Theorem {theorem}

For every @xmath , a surface @xmath has a hyperbolic (parabolic) type,
if and only if @xmath is hyperbolic (parabolic), where @xmath is the
Speiser graph of @xmath .

Theorem 2.4.2 is a slight generalization of the theorem by P. Doyle pD84
. The latter states that @xmath is hyperbolic, if and only if the
McKean-Sullivan random walk on its Speiser graph @xmath is transient. In
plain terms, the McKean-Sullivan random walk on @xmath comes from the
simple random walk on @xmath , when we observe it only as it hits @xmath
. Doyle’s arguments are probabilistic and electrical, whereas we employ
geometric methods. We use the results of M. Kanai mK85 , mK86 to prove
Theorem 2.4.2 .

### 2.5 Proof of P. Doyle’s Theorem

According to Fact 1 and Theorem 2.1.6 , to prove Theorem 2.4.2 , we need
to find a conformal metric @xmath on @xmath , where @xmath is a discrete
subset of @xmath , such that @xmath satisfies ( 2.1 ), and is roughly
isometric to @xmath .

#### 2.5.1 Conformal Metric

For each @xmath , let @xmath be a local coordinate neighborhood of
@xmath , centered at zero, so that @xmath , and @xmath . Consider an
open covering @xmath of @xmath , where @xmath ; let @xmath be a
conformal map of @xmath onto a domain in @xmath . Further, let @xmath be
a partition of unity on @xmath , subordinate to the covering. This
partition of unity pulls back to a partition of unity on @xmath as
follows. Let @xmath be a connected component of @xmath . We define
@xmath , a function on @xmath , that we extend to a smooth function on
@xmath , by letting it to be 0 outside @xmath . It is clear that @xmath
, a family of functions indexed by connected components of @xmath ,
forms a partition of unity on @xmath . Every component @xmath contains
at most one singular point. If @xmath is a @xmath -sheeted covering of
@xmath , @xmath , we denote @xmath by @xmath . The connected component
of @xmath is denoted by @xmath .

We choose @xmath to be the set of all critical points @xmath , so that
the local degree @xmath of @xmath at @xmath is at least @xmath . Now we
define a conformal metric @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The function @xmath smoothly extends to a neighborhood of every critical
point that does not belong to @xmath .

We need to show that @xmath satisfies @xmath , and is roughly isometric
to @xmath .

#### 2.5.2 Geometric Uniformness Condition

Every curve going out to a point in @xmath has infinite length in the
metric @xmath , thus @xmath is complete. The Gaussian curvature is
bounded. Indeed, suppose that it is not. Then there exists a sequence of
points in @xmath , on which the Gaussian curvature tends to @xmath . We
project this sequence to @xmath . The projected sequence has either
finitely many points, or accumulates to a point in @xmath . Since in a
neighborhood of each point in @xmath there are at most @xmath choices
for the metric, each with a bounded curvature, we get a contradiction.

The radius of injectivity is positive. Assume the contrary, i.e. there
exists a sequence of points @xmath in @xmath , such that if @xmath is
the radius of injectivity at @xmath , then @xmath . To derive a
contradiction, we follow the same argument as in the proof that the
Gaussian curvature is bounded. The most interesting case is when the
projected sequence accumulates at a point @xmath . Every component
@xmath , of the preimage @xmath is isometric to @xmath with the length
element @xmath , if @xmath , or @xmath , when @xmath . A connected
component @xmath of @xmath is isometric to @xmath with the metric @xmath
. In any case we obtain a contradiction.

#### 2.5.3 Rough Isometry

It remains to show the rough isometry. The Speiser graph @xmath of
@xmath is the preimage of @xmath under @xmath , where @xmath is embedded
in @xmath . The graph @xmath is finite, and otherwise satisfies all the
properties that a Speiser graph does. Therefore we can form the extended
graph @xmath . Since each face of @xmath contains a unique @xmath , we
can assume that the extended graph @xmath is embedded in @xmath in such
a way, that with respect to the local coordinate @xmath , the edges of
the lattice of @xmath are Euclidean semicircles and orthogonal to them
family of straight segments, which have length 1 in the metric @xmath .

Let @xmath be the embedding, whose image is contained in the pullback of
@xmath . For this embedding properties 1, 2, and 3 of Lemma 1 below are
readily verified, using the fact that there is a finite number of
choices for the metric in @xmath . Theorem 2.4.2 follows.

For a Riemannian surface @xmath we denote by @xmath the distance between
@xmath , and by @xmath , the length of a curve @xmath . Similarly, for a
graph @xmath , we denote the combinatorial distance between @xmath by
@xmath , and the combinatorial length of a path @xmath by @xmath . A
curve in @xmath joining points @xmath and @xmath is denoted by @xmath .

###### Lemma 1

Suppose that for a connected graph @xmath properly embedded in a
complete Riemannian surface @xmath the following conditions are
satisfied:

1.   there exists a constant @xmath , such that for every point @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   there exist constants @xmath , such that for every edge @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   there exists a constant @xmath , such that for every face @xmath ,
    and every two points @xmath on the boundary @xmath of @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Then the graph @xmath is roughly isometric to @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be the embedding map. In view of condition 1 , the
first property of rough isometry for @xmath is satisfied, so it remains
to prove the second property.

Let @xmath , and @xmath be a path in @xmath , joining these two points,
and having the minimal combinatorial length. Then, by condition 2 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Conversely, let @xmath , and @xmath be a curve in @xmath , joining
@xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be a face of @xmath , such that @xmath ,
and @xmath be a curve which is a connected component of @xmath . If
@xmath are endpoints of @xmath , then, by condition 3 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since this holds for every face @xmath and every component @xmath , we
conclude that there exists a path @xmath in @xmath , joining @xmath and
@xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last inequality holds by condition 2 . Taking the infimum with
respect to curves @xmath joining @xmath and @xmath , we obtain that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Combining inequalities ( 2.2 ), ( 2.3 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we conclude that @xmath is a rough isometry. The lemma is proved. @xmath

An immediate corollary of Lemma 1 is the fact that a surface of the
class @xmath , endowed with the pullback of a spherical metric, is
roughly isometric to the dual of its Speiser graph. However we could not
use this rough isometry in studying the type problem due to the presence
of vertices of infinite degree on the dual of a Speiser graph. Also,
even if we assume that there are no asymptotic values, i.e. there are no
vertices of infinite degree on a dual of the Speiser graph, the degrees
of the vertices of the dual can be unbounded, and we cannot conclude
that the type of a surface agrees with the type of the dual graph.

The only case when we can use the dual graph to determine the type of a
surface is when the degrees of the vertices of this graph are bounded.
This is first of all too restrictive, and second, if this happens, we
can use the Speiser graph itself for this purpose, i.e. we do not need
to consider the extended graph.

In the next chapter we apply Doyle’s theorem to show that
R. Nevanlinna’s conjecture is false. We could not use any other known
criteria of type to show the parabolicity of the surface constructed
below.

This page deliberately left blank

## Chapter 3 R. Nevanlinna’s Conjecture

In this chapter we provide three examples of a parabolic surface with
negative mean excess, contradicting Nevanlinna’s conjecture. We also
give an example of a parabolic surface with “a lot of negative
curvature”, Section 3.6 . The third example and the surface in Section
3.6 , are due to O. Schramm and I. Benjamini.

### 3.1 Background and Preliminaries

#### 3.1.1 Excess

For a Speiser graph @xmath , R. Nevanlinna introduces the following
characteristic. To each vertex @xmath we assign the number

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a face with @xmath edges, @xmath , and @xmath is the set
of vertices on its boundary. The function @xmath , @xmath is called the
excess of @xmath .

#### 3.1.2 Integral Curvature

The motivation for the definition of excess uses a notion of integral
curvature. The integral curvature @xmath on @xmath is a signed Borel
measure, so that for each Borel subset @xmath , @xmath is the area of
@xmath with respect to the pullback metric minus @xmath , where the sum
is over all critical points @xmath , and @xmath is the local degree of
@xmath at @xmath .

Each vertex of @xmath represents a hemisphere, and each face of @xmath
with @xmath edges, @xmath , represents a critical point, where @xmath is
the local degree of @xmath at this point. Therefore, each vertex of
@xmath has positive integral curvature @xmath , and each face with
@xmath edges has negative integral curvature @xmath . We spread the
negative curvature evenly to all the vertices of the face. A face with
infinitely many edges contributes @xmath to each vertex on its boundary.
The curvature mass obtained by every @xmath is exactly @xmath .

#### 3.1.3 Mean Excess

Nevanlinna also defines the mean excess of a Speiser graph @xmath . We
fix a vertex @xmath , and consider an exhaustion of @xmath by a sequence
of finite graphs @xmath , where @xmath is the ball of combinatorial
radius @xmath , centered at @xmath . By averaging @xmath over all the
vertices of @xmath , and taking the limit, we obtain the mean excess ,
if the limit exists. We denote it by @xmath . If the limit does not
exist, we consider the upper or lower excess , given by the upper,
respectively lower, limit. The upper mean excess of every infinite
Speiser graph is nonpositive (see Appendix B ).

#### 3.1.4 Extremal length

In this section we give the definition of the extremal length of a
family of paths and derive one of its properties that we are going to
use below. The general reference for this section is pS94 .

Let @xmath be a locally-finite connected graph. For a path @xmath in
@xmath we denote by @xmath the edge set of @xmath . Similarly, by @xmath
we denote the edge set of a family of paths @xmath in @xmath . The
extremal length of a family of paths @xmath in @xmath , @xmath , is
defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the infimum is taken with respect to all density functions @xmath
defined on the edge set @xmath , such that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The extremal length of the family of paths connecting two vertices or a
vertex to infinity, is equal to (a scalar multiple of) the effective
resistance between the two vertices, respectively the vertex and
infinity. It is known that a locally-finite graph @xmath is hyperbolic
(parabolic) if and only if @xmath is finite (infinite) for some, and
hence every, vertex @xmath , where @xmath is the family of paths
connecting @xmath to infinity.

Let @xmath , be families of paths in @xmath , where @xmath is at most
countable. We assume that @xmath . Suppose that for every @xmath and
every @xmath , there exists @xmath , which is a subpath of @xmath . Then
(see Appendix C )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 3.2 Conjecture

We recall that the conjecture of R. Nevanlinna ( rN70 , p. 312) states
that a surface @xmath of the class @xmath is of a hyperbolic or a
parabolic type, according to whether the angle geometry of the surface
is “Lobachevskyan” or “Euclidean”, i.e. according to whether the mean
excess @xmath is negative or zero .

### 3.3 Counterexample 1

In what follows, we mean by @xmath that there are absolute positive
constants @xmath , such that @xmath ; similarly @xmath means that there
is an absolute positive constant @xmath , such that @xmath .

#### 3.3.1 Speiser Graph

First we consider an infinite linear graph , i.e. an infinite connected
graph where each vertex has degree 2. Next, we fix a vertex of this
graph, and denote it by 0. To a vertex of this graph that is at a
distance @xmath from 0, we attach a binary tree of @xmath generations
(see Fig. 3.1 ). We denote this graph by @xmath .

The vertices of @xmath of degree one we call leaves . To obtain a
Speiser graph @xmath we replace each vertex of @xmath by a hexagon.
Adjacent hexagons correspond to the vertices of @xmath that are
connected by an edge. The hexagons corresponding to leaves of @xmath ,
which we call free hexagons , should be completed with two edges, to
preserve the degree. We add the edges to each of these hexagons, so that
the pair of opposite vertices of degree 2 is connected by an edge inside
the hexagon, and the remaining vertices of degree 2 are connected by an
edge. The resulting graph @xmath has degree 3 at all of its vertices
(see Fig. 3.2 ).

We label the faces by @xmath , and @xmath . There are exactly two faces
with infinitely many edges, both labelled by @xmath . Let @xmath denote
the surface corresponding to @xmath , @xmath ; we chose the extended
real line as the base curve. Notice that the function @xmath is
analytic. We need to show that the surface is parabolic and the mean
excess is negative.

#### 3.3.2 Parabolicity

To prove parabolicity, we make use of Theorem 2.4.2 . For this we
consider the graph @xmath . It is easier to deal with its dual @xmath
(see Fig. 3.3 ) though.

Since all faces of @xmath have a uniformly bounded (by 6) number of
sides, and the degree of @xmath is bounded (it is 4), @xmath is roughly
isometric to @xmath , and hence they are simultaneously hyperbolic
(parabolic). To simplify further, we pass from @xmath to a roughly
isometric graph @xmath of bounded degree. The graph @xmath (see Fig. 3.4
) consists of a coarse lattice in the upper half-plane, a fine lattice
in the lower half-plane, and edges, which we call bridges , that connect
vertices on the real line. The bridges are chosen in such a way, that
identification of vertices connected by them gives a rough isometry
@xmath . We denote by @xmath the vertex on the real line with respect to
which @xmath is symmetric, and by @xmath the family of paths connecting
@xmath to infinity. We show that @xmath , which implies that the surface
is parabolic.

Let @xmath be a finite subgraph of @xmath , which is an annulus of
combinatorial width 1 in the upper half-plane, of combinatorial width
@xmath in the lower half-plane, and which contains bridges. In Figure
3.4 the inner and outer boundaries of the first annulus are marked by
dashed lines.

Let @xmath denote the family of paths in @xmath that connect the inner
and outer boundaries. We consider a density function @xmath , which
assigns the value @xmath to every edge of @xmath in the lower
half-plane, and the value @xmath to every edge in the upper half-plane.
To the bridges we assign values as follows. We say that a bridge has
size @xmath , if it connects the vertices that are at a distance @xmath
with respect to the real line. Now, to a bridge of size @xmath we assign
the value @xmath , where @xmath is the number of bridges of size @xmath
in @xmath . We notice that for each @xmath there are at most 4 different
sizes @xmath for which @xmath .

For every path @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the definition of the extremal length we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since there are @xmath edges of @xmath in the upper half-plane and
@xmath in the lower half-plane, these two parts combined contribute
@xmath to the right-hand side of ( 3.2 ). The bridges of @xmath
contribute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining the above estimates, we conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath .

#### 3.3.3 Mean Excess

Now we show that the (upper) mean excess is negative.

To each vertex of @xmath there corresponds a hexagon of @xmath . There
are 3 types of hexagons, according to the excess assigned to their
vertices. We call these types @xmath , and @xmath (see Fig. 3.5 , where
the numbers next to the vertices of hexagons are the corresponding
values of the excess).

In order to compute the mean excess of @xmath , we look at the graph
@xmath , whose vertices are labelled by @xmath , and @xmath (due to the
symmetry of @xmath , we can consider only the part of it which is to the
right of 0, see Fig. 3.6 ).

We split the sequence @xmath of balls into 4 subsequences, according to
the index @xmath , and compute the mean excess in each case, counting
how many hexagons of every type @xmath are included:

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

Since the limits of all the subsequences are @xmath , the mean excess
@xmath is also @xmath .

### 3.4 Counterexample 2: No Asymptotic Values

A face of a Speiser graph with infinitely many edges on the boundary
corresponds to an asymptotic spot of @xmath , and a face with finitely
many edges corresponds to a critical point. In the previous example we
had two asymptotic spots of @xmath with the same value @xmath . Hence
the function is analytic. We give another example where the function is
meromorphic, but it does not have asymptotic values.

We notice that the graph @xmath , which is an extended Speiser graph of
@xmath , is itself a Speiser graph of degree 4. It provides us with an
example of a parabolic surface @xmath , whose mean excess is negative.
The new feature is that @xmath does not have logarithmic elementary
regions, and, moreover, all algebraic critical points have bounded
order.

### 3.5 Counterexample 3

P. Doyle pD84 proved that the surface @xmath is parabolic if and only if
a certain modification of the Speiser graph is recurrent. (See pD84 and
pS94 for background on recurrence and transience of infinite graphs.) In
the particular case where @xmath is bounded, the recurrence of the
Speiser graph itself is equivalent to @xmath being parabolic. Though we
will not really need this fact, it is not too hard to see that in a
Speiser graph satisfying @xmath the number of vertices in a ball grows
exponentially with the radius. Thus, we may begin searching for a
counterexample by considering recurrent graphs with exponential growth.
A very simple standard example of this sort is a tree constructed as
follows. In an infinite @xmath -regular tree @xmath , let @xmath be an
infinite simple path. Let @xmath be the set of vertices @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath for all sufficiently large @xmath . Note that there is
a unique infinite simple path in @xmath starting from any vertex @xmath
. This implies that @xmath is recurrent. It is straightforward to check
that the number of vertices of @xmath in the ball @xmath grows
exponentially with @xmath .

Our Speiser graph counterexample is a simple construction based on the
tree @xmath . Fix a parameter @xmath , whose choice will be discussed
later. To every leaf (degree one vertex) @xmath of @xmath associate a
closed disk @xmath and on it draw the graph indicated in Figure 3.7
.(a), where the number of concentric circles, excluding @xmath , is
@xmath . If @xmath is not a leaf, then it has degree @xmath . We then
associate to it the graph indicated in Figure 3.7 .(b), drawn on a
triply connected domain @xmath . We combine these to form the Speiser
graph @xmath as indicated in figure 3.8 , by pasting the outer boundary
of the surface corresponding to each vertex into the appropriate inner
boundary component of its parent. Here, the parent of @xmath is the
vertex @xmath such that @xmath for all sufficiently large @xmath .

Every vertex of @xmath has degree @xmath and every face has @xmath ,
@xmath , or @xmath edges on its boundary. Therefore, @xmath is a Speiser
graph. Consequently, as discussed above, there is a surface spread over
the sphere @xmath whose Speiser graph is @xmath . It is immediate to
verify that @xmath is recurrent, for example, by the Nash-Williams
criterion. Doyle’s Theorem pD84 then implies that @xmath is parabolic.
Alternatively, one can arrive at the same conclusion by noting that
there is an infinite sequence of disjoint isomorphic annuli on @xmath
separating any fixed point from @xmath , and applying extremal length.
(See lA73 , oL73 for the basic properties of extremal length.)

We now show that @xmath for @xmath . Note that the excess is positive
only on vertices on the boundaries of @xmath -gons, which arise from
leaves in @xmath . On the other hand, every vertex of degree @xmath in
@xmath gives rise to vertices in @xmath with negative excess. Take as a
basepoint for @xmath a vertex @xmath with negative excess. It is easy to
see that there are constants @xmath , such that the number @xmath of
negative excess vertices in the combinatorial ball @xmath about @xmath
satisfies @xmath .

If @xmath is a vertex with positive excess, then there is a unique
vertex @xmath with negative excess closest to @xmath ; in fact, if
@xmath , then @xmath is the closest vertex to @xmath on @xmath , and the
(combinatorial) distance from @xmath to @xmath is our parameter @xmath .
The map @xmath is clearly injective. This implies that the number @xmath
of positive excess vertices in @xmath satisfies @xmath , @xmath . By
choosing @xmath sufficiently large, we may therefore arrange to have the
total excess in @xmath to be less than @xmath , for some @xmath and
every @xmath . It is clear that the number of vertices with zero excess
in @xmath is bounded by a constant (which may depend on @xmath ) times
@xmath . Hence @xmath for @xmath .

By allowing @xmath to depend on the vertex in @xmath , if necessary, we
may arrange to have @xmath ; that is, @xmath exists, while maintaining
@xmath . We have thus demonstrated that the resulting surface is a
counterexample in @xmath to the second implication in Nevanlinna’s
problem.

### 3.6 A Non-Positive Curvature Example

We now construct an example of a simply connected, complete, parabolic
surface @xmath of nowhere positive curvature, with the property

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some fixed @xmath and every @xmath , where @xmath denotes the open
disc centered at @xmath of radius @xmath , and @xmath is some fixed
constant.

Consider the surface @xmath with the metric @xmath in @xmath , and
@xmath in @xmath . We denote this surface by @xmath . Let @xmath denote
the curve @xmath in @xmath , i.e., the common boundary of @xmath and
@xmath .

Let @xmath denote the universal cover of @xmath . Note that @xmath is
isometric to @xmath via the map @xmath . Hence the curvature is zero on
@xmath , and the geodesic curvature of @xmath is @xmath . The geodesic
curvature of @xmath is @xmath . Consequently, @xmath has no concentrated
curvature on @xmath . The surface @xmath is thus a “surface of bounded
curvature”, also known as an Aleksandrov surface (see aA67 , yR93 ). The
curvature measure of @xmath is absolutely continuous with respect to
area; the curvature of @xmath is -1 (times the area measure) on @xmath
and @xmath on @xmath .

The surface @xmath is parabolic, and the uniformizing map is the
identity map onto @xmath with the standard metric.

We will now prove ( 3.3 ) with @xmath . Set @xmath . Note that the
shortest path in @xmath between any two points on @xmath is contained in
@xmath , and is the arc of a circle orthogonal to @xmath . Using the
Poincare disc model, it is easy to see that there exists a constant
@xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the right inequality holds for all @xmath , and the left for all
sufficiently large @xmath . By considering the intersection of @xmath
with the strip @xmath it is clear that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all sufficiently large @xmath .

Consider some point @xmath , and let @xmath be the point on @xmath
closest to @xmath . It follows easily (for example, by using the
isometry of @xmath and @xmath ) that if @xmath is any point in @xmath ,
then @xmath . Consequently, if @xmath , then there is an @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, it is clear that the set of points
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath has area @xmath .
Consequently,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using ( 3.4 ), we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all sufficiently large @xmath .

Now, combining ( 3.5 ) and ( 3.6 ), we obtain ( 3.3 ) for all
sufficiently large @xmath . It therefore holds for all @xmath .

This page deliberately left blank

## Chapter 4 Analytic Endomorphisms

In this chapter we study the question of recovering a domain from its
semigroup of analytic endomorphisms.

### 4.1 Semigroups

If @xmath is a domain in @xmath , its analytic endomorphism is an
analytic map from @xmath into itself. Analytic endomorphisms of @xmath
form a semigroup (with the identity map as the unit), which we denote by
@xmath . It is non-comutative. An isomorphism between semigroups is a
map that preserves the operation and sends the unit to the unit.

A biholomorphic map between two domains is a one-to-one onto analytic
map, whose inverse is also analytic. We say that a map is
antibiholomorphic , if its complex conjugate is biholomorphic. By an
(anti-)biholomorphic map we mean a map which is either biholomorphic or
antibiholomorphic. It is obvious that if @xmath is an
(anti-)biholomorphic map, then the map between the corresponding
semigroups @xmath is an isomorphism.

We study the converse implication, namely given an isomorphism between
semigroups, is there an (anti-)biholomorphic map that conjugates it?

### 4.2 Statement of the Theorem {theorem}

Let @xmath be bounded domains in @xmath respectively, and suppose that
there exists @xmath , an isomorphism of semigroups. Then @xmath and
there exists an (anti-)biholomorphic map @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 4.3 Topology

#### 4.3.1 Constant Endomorphisms

To construct the (anti-)biholomorphic map and deduce the desired
properties of it, we need to express certain properties of elements of
the semigroup, such as an element being injective, or constant, in terms
of the semigroup structure. This will allow us to conclude that an
element with a property, say being injective, will map to an element
with the same property. The most crucial property for a construction of
the biholomorphic map is constantness of an element.

For a bounded domain @xmath in @xmath , we denote by @xmath the
subsemigroup of @xmath consisting of constant maps. An endomorphism
@xmath is constant if it sends @xmath to a point @xmath . The subset
@xmath can be described using only the semigroup structure as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In other words, a constant map is a left zero.

It is clear that we have a bijection between constant endomorphisms of
@xmath and points of this domain as a set: to each @xmath corresponds a
unique @xmath and vice versa, so we can identify the two. Under this
identification, a subset of @xmath corresponds to a subsemigroup of
@xmath .

#### 4.3.2 Construction of @xmath

Having defined points of a domain in terms of its semigroup structure of
analytic endomorphisms, we can construct a map @xmath between @xmath and
@xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

So defined, @xmath satisfies ( 4.1 ). Indeed, let @xmath . This is
equivalent to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Applying @xmath to both sides of ( 4.4 ) we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

But ( 4.5 ) is equivalent to @xmath , which is ( 4.1 ).

#### 4.3.3 Continuity of @xmath

We describe the topology of a domain @xmath using its injective
endomorphisms. A map @xmath is injective if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We denote the class of injective endomorphisms of @xmath by @xmath . For
every @xmath is open sB48 . The family @xmath of subsets of @xmath forms
a base of topology, because every @xmath has a neighborhood @xmath ,
where @xmath , @xmath belongs to @xmath for every @xmath such that
@xmath is small. This is the place where we use the boundedness of
domains.

Thus we described subsets of @xmath and the topology on it using only
the semigroup structure of @xmath . Since this is so, the semigroup
structure also defines the notions of an open set, closed set, compact
set, and closure of a set.

Now we can easily prove continuity of the map @xmath constructed above.
Indeed, let @xmath be a set from the base of topology of @xmath . We
take @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath , which proves that @xmath is
continuous. Since @xmath is an isomorphism, the same argument works to
prove that @xmath is also continuous, and thus @xmath is a
homeomorphism.

Therefore the domains @xmath are homeomorphic, and hence wH41 they have
the same dimension, i.e. @xmath .

### 4.4 Localization

In order to prove that @xmath is (anti-)biholomorphic, we will introduce
a system of projections. The main difficulty in extracting any useful
information from such a system is that a projection in general does not
have to be an endomorphism. To overcome this difficulty, the following
localization lemma proves useful.

###### Lemma 2

Suppose @xmath is a semigroup with identity, and @xmath an element of
@xmath with the following two properties:

(i) @xmath , for every @xmath in @xmath , and

(ii) @xmath implies @xmath , for every @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .

Then there exists a semigroup @xmath and a monomorphism @xmath , such
that @xmath is invertible in @xmath and commutes with all elements of
@xmath . Moreover, the semigroup @xmath satisfies the following
universal property: for every semigroup @xmath with a monomorphism
@xmath such that @xmath is invertible in @xmath and commutes with all
elements of @xmath , there exists a unique monomorphism @xmath such that
@xmath .

###### Remark 1

Uniqueness of @xmath implies that the semigroup @xmath with the
universal property is unique up to isomorphism.

Proof. We construct @xmath as follows. First we consider formal
expressions of the form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is an integer
(may be positive, negative or zero). Then we define a multiplication on
this set: @xmath . Next we consider a relation on the set of formal
expressions: @xmath if @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , or @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . It is easy to verify that this is an equivalence
relation and it is compatible with the operation @xmath ; that is,
@xmath implies @xmath .

Lastly, let @xmath be the set of equivalence classes with the binary
operation induced by @xmath . For @xmath to be a semigroup, we need to
show that the binary operation @xmath is associative. Let @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . We need to show that @xmath . By the definition of
the operation @xmath , the last equivalence is the same as @xmath .
Assuming that @xmath , we have essentially one possibility to consider
(the others are either similar or trivial): @xmath , and @xmath . In
this case, @xmath . Now we can use the cancellation property (ii) to get
the desired equivalence.

The semigroup @xmath is embedded into @xmath via @xmath . The element
@xmath , where is the identity in @xmath , is invertible in @xmath with
the inverse @xmath . Clearly, @xmath commutes with all elements of
@xmath .

Now suppose that @xmath , @xmath , is a semigroup and a monomorphism,
such that @xmath is invertible in @xmath and commutes with all elements
of @xmath . Then we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This definition does not depend on a representative of @xmath . Indeed,
suppose @xmath and assume @xmath . Then @xmath , and thus @xmath . Hence
@xmath .

So defined, @xmath is a homomorphism:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The relation @xmath holds, since @xmath for all @xmath .

Uniqueness of @xmath is clear, and Lemma 2 is proved. @xmath

We are going to apply this lemma to get an extension of the isomorphism
@xmath restricted to the commutant of an element @xmath to a larger
semigroup that would contain a system of projections.

### 4.5 Extending @xmath

#### 4.5.1 Good Elements

Here we introduce a subsemigroup, whose elements, following aE93 , we
call to be ‘good’. They are termed ‘good’ because, first of all, their
analytic properties will be useful for us when extending the restricted
isomorphism @xmath , and second, all these properties can be expressed
in terms of the semigroup structure.

We say that for a bounded domain @xmath an element @xmath is good at
@xmath , denoted by @xmath , if

1.  @xmath is a unique fixed point of @xmath ,

2.  @xmath has compact closure in @xmath , and

3.  @xmath is injective in @xmath .

Property 3 of a good element was already stated in terms of the
semigroup structure. Since the topology on @xmath was described using
only the semigroup structure, Property 2 can also be stated in these
terms. Property 1 can be expressed in terms of the semigroup structure
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is an endomorphism of a domain, all eigenvalues @xmath of
its linear part at @xmath satisfy @xmath sK98 . Moreover, @xmath because
the closure of @xmath is a compact set in @xmath . The injectivity of
@xmath implies sB48 that it is biholomorphic onto @xmath and the
Jacobian determinant of @xmath does not vanish at any point of @xmath .

It is clear that for every @xmath a good element @xmath at @xmath
exists. For example, we can take @xmath with sufficiently small @xmath .

#### 4.5.2 Extending a Comutant

Consider a good element @xmath and its commutant @xmath in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly @xmath is a subsemigroup of @xmath . The element @xmath , being
good (hence injective), satisfies the cancellation property @xmath of
Lemma 2 in @xmath . Thus, by Lemma 2 , we have the extension @xmath of
@xmath in which @xmath is invertible and commutes with all elements of
@xmath . In the case of analytic endomorphisms we can embed @xmath into
the subsemigroup of @xmath , the semigroup of germs of analytic mappings
at @xmath under composition, consisting of elements that commute with
the germ of @xmath and containing the germ of @xmath . We use the
universal property of Lemma 2 to conclude that @xmath is isomorphic to a
subsemigroup of @xmath . We identify @xmath with this semigroup, i.e. we
consider elements of @xmath as germs of analytic mappings at @xmath .

#### 4.5.3 Extending the Isomorphism

In proving that @xmath is (anti-) biholomorphic we need to show that it
is so in a neighborhood of every point of @xmath . Since an (anti-)
biholomorphic type of a domain is preserved by translations in @xmath ,
it is enough to show that @xmath is (anti-) biholomorphic in a
neighborhood of @xmath , assuming that @xmath and @xmath contain 0 and
@xmath .

Let @xmath be an isomorphism of the semigroups, @xmath a good element,
@xmath , and @xmath the commutant of @xmath . Then clearly @xmath is the
commutant of @xmath . By Lemma 2 , we have the extensions @xmath of
@xmath and @xmath respectively, and by the universal property of this
lemma the isomorphism @xmath extends to an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 4.6 System of Projections and Linearization

#### 4.6.1 Very Good Elements

Let @xmath be a bounded domain in @xmath . We say that a good element
@xmath is very good at 0, and write @xmath , if the corresponding
semigroup @xmath constructed in Section 4.5 contains a system of
elements, which we call a system of projections, @xmath with the
following properties:

(a) @xmath ,

(b) @xmath , and

(c) @xmath .

There does exist a very good element, since we can take @xmath to be a
homothetic transformation at 0 with sufficiently small coefficient, and
@xmath a projection on the @xmath ’th coordinate of the standard
coordinate system. Clearly, @xmath and there exists @xmath such that
@xmath , and hence @xmath . From now on, we fix a very good element
@xmath , associated semigroups @xmath and a system of projections @xmath
.

We introduce another subsemigroup of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the commutativity relations are in @xmath . Notice that @xmath
since @xmath belongs to it.

#### 4.6.2 Linearization Lemma

###### Lemma 3

For every @xmath there exists a biholomorphic germ @xmath at @xmath such
that @xmath , where @xmath is an invertible diagonal matrix which is
similar to @xmath in @xmath .

Proof. The relations @xmath , and @xmath , imply that for @xmath , the
linear part of @xmath at 0, we have @xmath , and @xmath . Since the
matrices @xmath commute, there exists kH71 a matrix @xmath such that
@xmath , where the only non-zero entry appears in the @xmath ’th place.

Since @xmath , we can use the argument given in sK98 to linearize @xmath
, i.e. there exists a biholomorphic germ @xmath at 0 such that @xmath .
The map @xmath is constructed in sK98 as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we take @xmath , we have @xmath . For simplicity of notations, we
assume that @xmath itself conjugates @xmath to a diagonal matrix, that
is, @xmath (in this case @xmath is not necessarily @xmath , but rather
@xmath ). For every @xmath , we have @xmath , where @xmath . Let @xmath
. Then @xmath , and hence in the @xmath ’th row and the @xmath ’th
column the matrix @xmath has only one non-zero entry, @xmath , which is
located at their intersection. Thus @xmath has to be an eigenvalue of
@xmath , and hence of the linear part of @xmath . In particular, @xmath
.

Let @xmath be the embedding @xmath , where the only non-zero entry is
@xmath , which is in the @xmath ’th place; and @xmath , a projection
@xmath , corresponding to the @xmath ’th axis. For every @xmath , the
map @xmath sends a neighborhood of 0 in @xmath into @xmath , and its
derivative at 0, @xmath , is an eigenvalue of @xmath . Hence ( lC93 , p.
31) @xmath is linearized by the unique solution @xmath of the Schröder
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , we can rewrite ( 4.6 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath , and so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The equation ( 4.7 ), in turn, is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

We denote

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

a map from a neighborhood of @xmath into @xmath . Then ( 4.8 ) becomes
@xmath . Now we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a germ of an analytic map at 0. This germ linearizes @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an invertible diagonal matrix, which has eigenvalues of
@xmath on its diagonal.

The germ @xmath is biholomorphic. Indeed,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the chain rule, we see that @xmath , where @xmath is an invertible
diagonal matrix that diagonalizes @xmath . We conclude that @xmath is
biholomorphic, and Lemma 3 is proved. @xmath

### 4.7 Simultaneous Linearization

Using Lemma 3 , we can linearize elements of @xmath . Namely, for every
@xmath there exists @xmath (constructed in Section 4.6 ), such that
@xmath , where @xmath is an invertible diagonal matrix. In particular,
we can linearize @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the germ @xmath is biholomorphic at 0, and @xmath is an invertible
diagonal matrix.

###### Lemma 4

For every @xmath we have @xmath .

Proof. Let us consider the germ

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is clearly biholomorphic. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using ( 4.10 ), we write the equation @xmath in the coordinate form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By ( 4.9 ) and the definition of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Using the commutativity relations @xmath , which hold
since @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the same as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath locally preserves the @xmath ’th coordinate axis ( @xmath
). It is easily seen that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A normalized solution to a Schröder equation is unique though. Thus we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the uniqueness argument again, we obtain @xmath , and hence @xmath
. The lemma is proved. @xmath

According to Lemma 4 , the single biholomorphic germ @xmath conjugates
the subsemigroup @xmath to some subsemigroup @xmath of invertible
diagonal matrices in @xmath , the set of all @xmath diagonal matrices
with entries in @xmath . We show that @xmath contains all invertible
diagonal matrices with sufficiently small entries. To do this, first we
extend @xmath to an analytic map on the whole domain @xmath using the
formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is chosen so large that @xmath is contained in a
neighborhood of 0 where @xmath is originally defined and biholomorphic;
the symbol Cl denotes closure. From the procedure of extending @xmath to
@xmath we see that it is one-to-one and bounded in the whole domain.

Now, let @xmath be a matrix such that @xmath , where @xmath is a
neighborhood of @xmath for which @xmath . Such a matrix @xmath exists
since @xmath is bounded in @xmath . Consider @xmath , which belongs to
@xmath . The map @xmath commutes with @xmath and all @xmath ’s. Indeed,
using the formula @xmath , we conclude that @xmath is equivalent to
@xmath , which is a true relation since both matrices @xmath and @xmath
are diagonal. The relations @xmath , are verified similarly, using the
formula @xmath , which follows from the definition of @xmath .

### 4.8 Solving a Matrix Equation

We proved that for an element @xmath there exists a biholomorphic germ
@xmath conjugating the semigroup @xmath to a subsemigroup @xmath , which
contains all invertible diagonal matrices with sufficiently small
entries.

#### 4.8.1 Conjugations @xmath and @xmath

Let @xmath , and @xmath . Then @xmath , and there is an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the mappings @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are invertible diagonal matrices.

Let us consider the germ @xmath . This germ conjugates the semigroups
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , and @xmath .

Define @xmath . Then @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In what follows, we will identify @xmath with the multiplicative
semigroup @xmath ( @xmath ) in the obvious way and consider a topology
on @xmath induced by the standard topology on @xmath .

#### 4.8.2 Extending @xmath

We are going to extend @xmath to an isomorphism of @xmath . First, we
denote by @xmath the closures of @xmath in @xmath , and for @xmath we
set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This limit exists and does not depend on the sequence @xmath , which
follows from the fact that @xmath , and @xmath are continuous. The map
@xmath is an isomorphism of topological semigroups @xmath and @xmath
(the inverse of @xmath has a similar representation).

Next, we extend the map @xmath to @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is chosen so that @xmath . This definition does not depend
on the choice of @xmath . Indeed, since all matrices in question are
diagonal (hence commute), the relation @xmath is equivalent to @xmath ,
which holds.

The extended map @xmath is clearly an isomorphism of @xmath onto itself.
Thus we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Injectivity of @xmath and ( 4.11 ) imply that @xmath for all @xmath ,
where @xmath depends on @xmath , and @xmath is a permutation on @xmath
(we recall that @xmath ). This is because @xmath is the only system in
@xmath with the following relations: @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath .

#### 4.8.3 A System of Scalar Equations

Since all matrices @xmath and their images @xmath are diagonal, we can
consider the matrix equation ( 4.11 ) as @xmath scalar equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are components of @xmath . If we rewrite the equation
@xmath in the coordinate form, we see that @xmath ; that is, each @xmath
depends on only one of the @xmath ’s. For each @xmath the corresponding
equation in ( 4.12 ) in terms of the @xmath ’s becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This equation has ( aE93 , p. 130) either the constant solution @xmath ,
or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 4.8.4 Explicit Expression for @xmath

Going back to the function @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the inverse permutation to @xmath .

Let us choose and fix @xmath such that @xmath belongs to a neighborhood
@xmath of @xmath where @xmath is defined, and let @xmath be a
neighborhood of @xmath such that @xmath , whenever @xmath . Then from (
4.8.4 ) we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a constant matrix. The last formula is the explicit
expression for @xmath .

### 4.9 Proving that @xmath is (Anti-) Biholomorphic

To prove that @xmath is (anti-) biholomorphic is the same as to prove
that @xmath is (anti-) biholomorphic, because the relation @xmath holds.
We showed that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

in a neighborhood @xmath of @xmath . From the representation ( 4.13 ) we
see that @xmath is @xmath -differentiable and non-degenerate in @xmath .
Since this is true for every point in the domain @xmath , the map @xmath
is @xmath -differentiable and non-degenerate everywhere, with the
possible exception of an analytic set. Let us remove this set from
@xmath , as well as its image under @xmath from @xmath . We call the
domains obtained in this way @xmath and @xmath . Now the map @xmath is
@xmath -differentiable and non-degenerate everywhere. It is clear that
if we prove that @xmath is (anti-) biholomorphic between @xmath and
@xmath , then it is (anti-) biholomorphic between @xmath and @xmath due
to a standard continuation argument sK82 . So we can think that @xmath
is @xmath -differentiable and non-degenerate in @xmath itself. The map
@xmath thus has to be @xmath -differentiable and non-degenerate at 0.
However, this is the case if and only if @xmath . Together with the
equation @xmath it gives us that either @xmath , or @xmath .

It remains to show that either @xmath and @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath
, simultaneously for all @xmath . Suppose, by way of contradiction, that
we have @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are linear analytic functions. Let us look at an
endomorphism @xmath of @xmath of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is in the @xmath ’th place, @xmath in the @xmath ’th, and
@xmath is sufficiently small. Using ( 4.1 ) and the definition of @xmath
, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for some constant matrix @xmath . This map, and hence @xmath , is not
analytic though in a neighborhood of 0, which is a contradiction. Thus
@xmath , and hence @xmath , is either analytic or antianalytic in a
neighborhood of 0.

Theorem 4.2 is proved completely. @xmath

### 4.10 Generalization

Theorem 4.2 can be slightly generalized. Namely one may assume that
@xmath is an epimorphism. We prove the following theorem.

{theorem}

If @xmath is an epimorphism between semigroups, where @xmath are bounded
domains in @xmath respectively, then @xmath is an isomorphism.

Proof Since @xmath is an epimorphism, it takes constant endomorphisms of
@xmath to constant endomorphisms of @xmath , which follows from ( 4.2 ).
Thus we can define a map @xmath as in ( 4.3 ). Following the same steps
as in verifying ( 4.1 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will show that ( 4.14 ) implies the bijectivity of @xmath . The map
@xmath is surjective. Indeed, let @xmath , and @xmath be the
corresponding constant endomorphism. Since @xmath is an epimorphism,
there exists @xmath , such that @xmath . If we plug this @xmath into (
4.14 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Thus @xmath is surjective.

To prove that @xmath is injective, we show that for every @xmath , the
full preimage of @xmath under @xmath , @xmath , consists of one point.

Assume for contradiction that @xmath consists of more than one point for
some @xmath . The set @xmath cannot be all of @xmath , since @xmath is
surjective. For @xmath , we can find @xmath and @xmath which are
arbitrarily close to @xmath . Let @xmath be a fixed point of @xmath
different from @xmath . Consider a homothetic transformation @xmath such
that @xmath . Since the domain @xmath is bounded, we can choose points
@xmath and @xmath sufficiently close to each other so that @xmath
belongs to @xmath . Applying ( 4.14 ) to @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The contradiction shows injectivity of @xmath . Thus we have proved that
@xmath is bijective.

According to ( 4.14 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies that @xmath is an isomorphism.

Theorem 4.10 is proved. @xmath