Discrete dynamical systems over finite fields are investigated and their
integrability is discussed. In particular, the discrete Painlevé
equations and the discrete KdV equation are defined over finite fields
and their special solutions are obtained. Although the discrete
integrable equations we treat in this paper have been studied
intensively over the past, their investigation over the finite fields
has not been done as thoroughly, partly because of the indeterminacies
that appear in defining the systems. In this paper we introduce two
methods to well-define the equations over the finite fields and apply
the methods to several classes of discrete integrable equations. One
method is to extend the space of initial conditions through blowing-up
at the singular points. In case of discrete Painlevé equations, we
proved that an finite field analog of the Sakai theory can be applied to
construct the space of initial conditions [ 1 ] . We discuss the state
transition diagram of the time evolution over finite fields. The other
method is to define the equations over the field of @xmath -adic numbers
and then reduce them to the finite fields. The mapping whose time
evolutions commute with the reduction is said to have a ‘good
reduction’. We generalize good reduction in order to be applied to
integrable mappings, in particular, to the discrete Painlevé equations [
2 ] . This generalized notion is called an ‘almost good reduction’
(AGR). It is proved that AGR is satisfied for most of the discrete and
@xmath -discrete Painlevé equations, and therefore can be used as an
integrability detector. Moreover, AGR works as an arithmetic analog of
the singularity confinement test [ 3 ] . Next, our methods of extending
the initial value space are applied to the soliton systems: the discrete
KdV equation and one of its generalized forms [ 4 ] . The solitary wave
phenomena over finite fields are studied and their periodicity
discussed. The reduction from the extended field and the field of
complex numbers to the finite fields is also defined. The reduction
property of two-dimensional lattice systems are studied and the
generalization of AGR is presented. This article is basically a
replication of author’s thesis (paper submitted: June 2013, degree
conferred: September 2013) and draws from several of our published
materials. Also note that some parts are later modified from its
original version to keep up with the latest developments.
