Recent years have seen a tremendous progress in field of the high energy
(HE) astrophysics and very high energy (VHE) astronomy. This progress
has been achieved mostly thanks to a new generation of instruments that
provide data of previously unattainable quality. This thesis presents
the study of four aspects of high energy astronomy.

The first part of my thesis is dedicated to an aspect of instrument
development for imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes, namely the
Level 2 trigger system of the High Energy Stereoscopic System
(H.E.S.S.). H.E.S.S. is an array dedicated to VHE @xmath -ray astronomy.
The array has been in operation since the beginning of 2004. Originally
it has been composed of four 12 meter diameter telescopes, which has
been completed with a fifth 28 meter diameter telescope in 2012. This
H.E.S.S. II telescope is designed to operate both in stereoscopic mode
and in monoscopic mode. The Level 2 trigger system is required to
suppress spurious triggers of the telescope when operating in monoscopic
mode. This dissertation provides the motivation and principle of the
operation of the Level 2 trigger. I had the opportunity to work on the
Level 2 trigger system for the H.E.S.S. II telescope at IRFU/CEA in
France. The IRFU is responsible for designing and building this trigger
system. The system consists of both hardware and software solutions. My
work on the project focused on the algorithm development and the Monte
Carlo simulations of the trigger system and overall instrument (Moudden,
Barnacka, Glicenstein et al. 2011a; Moudden, Venault, Barnacka et al.
2011b). The hardware implementation of the system is described and its
expected performances are then evaluated.

The H.E.S.S. array has been used to observe the blazar PKS 1510-089. The
second part of my thesis deals with the data analysis and modeling of
broad-band emission of this particular blazar. PKS 1501-089 is an
example of the so-called flat spectrum radio quasars (FSRQs) for which
no VHE emission is expected due to the Klein-Nishina effects and strong
absorption in the broad line region (Moderski et al. 2005). The recent
detection of at least three FSRQs by Cherenkov telescopes has forced a
revision of our understanding of these objects. In part II of my thesis,
I am presenting the analysis of the H.E.S.S. data: the light curve and
spectrum of PKS 1510-089, together with the FERMI data and a collection
of multi-wavelength data obtained with various instruments. I am
presenting the model of PKS 1510-089 observations carried out during a
flare recorded by H.E.S.S.. The model is based on a single zone internal
shock scenario.

The third part of my thesis deals with blazars observed by the
FERMI-LAT, but from the point of view of other phenomena: a strong
gravitational lensing. This part of my thesis shows the first evidence
for gravitational lensing phenomena in high energy gamma-rays. This
evidence comes from the observation of a gravitational lens system
induced echo in the light curve of the distant blazar PKS 1830-211.
Traditional methods for the estimation of time delays in gravitational
lensing systems rely on the cross-correlation of the light curves from
individual images. In my thesis, I used 300 MeV-30 GeV photons detected
by the Fermi-LAT instrument. The FERMI-LAT instrument cannot separate
the images of known lenses. The observed light curve is thus the
superposition of individual image light curves. The FERMI-LAT instrument
has the advantage of providing long, evenly spaced, time series with
very low photon noise. This allows to use directly Fourier transform
methods.

A time delay between the two compact images of PKS 1830-211 has been
searched for both by the autocorrelation method and a new method: the
“double power spectrum”. The double power spectrum shows a 4.2 @xmath
evidence for a time delay of 27.1 @xmath 0.6 days (Barnacka et al.
2011), consistent with the results from Lovell et al. (1998) and
Wiklind & Combes (2001).

The last part of my thesis concentrates on another lensing phenomena
called ”femtolensing”. The search for femtolensing effects has been used
to derive limits on the primordial black holes abundance. The abundance
of primordial black holes is currently significantly constrained in a
wide range of masses. The weakest limits are established for the small
mass objects, where the small intensity of the associated physical
phenomenon provides a challenge for current experiments. I have used
gamma-ray bursts with known redshifts detected by the FERMI Gamma-ray
Burst Monitor (GBM) to search for the femtolensing effects caused by
compact objects. The lack of femtolensing detection in the GBM data
provides new evidence that primordial black holes in the mass range
@xmath – @xmath g do not constitute a major fraction of dark matter
(Barnacka et al. 2012).
