###### Contents

-    1 Motivations and scope of the present work
    -    1.1 Why a quantum theory of gravity cannot be dispensed with
    -    1.2 Quantum gravity and quantization
    -    1.3 On scales and renormalization with or without background
    -    1.4 Purpose and plan of the thesis
-    2 Two paths to Group Field Theories
    -    2.1 Group Field Theories and quantum General Relativity
        -    2.1.1 Loop Quantum Gravity
        -    2.1.2 Spin Foams
        -    2.1.3 Summing over Spin Foams
        -    2.1.4 Towards well-defined quantum field theories of Spin
            Networks
    -    2.2 Group Field Theories and random discrete geometries
        -    2.2.1 Matrix models and random surfaces
        -    2.2.2 Higher dimensional generalizations
        -    2.2.3 Bringing discrete geometry in
    -    2.3 A research direction
-    3 Colors and tensor invariance
    -    3.1 Colored Group Field Theories
        -    3.1.1 Combinatorial and topological motivations
        -    3.1.2 Motivation from discrete diffeomorphisms
    -    3.2 Colored tensor models
        -    3.2.1 Models and amplitudes
        -    3.2.2 Degree and existence of the large N expansion
        -    3.2.3 The world of melons
    -    3.3 Tensor invariance
        -    3.3.1 From colored simplices to tensor invariant
            interactions
        -    3.3.2 Generalization to GFTs
-    4 Large N expansion in topological Group Field Theories
    -    4.1 Colored Boulatov model
        -    4.1.1 Vertex variables
        -    4.1.2 Regularization and general scaling bounds
        -    4.1.3 Topological singularities
        -    4.1.4 Domination of melons
    -    4.2 Colored Ooguri model
        -    4.2.1 Edge variables
        -    4.2.2 Regularization and general scaling bounds
        -    4.2.3 Topological singularities
        -    4.2.4 Domination of melons
-    5 Renormalization of Tensorial Group Field Theories: generalities
    -    5.1 Preliminaries: renormalization of local field theories
        -    5.1.1 Locality, scales and divergences
        -    5.1.2 Perturbative renormalization through a multiscale
            decomposition
    -    5.2 Locality and propagation in GFT
        -    5.2.1 Simplicial and tensorial interactions
        -    5.2.2 Constraints and propagation
    -    5.3 A class of models with closure constraint
        -    5.3.1 Definition
        -    5.3.2 Graph-theoretic and combinatorial tools
    -    5.4 Multiscale expansion and power-counting
        -    5.4.1 Multiscale decomposition
        -    5.4.2 Propagator bounds
        -    5.4.3 Abelian power-counting
    -    5.5 Classification of just-renormalizable models
        -    5.5.1 Analysis of the Abelian divergence degree
        -    5.5.2 Just-renormalizable models
        -    5.5.3 Properties of melonic subgraphs
-    6 Super-renormalizable @xmath models in four dimensions
    -    6.1 Divergent subgraphs and Wick ordering
        -    6.1.1 A bound on the divergence degree
        -    6.1.2 Classification of divergences
        -    6.1.3 Localization operators
        -    6.1.4 Melordering
        -    6.1.5 Vacuum submelonic counter-terms
    -    6.2 Finiteness of the renormalized series
        -    6.2.1 Classification of forests
        -    6.2.2 Power-counting of renormalized amplitudes
        -    6.2.3 Sum over scale attributions
    -    6.3 Example: Wick-ordering of a @xmath interaction
-    7 Just-renormalizable @xmath model in three dimensions
    -    7.1 The model and its divergences
        -    7.1.1 Regularization and counter-terms
        -    7.1.2 List of divergent subgraphs
    -    7.2 Non-Abelian multiscale expansion
        -    7.2.1 Power-counting theorem
        -    7.2.2 Contraction of high melonic subgraphs
    -    7.3 Perturbative renormalizability
        -    7.3.1 Effective and renormalized expansions
        -    7.3.2 Classification of forests
        -    7.3.3 Convergent power-counting for renormalized amplitudes
        -    7.3.4 Sum over scale attributions
    -    7.4 Renormalization group flow
        -    7.4.1 Approximation scheme
        -    7.4.2 Truncated equations for the counter-terms
        -    7.4.3 Physical coupling constants: towards asymptotic
            freedom
        -    7.4.4 Mass and consistency of the assumptions
-    8 Conclusions and perspectives
    -    8.1 The @xmath expansion in colored GFTs
        -    8.1.1 Achievements
        -    8.1.2 Discussion and outlook
    -    8.2 Renormalization of TGFTs
        -    8.2.1 Achievements
        -    8.2.2 Discussion and outlook
-    A Technical appendix
    -    A.1 Heat Kernel
    -    A.2 Proof of heat kernel bounds
-    References

## Chapter 1 Motivations and scope of the present work

Nous sommes en 50 avant J sus-Christ. Toute la Gaule est occup e par les
Romains… Toute? Non! Un village peupl d’irr ductibles Gaulois r siste
encore et toujours l’envahisseur. Et la vie n’est pas facile pour les
garnisons de l gionnaires romains des camps retranch s de Babaorum,
Aquarium, Laudanum et Petibonum…
Ren Goscinny and Albert Uderzo , Ast rix le Gaulois

### 1.1 Why a quantum theory of gravity cannot be dispensed with

A consistent quantum theory of gravity is mainly called for by a
conceptual clash between the two major achievements of physicists of the
XX @xmath century. On the one hand, the realization by Einstein that
classical space-time is a dynamical entity correctly described by
General Relativity (GR), and on the other the advent of Quantum
Mechanics (QM). The equivalence principle, upon which GR is built, leads
to the interpretation of gravitational phenomena as pure geometric
effects: the trajectories of test particles are geodesics in a curved
four-dimensional manifold, space-time, whose geometric properties are
encoded in a Lorentzian metric tensor, which is nothing but the
gravitational field [ einstein_grossmann1913 ] . Importantly, the
identification of the gravitational force to the metric properties of
space-time entails the dynamical nature of the latter. Indeed, gravity
being sourced by masses and energy, space-time cannot remain as a fixed
arena into which physical processes happen, as was the case since
Newton. With Einstein, space-time becomes a physical system per se ,
whose precise structure is the result of a subtle interaction with the
other physical systems it contains. At the conceptual level, this is
arguably the main message of GR, and the precise interplay between the
curved geometry of space-time and matter fields is encoded into
Einstein’s equations [ einstein1915 ] . The second aspect of the physics
revolution which took place in the early XX @xmath century revealed a
wealth of new phenomena in the microscopic world, and the dissolution of
most of the classical Newtonian picture at such scales: the
disappearance of the notion of trajectory, unpredictable outcomes of
experiments, statistical predictions highly dependent on the
experimental setup [ bohr1983 ] … At the mathematical level, QM brings
along an entirely new arsenal of technical tools: physical states are
turned into vectors living in a Hilbert space, which replaces the phase
space of classical physics, and observables become Hermitian operators
acting on physical states. However, the conception of space-time on
which QM relies remains deeply rooted in Newtonian physics: the Schr
dinger equation is a partial differential equation with respect to fixed
and physical space-time coordinates. For this reason, Special Relativity
could be proven compatible with these new rules of the game, thanks to
the Quantum Field Theory (QFT) formalism. The main difficulties in going
from non-relativistic to relativistic quantum theory boiled down to the
incorporation of the Lorentz symmetry, which also acts on time-like
directions. Achieving the same reconciliation with the lessons of GR is
(and has been proven to be) extraordinarily more difficult. The reason
is that as soon as one contemplates the idea of making the geometry of
space-time both dynamical and quantum, one looses in one stroke the
fixed arena onto which the quantum foundations sit, and the Newtonian
determinism which allows to unambiguously link space-time dynamics to
its content. The randomness introduced by quantum measurements seems
incompatible with the definition of a single global state for space-time
and matter (e.g. a solution of a set of partial differential equations).
And without a non-dynamical background, there is no unambiguous ’here’
where quantum ensembles can be prepared, nor a ’there’ where
measurements can be performed and their statistical properties checked.
In a word, by requiring background independence to conform to Einstein’s
ideas about gravity, one also suppresses the only remaining Newtonian
shelter where quantum probabilities can safely be interpreted. This is
probably the most puzzling aspect of modern physics, and calls for a
resolution.

But, one could ask, do we necessarily need to make gravity quantum?
Cannot we live with the fact that matter is described by quantum fields
propagating on a dynamical but classical geometry? A short answer would
be to reject the dichotomous understanding of the world that would
result from such a combination of a priori contradictory ideas. On the
other hand, one cannot deny that space-time is a very peculiar physical
system, which one might argue, could very well keep a singular status as
the only fundamentally classical entity. However, very nice and general
arguments, put forward by Unruh in [ unruh1984 ] , make this position
untenable (at least literally). Let us recapitulate the main ideas of
this article here. In order to have the Einstein equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

as a classical limit of the matter sector, one possibility would be to
interpret the right-hand side as a quantum average @xmath of some
quantum operator representing the energy-momentum tensor of matter
fields. The problems with such a theory pointed out in [ unruh1984 ] are
two-fold. First, quantum measurements would introduce discontinuities in
the expectation value of @xmath , and in turn spoil its conservation.
Second, and as illustrated with a gravitational version of Schr dinger’s
cat gedanken experiment, such a coupling of gravity to a statistical
average of matter states would introduce slow variations of the
gravitational field caused by yet unobserved and undetermined matter
states. Another idea explored by Unruh to make sense of ( 1.1 ) in such
a way that the left-hand side is classical, and the right-hand side
quantum, is through an eigenvalue equation of the type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The main issue here is that the definition of the operator @xmath would
have to depend non-linearly on the classical metric, and hence on the
’eigenvalue’ @xmath . From the point of view of quantum theory, this of
course does not make any sense.

Now that some conceptual motivations for the search for a quantum
description of the gravitational field have been recalled (and which are
also the author’s personal main motivations to work in this field), one
should make a bit more precise what one means by ’a quantum theory of
gravitation’ or ’quantum gravity’. We will adopt the kind of ambitious
though minimalistic position promoted in Loop Quantum Gravity (LQG) [
ashtekar_book , rovelli_book , thiemann_book ] . Minimalistic because
the question of the unification of all forces at high energies is
recognized as not necessarily connected to quantum gravity, and
therefore left unaddressed. But ambitious in the sense that one is not
looking for a theory of quantum perturbations of the gravitational
degrees of freedom around some background solution of GR, since this
would be of little help as far as the conceptual issues aforementioned
are concerned. Indeed, and as is for instance very well explained in [
perez_review2004 , perez_review2012 ] , from the point of view of GR,
there is no canonical way of splitting the metric of space-time into a
background (for instance a Minkowski metric, but not necessarily so)
plus fluctuations. Therefore giving a proper quantum description of the
latter fluctuations, that is finding a renormalizable theory of
gravitons on a given background, cannot fulfill the ultimate goal of
reconciling GR with QM. On top of that, one would need to show that the
specification of the background is a kind of gauge choice, which does
not affect physical predictions. Therefore, one would like to insist on
the fact that even if such a theory was renormalizable, the challenge of
making Einstein’s gravity fully quantum and dynamical would remain
almost untouched. This already suggests that introducing the background
in the first place is unnecessary. Since it turns out that the quantum
theory of perturbative quantum GR around a Minkowski background is not
renormalizable [ goroff_sagnotti ] , we can even go one step further:
the presence of a background might not only be unnecessary but also
problematic. The present thesis is in such a line of thought, which aims
at taking the background independence of GR seriously, and use it as a
guiding thread towards its quantum version [ smolin_background ] . In
this perspective, we would call ’quantum theory of gravity’ a quantum
theory without any space-time background, which would reduce to GR in
some (classical) limit.

A second set of ideas which are often invoked to justify the need for a
theory of quantum gravity concerns the presence of singularities in GR,
and is therefore a bit more linked to phenomenology, be it through
cosmology close to the Big Bang or the question of the fate of black
holes at the end of Hawking’s evaporation. It is indeed tempting to draw
a parallel between the question of classical singularities in GR and
some of the greatest successes of the quantum formalism, such as for
example the explanation of the stability of atoms or the resolution of
the UV divergence in the theory of black-body radiation. We do not want
to elaborate on these questions, but only point out that even if very
suggestive and fascinating proposals exist [ bojowald2001 , ashtekar2006
, bojowald2012 ] , there is as far as we know no definitive argument
claiming that the cumbersome genericity of singularities in GR has to be
resolved in quantum gravity. This is for us a secondary motivation to
venture into such a quest, though a very important one. While a quantum
theory of gravity must by definition make QM and GR compatible, it only
might explain the nature of singularities in GR. Still, it would be of
paramount relevance if this second point were indeed realized, since it
would open the door to a handful of new phenomena and possible
experimental signatures to look for.

Another set of ideas we consider important but we do not plan to address
further in this thesis are related to the non-renormalizability of
perturbative quantum gravity. As a quantum field theory on Minkowski
space-time, the quantum theory of gravitons based on GR can only be
considered as an effective field theory [ burgess2003 , donoghue2012 ] ,
which breaks down at the Planck scale. Such a picture is therefore
necessarily incomplete as a fundamental theory, as it was to be
expected, but does not provide any clear clue about how it should be
completed. At this point, two attitudes can be adopted. Either assume
that one should first look for a renormalizable perturbative theory of
quantum gravity, from which the background independent aspects will be
addressed in a second stage; or, focus straight away on the background
independent features which are so central to the very question of
quantum gravity. Since we do not want to assume any a priori connection
between the UV completion of perturbative quantum general relativity and
full-fledged quantum gravity, as is for instance investigated in the
asymptotic safety program [ reuter2012 , dario2013 ] , the results of
this thesis will be presented in a mindset in line with the second
attitude. Of course, any successful fundamental quantum theory of
gravity will have to provide a deeper understanding of the two-loops
divergences of quantum GR, and certainly any program which would fail to
do so could not be considered complete [ nicolai2005 ] .

The purpose of the last two points was to justify to some extent the
technical character of this PhD thesis, and its apparent disconnection
with many of the modern fundamental theories which are experimentally
verified. While it is perfectly legitimate to look for a reconciliation
of QM and GR into the details of what we know about matter, space and
time, we want to advocate here a hopefully complementary strategy, which
aims at finding a general theoretical framework encompassing them both
at a general and conceptual level. At this stage, we would for example
be highly satisfied with a consistent definition of quantum geometry
whose degrees of freedom and dynamics would reduce to that of vacuum GR
in some limit; even if such a theory did not resolve classical
singularities, nor it would provide us with a renormalizable theory of
gravitons.

### 1.2 Quantum gravity and quantization

Now that we reinstated the necessity of finding a consistent quantum
formulation of gravitational physics, we would like to make some
comments about the different general strategies which are at our
disposal to achieve such a goal. In particular, would a quantization of
general relativity (or a modification thereof) provide the answer?

The most conservative strategy is the quantization program of classical
GR pioneered by Bryce DeWitt [ dewitt2011pursuit ] , either through
Dirac’s general canonical quantization procedure [ dirac_qm , dewitt_can
] or with covariant methods [ dewitt_cov ] . Modern incarnations of
these early ideas can be found in canonical loop quantum gravity and its
tentative covariant formulation through spin foam models [ rovelli_book
, thiemann_book , perez_review2012 ] . While the Ashtekar formulation of
GR [ ashtekar1986 , barbero1994 ] allowed dramatic progress with respect
to DeWitt’s formal definitions, based on the usual metric formulation of
Einstein’s theory, very challenging questions remain open as regards the
dynamical aspects of the theory. In particular, many ambiguities appear
in the definition of the so-called scalar constraint of canonical LQG,
and therefore in the implementation of four-dimensional diffeomorphism
invariance, which is arguably the core purpose of quantum gravity. There
are therefore two key aspects of the canonical quantization program that
we would like to keep in mind: first, the formulation of classical GR
being used as a starting point (in metric or Ashtekar variables), or
equivalently the choice of fundamental degrees of freedom (the metric
tensor or a tetrad field), has a great influence on the quantization;
and second, the subtleties associated to space-time diffeomorphism
invariance have so far plagued such attempts with numerous ambiguities,
which prevent the quantization procedure from being completed. The first
point speaks in favor of loop variables in quantum gravity, while the
second might indicate an intrinsic limitation of the canonical approach.

A second, less conservative but more risky, type of quantization program
consists in discarding GR as a classical starting point, and instead
postulating radically new degrees of freedom. This is for example the
case in string theory, where a classical theory of strings moving in
some background space-time is the starting point of the quantization
procedure. Such an approach is to some extent supported by the
non-renormalizability of perturbative quantum GR, interpreted as a
signal of the presence of new degrees of freedom at the Planck scale.
Similar interpretations in similar situations already proved successful
in the past, for instance with the four-fermion theory of Fermi, whose
non-renormalizability was cured by the introduction of new gauge bosons,
and gave rise to the renormalizable Weinberg-Salam theory. In the case
of gravity, and because of the unease with the perturbative strategy
mentioned before, we do not wish to give too much credit to such
arguments. However, it is necessary to keep in mind that the degrees of
freedom we have access to in the low-energy classical theory (GR) are
not necessarily the ones to be quantized.

Finally, a third idea which is gaining increasing support in the recent
years is to question the very idea of quantizing gravity, at least
stricto sensu . Rather, one should more generally look for a quantum
theory, with possibly non-metric degrees of freedom, from which
classical geometry and its dynamics would emerge . Such a scenario has
been hinted at from within GR itself, through the thermal properties of
black holes and space-time in general. For instance in [ jacobson1995 ]
, Jacobson suggested to interpret the Einstein equations as equations of
states at thermal equilibrium. In this picture, space-time dynamics
would only emerge in the thermodynamic limit of a more fundamental
theory, with degrees of freedom yet to be discovered. This is even more
radical that what is proposed in string theory, but also consistent with
background independence in principle: there is no need to assume the
existence of a (continuous) background space-time in this picture, and
contrarily so, the finiteness of black hole entropy can be interpreted
as suggestive of the existence of an underlying discrete structure. Such
ideas have close links with condensed matter theory, which explains for
example macroscopic properties of solids from the statistical properties
of their quantum microscopic building blocks, and in particular with the
theory of quantum fluids and Bose-Einstein condensates [ lorenzo2009 ,
barcelo2005 ] . Of course, the two outstanding issues are that no
experiments to directly probe the Planck scale are available in the near
future, and emergence has to be implemented in a fully background
independent manner.

After this detour, one can come back to the main motivations of this
thesis, loop quantum gravity and spin foams, and remark that even there,
the notion of emergence seems to have a role to play. Indeed, the key
prediction of canonical loop quantum gravity is undoubtedly the
discreteness of areas and volumes at the kinematical level [
rovelli_smolin1994 ] , and this already entails some kind of emergence
of continuum space-time. In this picture, continuous space-time cannot
be defined all the way down to the Planck scale, where the discrete
nature of the spectra of geometric operators starts to be relevant. This
presents a remarkable qualitative agreement with Jacobson’s proposal,
and in particular all the thermal aspects of black holes explored in LQG
derive from this fundamental result [ pranzetti_sigma ] . But there are
other discrete features in LQG and spin foams, possibly related to
emergence, which need to be addressed. Even if canonical LQG is a
continuum theory, the Hilbert space it is based upon is constructed in
an inductive way, from states (the spin-network functionals) labeled by
discrete quantities (graphs with spin labels). We can say that each such
state describes a continuous quantum geometry with a finite number of
degrees of freedom, and that the infinite number of possible excitations
associated to genuine continuous geometries is to be found in large
superpositions of these elementary states, in states associated to
infinitely large graphs, or both. In practice, only spin-network states
on very small graphs can be investigated analytically, the limit of
infinitely large graphs being out of reach, and their superpositions
even more so. This indicates that in its current state, LQG can also be
considered a theory of discrete geometries, despite the fact that it is
primarily a quantization of GR. From this point of view, continuous
classical space-time would only be recovered through a continuum limit.
This is even more supported by the covariant spin foam perspective,
where the discrete aspects of spin networks are enhanced rather than
tamed. The discrete structure spin foam models are based upon, @xmath
-complexes, acquire a double interpretation, as Feynman graphs labeling
the transitions between spin network states on the one hand, and as
discretizations of space-time akin to lattice gauge theory on the other
hand. Contrary to the canonical picture, this second interpretation
cannot be avoided, at least in practice, since all the current spin foam
models for four-dimensional gravity are constructed in a way to enforce
a notion of (quantum) discrete geometry in a cellular complex dual to
the foam. Therefore, in our opinion, at this stage of the development of
the theory, it seems legitimate to view LQG and spin foam models as
quantum theories of discrete gravity. And if so, addressing the question
of their continuum limit is of primary importance.

Moreover, we tend to see a connection between: a) the ambiguities
appearing in the definition of the dynamics of canonical LQG, b) the
fact that the relevance of a quantization of GR can be questioned in a
strong way, and c) the problem of the continuum in the covariant version
of loop quantum gravity. Altogether, these three points can be taken as
a motivation for a strategy where quantization and emergence both have
to play their role. It is indeed possible, and probably desirable, that
some of the fine details of the dynamics of spin networks are irrelevant
to the large scale effects one would like to predict and study. In the
best case scenario, the different versions of the scalar constraint of
LQG would fall in a same universality class as far as the recovery of
continuous space-time and its dynamics is concerned. This would
translate, in the covariant picture, as a set of spin foam models with
small variations in the way discrete geometry is encoded, but having a
same continuum limit. The crucial question to address in this
perspective is that of the existence, and in a second stage the
universality of such a limit, in the sense of determining exactly which
aspects (if any) of the dynamics of spin networks are key to the
emergence of space-time as we know it. The fact that these same spin
networks were initially thought of as quantum states of continuous
geometries should not prevent us from exploring other avenues, in which
the continuum only emerge in the presence of a very large number of
discrete building blocks.

This PhD thesis has been prepared with the scenario just hinted at in
mind, but we should warn the reader that it is in no way conclusive in
this respect. Moreover, we think and we hope that the technical results
and tools which are accounted for in this manuscript are general enough
to be useful to researchers in the field who do not share such point of
views. The reason is that, in order to study universality in quantum
gravity, and ultimately find the right balance between strict
quantization procedures and emergence, one first needs to develop a
theory of renormalization in this background independent setting, which
precisely allows to consistently erase information and degrees of
freedom. This thesis is a contribution to this last point, in the Group
Field Theory (GFT) formulation of spin foam models.

### 1.3 On scales and renormalization with or without background

The very idea of extending the theory of renormalization to quantum
gravity may look odd at first sight. The absence of any background seems
indeed to preclude the existence of any physical scale with respect to
which the renormalization group flow should be defined. A few remarks
are therefore in order, about the different notions of scales which are
available in quantum field theories and general relativity, and the
general assumption we will make throughout this thesis in order to
extend such notions to background independent theories.

Let us start with relativistic quantum field theories, which support the
standard model of particle physics, as well as perturbative quantum
gravity around a Minkowski background. The key ingredient entering the
definition of these theories is the flat background metric, which
provides a notion of locality and global Poincar invariance. The latter
allows in particular to classify all possible interactions once a field
content (with its own set of internal symmetries) has been agreed on [
weinberg1 ] . More interesting, this same Poincar invariance, combined
with locality and the idea of renormalization [ wilson_nobel ,
vincent_book , salmhofer ] , imposes further restrictions on the number
of independent couplings one should work with. When the theory is
(perturbatively) non-renormalizable, it is consistent only if an
infinite set of interactions is taken into account, and therefore loses
any predictive power (at least at some scale). When it is on the
contrary renormalizable, one can work with a finite set of interactions,
though arbitrarily large in the case of a super-renormalizable theory.
For fundamental interactions, the most interesting case is that of a
just-renormalizable theory, such as QED or QCD, for which a finite set
of interactions is uniquely specified by the renormalizability
criterion. In all of these theories, what is meant by ’scale’ is of
course an energy scale, in the sense of special relativity. However,
renormalization and quantum field theory are general enough to
accommodate various notions of scales, as for example non-relativistic
energy, and apply to a large variety of phenomena for which Poincar
invariance is completely irrelevant. A wealth of examples of this kind
can be found in condensed matter physics, and in the study of phase
transitions. The common feature of all these models is that they
describe regimes in which a huge number of (classical or quantum)
degrees of freedom are present, and where their contributions can be
efficiently organized according to some order parameter, the ’scale’. As
we know well from thermodynamics and statistical mechanics, it is in
this case desirable to simplify the problem by assuming instead an
infinite set of degrees of freedom, and adopt a coarse-grained
description in which degrees of freedom are collectively analyzed.
Quantum field theory and renormalization are precisely a general set of
techniques allowing to efficiently organize such analyzes. Therefore,
what makes renormalizable quantum field theories so useful in
fundamental physics is not Poincar invariance in itself, but the fact
that it implies the existence of an infinite reservoir of degrees of
freedom in the deep UV.

We now turn to general relativity. The absence of Poincar symmetry, or
any analogous notion of space-time global symmetries prevents the
existence of a general notion of energy. Except for special solutions of
Einstein’s equations, there is no way to assign an unambiguous notion of
localized energy to the modes of the gravitational field ¹ ¹ 1 We can
for instance quote Straumann [ straumann ] : This has been disturbing to
many people, but one simply has to get used to this fact. There is no
"energy-momentum tensor for the gravitational field". . The two
situations in which special relativistic notions of energy-momentum do
generalize are in the presence of a global Killing symmetry, or for
asymptotically flat space-times. In the first case, it is possible to
translate the fact that the energy-momentum tensor @xmath is divergence
free into both local and integral conservation equations for an
energy-momentum vector @xmath , where @xmath is the Killing field. In
the second case, only a partial generalization is available, in the form
of integral conservation equations for energy and momentum at spatial
infinity. One therefore already loses the possibility of localizing
energy and momentum in this second situation, since they are only
defined for extended regions with boundaries in the approximately flat
asymptotic region. In any case, both generalizations rely on global
properties of specific solutions to Einstein’s equations which cannot be
available in a background independent formulation of quantum gravity. We
therefore have to conclude that, since energy scales associated to the
gravitational field are at best solution-dependent, and in general not
even defined in GR, a renormalization group analysis of background
independent quantum gravity cannot be based on space-time related
notions of scales.

This last point was to be expected on quite general grounds. From the
point of view of quantization la Feynman for example, all the solutions
to Einstein’s equations (and in principle even more general ’off-shell’
geometries) are on the same footing, as they need to be summed over in a
path-integral (modulo boundary conditions). We cannot expect to be able
to organize such a path-integral according to scales defined internally
to each of these geometries. But even if one takes the emergent point of
view seriously, GR suggests that the order parameter with respect to
which a renormalization group analysis should be launched cannot depend
on a space-time notion of energy. This point of view should be taken
more and more seriously as we move towards an increasingly background
independent notion of emergence, in the sense of looking for a unique
mechanism which would be responsible for the emergence of a large class
of solutions of GR, if not all of them. In particular, as soon as such a
class is not restricted to space-times with global Killing symmetries or
with asymptotically flat spatial infinities, there seems to be no room
for the usual notion of energy in a renormalization analysis of quantum
gravity.

However, it should already be understood at this stage that the absence
of any background space-time in quantum gravity, and therefore of any
natural physical scales, does not prevent us from using the quantum
field theory and renormalization formalisms. As was already mentioned,
the notion of scale prevailing in renormalization theory is more the
number of degrees of freedom available in a region of the parameter
space, rather than a proper notion of energy. Likewise, if quantum
fields do need a fixed background structure to live in, this needs not
be interpreted as space-time. As we will see, this is precisely how GFTs
are constructed, as quantum field theories defined on (internal)
symmetry groups rather than space-time manifolds. More generally, the
working assumption of this thesis will be that a notion of scale and
renormalization group flow can be defined before ² ² 2 Obviously, this
’before’ does not refer to time, but rather to the abstract notion of
scale which is assumed to take over when no space-time structure is
available anymore. space-time notions become available, and studied with
quantum field theory techniques, as for example advocated in [
vincent_tt1 , vincent_tt2 ] . The only background notions one is allowed
to use in such a program must also be present in the background of GR.
The dimension of space-time, the local Lorentz symmetry, and the
diffeomorphism groups are among them, but they do not support any
obvious notion of scale. Rather, we will postulate that the ’number of
degrees of freedom’ continues to be a relevant order parameter in the
models we will consider, that is in the absence of space-time. This
rather abstract scale will come with canonical definitions of UV and IR
sectors. They should by no means be understood as their space-time
related counter-parts, and be naively related to respectively small and
large distance regimes. Instead, the UV sector will simply be the corner
of parameter space responsible for divergences, or equivalently where
’most’ of the degrees of freedom sit. A natural renormalization group
flow will be defined, which will allow to average out the contributions
of the degrees of freedom, from higher to lower scales. The only strong
conceptual assumption we will make in this respect is that such an
abstract definition of renormalization is physical and can be used to
describe the emergence of space-time structures. However, at this
general level of discussion, we would like to convey the idea that such
a strong assumption is in a sense also minimal. Indeed, if one wants to
be able to speak of emergence of space and time, one also needs at least
one new parameter which is neither time nor space. We simply call this
order parameter ’scale’, and identify it with one of the central
features of quantum field theory: the renormalization group. It is in
our view the most direct route towards new physics in the absence of
space and time, as quantum gravity seems to require.

### 1.4 Purpose and plan of the thesis

We are well aware of the fact that the previous motivations cannot be
taken for granted. They can be contested in various ways, and also lack
a great deal of precision. The reader should see them as a guiding
thread towards making full sense of the emergence of space-time from
background independent physics, rather than definitive statements
embraced by the author. From now on, we will refrain from venturing into
more conceptual discussions, and mostly leave the specific examples
worked out in this thesis speak for themselves, hoping that they will do
so in favor of the general ideas outlined before.

The rest of the thesis is organized as follows. In chapter 2 , we will
start by recalling the two main ways of understanding the construction
of GFT models. One takes its root in the quantization program for
quantum gravity, in the form of loop quantum gravity and spin foam
models. In this line of thoughts, GFTs are generating functionals for
spin foam amplitudes, in the same way as quantum field theories are
generating functionals for Feynman amplitudes. In this sense, they
complete the definition of spin foam models by assigning canonical
weights to the different foams contributing to a same transition between
boundary states (spin networks). Moreover, a quantum field theory
formalism is expected to provide easier access to non-perturbative
regimes, and hence to the continuum. For example, classical equations of
motion can be used as a way to change vacuum [ edr ] , or to study
condensed phases of the theory [ gfc ] . Of course, this specific
completion of the definition of spin foam models relies on a certain
confidence in the quantum field theory formalism. Alternative but
hopefully complementary approaches exist, such as coarse-graining
methods imported from condensed matter physics and quantum information
theory [ bianca_cyl , bianca_review , bahr2012 ] . Though, if one
decides to stick to quantum field theory weights, it seems natural to
also bring renormalization in. From this point of view, perturbative
renormalizability of GFTs is a self-consistency check, and is rather
independent from the continuum limit and the emergence question. A
second set of motivations is given by discrete approaches to quantum
gravity. We will first focus on the successful example of matrix models,
which allowed to define random two-dimensional surfaces, and henceforth
achieve a quantization of two-dimensional quantum gravity. We will then
outline natural extensions of matrix models, known as tensor models,
which will be crucial to the rest of the thesis, particularly in their
modern versions. In this perspective, GFTs appear as enriched tensor
models, which allow to define finer notions of discrete quantum
geometries, and the question of emergence of the continuum is put to the
forefront, merely by construction. We will then comment on the relations
between these two historical paths, and advocate for a middle path, in
which the hard questions to be faced are renormalization and
universality of the continuum limit.

In Chapter 3 , we will move to the more recent aspects of GFTs and
tensor models, following the introduction of colored models by Gurau in
2009. This will be the occasion to summarize the main results and tools
which have been developing fast since then. This will especially include
combinatorial and topological properties of colored graphs, which shape
all the models we will discuss in the later chapters, and will be at the
core of all the original results of this thesis. The important notion of
tensor invariance will also be introduced and motivated in this chapter.

Finally, all the concepts introduced in the first chapters will be used
in Chapters 4 and 5 to present the original results of this PhD thesis.
They come in two types, and as we will try to illustrate, are quite
complementary. The first set of results concerns the so-called @xmath
expansion of topological GFT models. It applies to GFTs with cut-off
(given by the parameter @xmath ), in which a particular scaling of the
coupling constant allows to reach an asymptotic many-particle regime at
large @xmath . We will in particular focus on asymptotic bounds on the
amplitudes which allow to classify their contributions according to the
topology of the underlying cell-complex. This will be argued to be a
rough preliminary version of the second set of results, which concerns
full-fledge renormalization. Tensorial Group Field Theories (TGFTs),
which are refined versions of the cut-off models with new non-trivial
propagators, will be introduced. They have a built-in notion of scale,
which generates a well-defined renormalization group flow, and will give
rise to somewhat dynamical versions of the @xmath expansions. We will
give several examples, culminating in a detailed study of a
just-renormalizable TGFT based on the group @xmath in three dimensions,
and incorporating the ’closure constraint’ of spin foam models. As will
be argued at this point, this TGFT can be considered a field theory
realization of the original Boulatov model for three-dimensional quantum
gravity [ boulatov ] .

The results accounted for in Chapters 4 to 7 are mainly based on four
publications, the first two in collaboration with Daniele Oriti [ vertex
, edge ] , and the two others with Daniele Oriti and Vincent Rivasseau [
u1 , su2 ] . At the end of Chapter 7 , we also include unpublished work
[ beta_su2 ] about the flow equations of the TGFT introduced in [ su2 ]
. Finally, a fifth paper [ boulatov_phase ] , in collaboration with
Aristide Baratin, Daniele Oriti, James Ryan and Matteo Smerlak, will be
briefly evoked in the conclusions.

## Chapter 2 Two paths to Group Field Theories

Men’s memories are uncertain and the past that was differs little from
the past that was not.
Cormac McCarthy , Blood Meridian .

In this chapter, we recall two historical and conceptual paths leading
to the GFT formalism. The first follows the traditional quantization
route, from canonical LQG, to spin foam models, and finally to GFTs,
seen as generating functionals for the latter. The second approach
relies from the start on the idea of discretization, and takes its root
in the successes of matrix models. We will then argue in favor of taking
these two strategies equally seriously to investigate the properties of
GFTs, and the physical picture emerging from them.

### 2.1 Group Field Theories and quantum General Relativity

#### 2.1.1 Loop Quantum Gravity

Loop Quantum Gravity is a tentative approach to the canonical
quantization of general relativity. It is conceptually very much in line
with the old Wheeler-DeWitt (WdW) theory, at the notable exception that
many previously formal expressions could be turned into rigorous
equations thanks to LQG techniques. This breakthrough triggered many
developments, from cosmology to black hole physics, all relying on the
well-understood kinematical properties of LQG. Unfortunately, to this
date the canonical quantization program could not be completed, a proper
definition of the dynamics being still challenging, despite some recent
progress [ Laddha:2011mk , casey_weak ] .

As in the WdW theory, one starts from a canonical formulation of general
relativity, which requires hyperbolicity of the space-time manifold
@xmath . This allows to introduce a global foliation, in terms of a time
function @xmath indexing three-dimensional spacelike hypersurfaces
@xmath . One then recasts Einstein’s equation in the form of a
Hamiltonian system, dictating the evolution of spatial degrees of
freedoms in this parameter @xmath . In the WdW theory, the Hamiltonian
formulation is the ADM one [ adm ] , for which the configuration space
is the set of all spatial metrics @xmath ( @xmath ) on @xmath . This is
where LQG departs from the WdW theory, with the Ashtekar-Barbero
formulation of classical GR [ ashtekar1986 , barbero1994 ] as a starting
point, hence shifting the emphasis to forms and connection variables.

Let us first introduce the four-dimensional formalism. Instead of using
the space-time metric @xmath ( @xmath ) as configuration variable, one
instead introduces a tetrad field

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a quadruple of @xmath -forms on @xmath , indexed by a Minkowski
index @xmath . The metric is only a derived quantity, which simply
writes as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Minkowski metric (with signature @xmath ). This
redundant rewriting of the metric introduces a new local symmetry,
corresponding to the action of @xmath on the Minkowski index labeling
the tetrad:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Einstein’s equations can then be recovered from a first order
variational principle, depending on an additional spin connection @xmath
, which is a @xmath -form with values in the Lie algebra @xmath . The
particular action lying at the foundations of current LQG and spin foams
is the Holst action (for vacuum gravity without cosmological constant):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant containing Newton’s @xmath , @xmath is the
Barbero-Immirzi parameter, and @xmath is the curvature of the spin
connection. Varying @xmath with respect to @xmath and @xmath
independently provides two sets of equations: the first forces @xmath to
be the unique torsion-free connection compatible with @xmath , and the
second gives Einstein’s equations. The term proportional to the
Barbero-Immirzi parameter is topological, and therefore plays no role as
far as classical equations are concerned. It is however a key ingredient
of the loop quantization, and as we will see is a cornerstone of the
current interpretation of quantum geometry in LQG.

Assuming hyperbolicity of @xmath , it is possible to perform a canonical
analysis of ( 2.4 ) leading to the Ashtekar-Barbero formulation of GR.
Details can for example be found in [ perez_review2012 , Geiller:2012dd
] , and at the end of the day a @xmath splitting is obtained for both
the tetrad and the spin connection in terms of canonical pairs @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where now @xmath and @xmath refer to coordinates on the spatial
hypersurface @xmath . @xmath is an @xmath connection encoding parallel
transport on @xmath , and the densitized triad @xmath can be used to
define geometric quantities such as areas and volumes embedded in @xmath
. The most interesting aspect of such a formulation is that the dynamics
of GR is encoded in three sets of constraints, bearing some similarities
with Yang-Mills theory on a background space-time:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

These constraints are first class, which means that the Poisson bracket
of two constraints is itself a linear combination of constraints, and
therefore weakly vanishes. In addition to defining a submanifold of
admissible states in phase space, they therefore also generate gauge
transformations, which encode all the symmetries of the triad
formulation of GR. More precisely, the Gauss constraint @xmath generates
@xmath local transformations induced by the @xmath symmetry ( 2.3 ),
while the vector constraint generates spatial diffeomorphism on @xmath .
The third and so-called scalar constraint @xmath is responsible for time
reparametrization invariance, therefore extending the gauge symmetries
to space-time diffeomorphisms.

In its canonical formulation, GR is a fully constrained system, which
can be quantized following Dirac’s program [ dirac_qm ,
henneaux_teitelboim ] . The first step consists in finding a
representation of the basic phase space variables as operators acting on
a kinematical Hilbert space @xmath , and such that Poisson brackets are
turned into commutation relations in the standard way. Then, one has to
promote the constraints themselves to operators on @xmath . Third, one
should perform the equivalent of finding the constraint surface in the
classical theory, which means finding the states annihilated by the
constraint operators. This step is crucial in the sense that it is only
at this stage that the Hilbert space of physical sates @xmath is
defined. Finally, one has to look for a complete set of physical
observables, that is a maximal set of operators commuting with the
constraints. The main achievements of LQG regarding this quantization
program concerns the first three steps. Contrary to the WdW theory, a
kinematical Hilbert space could explicitly be constructed. Moreover, a
representation of the constraint algebra on this Hilbert space could be
specified, without any anomaly, therefore completing the second step.
Ambiguities remain, but they mainly concern the scalar constraint. The
Gauss and vector constraints, which form a closed subalgebra, could
moreover be solved explicitly. The resulting Hilbert space of gauge and
diffeomorphism invariant states has also been proved unique under
certain additional assumptions [ lost ] . This provides a solid arena to
study the dynamics of LQG further, as encoded by the scalar constraint.
However, its quantum definition remains ambiguous, and a complete set of
solutions out of reach, hence precluding the completion of the canonical
program. It should also be noted that, even if a satisfactory space of
solutions to the scalar constraint were to be found, completing Dirac’s
program would remain incredibly difficult: even at the classical level,
finding a complete (and manageable) set of Dirac observables for GR
remains an outstanding task, and possibly forever so.

The structures of the kinematical Hilbert space of LQG, and of the
solutions to the Gauss and vector constraints, are one of the main
inputs for the covariant approach, and therefore deserve to be described
in some details here. A distinctive feature of the loop approach is the
choice of basic variables to be quantized, which are holonomies of the
connection rather than the connection itself. To any path @xmath in
@xmath is associated the unique holonomy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath stands for path ordering. This @xmath element encodes
parallel transport of the triad along @xmath , and collectively the set
of all the holonomy functionals fully capture the information contained
in the connection. There is an important subtlety however, lying in the
fact that smooth connections are replaced by a generalized space of
connections before the quantization. It can be given an inductive
definition in terms of holonomy functionals associated to closed
embedded graphs [ Ashtekar:1994wa ] , which play a central role in the
definition of the kinematical Hilbert space. As far as we know,
alternative constructions might be proposed at this level, relying on
slightly different generalizations of smooth connections. This concerns
for example regularity properties of the graphs (usually assumed to be
piecewise analytic), as was already explored in [ Zapata:2004xq ] . But
more importantly so, it seems to us that the relevance of the
combinatorial properties of the graphs supporting LQG states might have
been underestimated. As we will see in the GFT context, combinatorial
restrictions can dramatically improve analytic control over the theory,
without affecting its conceptual aspects in any clear way. It seems to
us that this freedom, so far overlooked in the canonical approach, would
deserve to be investigated and taken advantage of. In any case, the
standard kinematical Hilbert space of LQG is spanned by so-called
cylindrical functionals @xmath , labeled by a closed oriented graph
@xmath with @xmath links, and a function @xmath . @xmath only depends on
the holonomies @xmath along the links of @xmath , through the following
formula:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is moreover assumed to be square-integrable with respect to the
Haar measure on @xmath , which allows to define a scalar product between
cylindrical functionals associated to a same graph:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This scalar product naturally extends to arbitrary couples of
cylindrical functionals, via embeddings of two distinct graphs into a
common bigger one. The kinematical Hilbert space @xmath is the
completion with respect to this scalar product of the vector space
generated by the cylindrical functionals. It can be shown to be nothing
but the space @xmath of square-integrable functions on the space of
generalized connections @xmath , with respect to the
Ashtekar-Lewandowski measure @xmath [ Ashtekar:1994mh ] . The (matrix
elements of the) holonomies are turned into operators, acting by
multiplication on the kinematical states. As for the momenta @xmath ,
there are also smeared out before quantization. For any two-dimensional
surface @xmath in @xmath , and any @xmath -valued function @xmath , one
defines the flux :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action of an elementary flux on a kinematical state can be found by
formally turning the densitized triad into a derivative operator with
respect to the connection. This construction provides an anomaly-free
representation of the classical holonomy-flux algebra , that is the
Poisson algebra formed by the smeared variables just introduced, which
is moreover unique under certain assumptions regarding the
diffeomorphism symmetry [ lost ] . Solving the Gauss constraint is
relatively straightforward once this representation has been
constructed, since its (quantum) action on cylindrical functionals can
be simply inferred from its (classical) action on holonomies. A finite
(generalized) gauge transformation is labeled by one @xmath element
@xmath at each point @xmath , acting on holonomies and cylindrical
functionals as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thanks to group-averaging techniques, any cylindrical functional can be
projected down to a gauge invariant one. Combined with the Peter-Weyl
theorem, this allows to construct an explicit orthonormal basis for the
gauge invariant Hilbert space. It is the subspace of @xmath spanned by
the spin network functionals , which are special cylindrical functionals
@xmath . The half-integers @xmath label representations of @xmath
associated to the links @xmath of @xmath , while @xmath is an @xmath
intertwiner attached to the node @xmath , compatible with the different
representations meeting at @xmath . @xmath is the contraction of
representations matrices @xmath with the intertwiners, according to the
pattern of the decorated graph @xmath , which can schematically be
denoted:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving the vector constraint is more intricate, because its solutions
have to be found in the topological dual of an appropriate dense
subspace of @xmath . This aspect of the canonical theory is largely
unrelated to the present thesis, therefore it is sufficient to recall
the main conceptual idea, and skip all the technical details. When acted
upon a spin network, a diffeomorphism simply moves and deforms the graph
on which it is supported. One therefore needs to repackage spin network
functionals into equivalent classes of decorated graphs which can be
deformed into one another. All the information about the embeddings of
the graphs is washed out, except for their knot structures, which
provide additional quantum numbers characterizing the diffeomorphism
invariant classes. As we will see, a different route has been developed
in the covariant theory as regards the diffeomorphism symmetry. The
embedding information is altogether dispensed with, and the spin
networks states are instead labeled by abstract graphs. The topological
structure is then recovered from the graph itself, and likewise smooth
diffeomorphisms (be them spatial or four-dimensional) are only expected
to be (approximately) recovered in a yet to be defined continuum limit.

The essential outcome of this partial completion of Dirac’s quantization
program is the notion of quantum geometry , which provides a physical
interpretation for spin network states. From the quantum fluxes, it is
possible to construct geometric operators quantizing the area of a
@xmath -dimensional surface, or the volume of a @xmath -dimensional
region. Because the spin network functionals are eigenstates of such
operators, it was possible to determine their spectra, which turned out
to be discrete. More precisely, it was shown that the quanta of area are
carried by the links of a spin network: each link with spin @xmath ,
puncturing a surface @xmath , contributes with a term @xmath to the
(oriented) area of @xmath , where @xmath is the Planck length.
Similarly, the nodes of a spin network carry infinitesimal volumes, in a
rather complicated but still discrete fashion. These results are at the
chore of the applications of LQG techniques to cosmology and black hole
physics, and also enter crucially into the semi-heuristic constructions
on which spin foam models are based. The fact that the Immirzi parameter
@xmath parametrizes these spectra is the reason why we claimed earlier
it crucially enters the geometric interpretation of spin networks
states.

#### 2.1.2 Spin Foams

Spin Foam Models (SFMs) are a covariant approach to the quantization of
GR, initially introduced to circumvent the difficulties with the scalar
constraint encountered in canonical LQG. Like any known quantum theory,
LQG is expected to have a second equivalent representation, in the form
of a path-integral la Feynman. SFMs provide tentative formulations of
this covariant theory, with the idea that LQG techniques can again make
old formal theories well-defined, and that the dynamics of quantum GR
might be more amenable in a four-dimensional setting. In the
gravitational context, Feynman’s formulation of quantum mechanics
suggests to define transition amplitudes between three-dimensional
boundary states of the gravitational field by integrating over histories
(i.e. space time geometries interpolating between such boundary states),
with a weight given by an action for GR. Schematically, call @xmath and
@xmath two boundary @xmath -geometries, and denote by @xmath a space
time manifold having @xmath and @xmath as boundaries. Then one would
like to define the transition amplitude between @xmath and @xmath by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a suitable probability measure on the space of
interpolating @xmath -geometries, and @xmath is an action for GR. This
goal is mathematically very challenging, essentially because of the
dubious existence of probability measures on spaces of continuous
geometries. Indeed, if we were to use coordinates in order to define
such quantities, in addition to having to handle the usual difficulties
associated to measures on infinite dimensional spaces, one would also
have to face the even harder question of diffeomorphism invariance. Even
the left-hand side of ( 2.14 ) is problematic, as it assumes the
availability of a well controlled space of @xmath -geometries. Finally,
even at this very abstract level, what exactly should be summed over is
not really clear (metric degrees of freedom only or topologies as
well?).

In order to make ( 2.14 ) more concrete, one can follow the ideas behind
LQG, but this time in a four-dimensional framework. This can be done in
several ways, which all seem to point in a same direction. They can be
classified according to the amount of inspiration and results which can
be directly traced back to the canonical theory. The first, historical
route, has been to reproduce Feynman’s heuristic construction from
canonical LQG. While this allows to deduce the general form of spin foam
amplitudes, no definite model can be inferred, since the dynamics of
canonical LQG is itself not well understood. Rather, one hopes in
reverse to be able to pin-point the right model on the covariant side
(right-hand side of equation ( 2.14 )), and deduce the definition of the
physical Hilbert space (scalar product on the left-hand side of equation
( 2.14 )). In this approach, one takes as many features of the canonical
theory as possible for granted, such as the boundary @xmath spin network
states, and relies on covariant quantization techniques for the dynamics
only. In the second approach, one starts the quantization from scratch
in the covariant setting, but like in canonical LQG one hopes that
shifting the emphasis from metric to tetrads and connection variables is
profitable. Finally, the third strategy consists in taking seriously the
type of degrees of freedom and discrete features of canonical LQG, but
being critical towards strict quantization procedures. The latter will
be discussed in details in the next section. Here, we only present and
comment on the advantages and shortcomings of the first two strategies.

The dynamics of canonical LQG is encoded into the vector and scalar
constraints, which together must ensure space-time diffeomorphism
invariance. The vector constraint can be imposed at the kinematical
level, and with the additional combinatorial abstraction previously
mentioned, provides an intermediate Hilbert space spanned by
(combinatorial) spin networks. The physical Hilbert space should be
deduced by projecting down to states annihilated by the quantum scalar
constraint @xmath . The trick lies in the fact that formally

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore the projector on physical states can be given the formal
definition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parameter @xmath is not a time variable, but an abstract parameter
of gauge transformations generated by @xmath . However, formally one can
reproduce Feynman’s original derivation of the path-integral, by cutting
the integral on @xmath into infinitesimal pieces and inserting
resolutions of the identity in terms of the spin network basis. This
heuristic argument [ Reisenberger:1996pu , rovelli_book ] leads to the
spin foam general ansatz replacing ( 2.14 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are two spin network states and @xmath is a spin
foam interpolating between them. In addition to @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath is labeled by a triplet @xmath , where @xmath is a @xmath
-complex with boundary @xmath , @xmath are @xmath representations
associated to its faces @xmath , and @xmath are intertwiners associated
to its edges @xmath . Compatibility between @xmath and its boundary
requires a face @xmath touching a boundary link @xmath to be labeled by
@xmath , and an edge @xmath touching a boundary vertex @xmath to be
associated to an intertwiner @xmath . The main advantages of ( 2.17 )
over ( 2.14 ) is that boundary states have well-defined
background-independent labels, and the sum-over-path is combinatorial in
nature. Apart from that, the conceptual setting is identical: boundary
states represent quantum spatial geometries, while the foams are one
dimensional higher analogues which can be given the interpretation of
quantum space-times. The main shortcoming is that no clear-cut
derivation of this ansatz from canonical LQG is available, and therefore
viewing SFMs as the covariant realization of the same thing might be
misleading, at least in a literal sense. In any case, this general
heuristic argument does not provide much clue as to how the amplitudes
@xmath should be defined, nor as to which exact combinatorial structures
should be summed over. We discard the question of the combinatorics for
the moment, since it will be addressed at length in the core chapters of
this thesis. At this stage we only point out that in most of the
literature on spin foams, the @xmath -complexes are assumed to be dual
to simplicial decompositions of some topological @xmath -manifold.
Taking seriously the fact that the scalar constraint of LQG (as defined
by Thiemann [ Thiemann:1996ay ] ) only acts at the nodes of LQG states,
one can further assume that the amplitudes @xmath can be factorized over
elementary contributions @xmath , only depending on the group-theoretic
labels related to the vertex @xmath . It is therefore on the definition
of the so-called vertex amplitude that most of the efforts have been
concentrated, and we refer to [ Bianchi:2012nk ] for details or
additional references. We would like to see this assumption as a
’locality principle’, akin to the fact that @xmath is best understood as
an integral over the @xmath -manifolds entering the formal definition (
2.14 ). In this respect, it is worth-mentioning one particular
derivation of spin foam dynamics, outlined in the review [
Bianchi:2012nk ] , which is tightly related to the canonical theory: LQG
provides the degrees of freedom and their quantum geometric
interpretation, the dynamics of the Engle-Peirera-Rovelli-Livine (EPRL)
[ eprl ] model is then argued for on the basis of Lorentz covariance and
some locality principle. This approach is conceptually similar to the
original parts of this thesis, and it seems to us could benefit from the
new ’locality principle’ we will introduce. For more insights into the
relation between canonical LQG and SFMs, we refer to [ Alexandrov:2011ab
] .

The other approach to SFMs, more independent from canonical LQG,
originates from the Ponzano-Regge model for quantum gravity, which is a
spin foam model for Euclidean quantum gravity in three dimensions. The
basic idea is that, because the classical theory is topological, it can
be discretized before quantization without loss of information. Applying
a path-integral quantization to the discretized classical theory, which
takes the form of an @xmath @xmath theory, provides a SFM with the same
structure as inferred from the heuristic reasoning based on LQG. This
model has then been generalized, in several ways, to four-dimensional
models with Euclidean or Lorentzian signatures (see for instance [
Baez:1997zt , bc , eprl , fk , Dupuis:2011fz , Dupuis:2011wy , bo_bc ,
bo_holst ] ). The classical starting point is not the Holst action
itself, but rather the Holst-Plebanski one, which recasts gravity as an
@xmath @xmath theory with additional constraints. The Holst-Plebanski
action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Lagrange multiplier symmetric under the exchange of
pairs @xmath and @xmath , and such that @xmath . @xmath is an @xmath
-valued @xmath -form, the bivector, and the @xmath term ensures that on
shell:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a triad. Solving for the equations of motion the
variation of @xmath provides therefore gives back the Holst action (in
one sector). The main interest of the Holst-Plebanski action principle
is that @xmath theory can be rigorously quantized by spin foam
techniques. This consists in two steps: 1) define a discretization of
the @xmath -field and the curvature on some adequate cell complex, which
thanks to the topological nature of @xmath , captures all its dynamical
features; 2) quantize the discrete theory through path-integral methods.
In three dimensions gravity and @xmath theory coincide, hence the
initial interest in such a strategy. In four dimensions, the idea is to
start from the exact quantization of @xmath , and use a discrete version
of the Plebanski constraints to reintroduce the tetrad degrees of
freedom at the quantum level . Note that in such approaches, one works
with the full @xmath (or @xmath ) group rather than @xmath , and
therefore slightly generalizes the formalism. This strategy of
quantizing first, and only then constraining the degrees of freedom, is
at the same time one of the main appeals and the most cumbersome issue
of the spin foam quantization. While this allowed to construct
interesting quantum gravity models, some of them well-connected to the
canonical theory, it is certainly problematic from the conceptual point
of view, and to a large extent explains the variety of models one can
construct: ill-defined recipes necessary introduce a handful of
ambiguities. We refer again to [ Alexandrov:2011ab ] for a review of
quantization and discretization ambiguities in SFMs.

We finish this discussion of SFMs by a brief introduction to the
Ponzano-Regge model. Classically, three-dimensional Euclidean gravity
can be formulated through the first order action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the triad @xmath is an @xmath -valued @xmath -form (the @xmath
field), @xmath is an @xmath -connection with curvature @xmath , and
@xmath stands for the trace in @xmath . As in the four-dimensional
context, variation with respect to @xmath imposes the torsion-free
equation, and the variation of @xmath provides Einstein’s equation:
@xmath ; hence space-time is flat. The only degrees of freedom of vacuum
@xmath Euclidean gravity are global, which is the sense in which the
theory is said to be topological, and this flatness condition should
therefore be preserved at the quantum level. Indeed, the triad can
formally be integrated in the (ill-defined) continuous partition
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

suggesting that a rigorous definition should in a way measure the
’volume’ of the set of flat connections on @xmath . This expectation can
be made more rigorous in the discrete: let us introduce a cellular
decomposition @xmath of @xmath , and its dual @xmath -complex @xmath .
For definiteness, one can for example assume that @xmath is a
three-dimensional simplicial complex: elementary cells are tetrahedra,
glued along their boundary triangles. @xmath is a set of nodes @xmath ,
lines @xmath and faces @xmath such that: inside each tetrahedron of
@xmath one finds a unique node, two nodes are connected by a line
whenever the two dual tetrahedra share a triangle, and faces are
collections of lines closing around the edges of @xmath . Similarly to
lattice gauge theory, one then discretizes the connection by extracting
its holonomy along each line of @xmath , noted @xmath . As for the
triad, it can be integrated along the edges of @xmath , and provides a
Lie algebra element @xmath for each edge @xmath dual to the face @xmath
. This allow to discretize the action in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the oriented product of the holonomies around the face @xmath . The
formal partition function ( 2.21 ) is made concrete by summing
holonomies with the Haar measure @xmath over @xmath , and triads with
the Lebesgue measure @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formulation of the Ponzano-Regge partition function, in lattice
gauge theoretic language making flatness of the geometry apparent, will
be primary in the GFT context. Two other formulations are however
possible. One could instead integrate the connection degrees of freedom,
and express @xmath as an integral over Lie algebra variables [
Baratin:2010wi ] . The subtlety is that these are non-commutative
variables, but we will see how it can be done and put to good use in
later chapters. The other rewriting, which we describe now, makes the
connection to spin foam models explicit. One simply relies on the
Peter-Weyl theorem, and expands the @xmath -functions in
representations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the character of the @xmath representation of @xmath .
Each character can be decomposed in products of Wigner matrices with
individual line holonomies as variables. Each variable @xmath will
appear exactly three times, one for each edge of the dual triangle of
@xmath . The @xmath holonomies can therefore be integrated explicitly,
yielding one @xmath -valent intertwiner per line, which is nothing but a
@xmath symbol. Finally, these can be contracted together, four by four,
following the tetrahedral pattern associated to each vertex of @xmath .
The partition function then takes the original form proposed by Ponzano
and Regge in their seminal work [ ponzano_regge ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sum runs over all possible spin attributions to the faces of
@xmath , and @xmath denotes the evaluation of the @xmath symbol on the
six spin labels of the faces of @xmath running through @xmath . This is
the first SFM ever proposed, and we see that in the simplicial setting,
the vertex amplitude is essentially captured by the @xmath symbol.

#### 2.1.3 Summing over Spin Foams

From the point of view of the heuristic path towards spin foams from
canonical LQG (formula ( 2.17 )), it is clear that when computing
transition amplitudes, one should not only sum over the group-theoretic
data, but also on the combinatorial structure of the foam. The first
question to come to mind is then: with which measure? Since the precise
form of the amplitudes is dictated by a quantization of the discretized
theory, where the foam is chosen once and for all at the classical
level, this is a difficult question to address. On the other hand, if we
do not give too much credit to the heuristic construction la Feynman,
and focus instead on the Ponzano-Regge and related spin foam models for
three-dimensional gravity, it is possible to argue for a different
strategy. Indeed, an interesting property of the Ponzano-Regge model is
that it is formally triangulation independent: that is, performing any
possible local move which do not change the topology (Pachner moves) on
the triangulation only affects the amplitude through a generically
divergent overall factor. The unpleasant formal character of this
invariance can even be cured at the price of trading the @xmath group
for its quantum-deformed version. Is obtained in this way the so-called
Turaev-Viro model, which is usually interpreted as 3d quantum gravity
with a non-vanishing positive cosmological constant [ turaev_viro ] .
Since 3d quantum gravity turns out to be equivalent in this sense to the
definition of a topological invariant for @xmath -manifolds, it is
tempting to assume that 4d quantum gravity will be likewise equivalent
to the definition of a diffeomorphism invariant for @xmath -manifolds.
Again, in the realm of triangulated manifolds, diffeomorphism invariance
can be understood as triangulation invariance, and more precisely
invariance under local Pachner moves. This key property is what is
generally understood as entailing the definition of a well-behaved
state-sum model , applying tools from topological quantum field theory
to quantum gravity [ Barrett:1995mg ] .

In this thesis we tend to favor the heuristic argument leading to the
idea of SFMs over the very formal idea of a quantum invariant. The
outstanding difficulties paving the way to a satisfactory diffeomorphism
invariant in 4d, and the rigidity of such a strategy are discouraging to
us. As explained in the introduction, we would rather favor an approach
in which the notions of scale and renormalization have a role to play,
thus allowing for more flexible models, where approximate rather than
exact invariance matters. This route is currently explored in details by
Bianca Dittrich and collaborators [ Bahr:2011uj , Dittrich:2011zh ,
Dittrich:2011vz , bianca_review , bianca_cyl ] . Rather than looking for
an exact state-sum model, they are instead developing coarse-graining
and renormalization methods allowing to consistently improve the
dynamics, and hopefully reach a diffeomorphism-invariant phase in some
infinite refinement limit of the foams. In addition to providing a
constructive method towards diffeomorphism invariance, this framework
aims at developing the necessary tools to perform approximate
calculations. From the point of view of applications to realistic
physical situations, this seems to us a good alternative to the more
abstract incarnations of state-sum models.

More prosaically, most of the SFMs currently under investigation not
only fail to implement topological or diffeomorphism invariance, but
even fail to verify the axioms which are at the basis of the state-sum
approach [ Baez:1997zt ] . For instance, the ’projector’ defining the
intertwiner space of the Lorentzian EPRL model does actually not square
to itself. As a result, spin foam amplitudes do not compose well: if
@xmath is a spin foam mapping a spin network state @xmath to @xmath ,
and @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath , one has in general

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

contrary to the formalism advocated in [ Baez:1997zt ] . Even in the
Ponzano-Regge model, such requirements cannot be implemented in full
generalities. Because of the formal of nature equation ( 2.24 ), plagued
with divergences, one needs to introduce a regulator cutting-off large
spin labels. Such a cut-off spoils both the triangulation invariance and
the morphism properties of the Ponzano-Regge amplitudes. It is true that
in this case one could resort to the well-behaved Turaev-Viro model.
However, from a more physical point of view it is not clear why the
cosmological constant should be necessary to the very definition of spin
foam models. These pathologies seem on the contrary to suggest that the
strict notion of state-sum model, with rigid composition rules, is too
narrow to accommodate interesting and physically sound proposals such as
the EPRL model.

Let us summarize shortcomings of SFMs such as the Ponzano-Regge model or
the EPRL one. First, they do not provide any canonical measure on the
space of foams to be summed over, and even this space is not clearly
constrained. Second, the presence of divergences (at least when the
cosmological constant vanishes) calls for regularization and
renormalization procedures, which as in usual quantum field theories are
expected to map different combinatorial structures to one another (via
coarse-graining or renormalization steps). Again, the quantization
procedure leading to specific models does not seem to provide any hint
as to how this should be done. Third, and this is certainly the main
drawback, the first issue together with the absence of triangulation
independence precludes any complete definition of the transition
amplitudes ( 2.17 ), even at the formal level. We would like to add a
fourth trouble, which we will address in more details later one: the
question of the continuum limit of SFMs. If spin networks boundary
states are thought of as encoding elementary excitations of the
gravitational field, or equivalently atoms of space, one is naturally
inclined to address the question of the dynamics of very many such
states, collectively representing macroscopic and approximately smooth
geometries. Indeed, if LQG and SFMs can ever be related to continuous GR
in full generality, and hence established as proper quantum theories of
gravity, it seems unlikely to be at the level of spin networks with a
few links and nodes. For if such states were to describe macroscopic
spaces, these would be highly discrete ones (i.e. sampled with very few
points), hardly comparable to the smooth structure we experience in
everyday life and physics. It is true that they might be appropriate to
describe specific physical situations where the number of relevant
degrees of freedom are effectively small, such as for instance in
cosmology, but they cannot themselves explain the emergence of classical
space-time. On the contrary, handling combinatorially large and
complicated spin networks can only be made possible if new approximation
tools are developed. Individually, and even more altogether, these four
challenges seem to point towards essentially two alternatives, both
relying on renormalization. The first, inspired by lattice gauge
theories, is to find a consistent way of refining SFMs, as already
explained. The second is to instead look for a way of consistently
summing spin foam amplitudes.

#### 2.1.4 Towards well-defined quantum field theories of Spin Networks

The application of Group Field Theory to spin foam models originates
from seminal work by De Pietri, Freidel, Krasnov, Reisenberger and
Rovelli [ dPFKR , GFT_rovelli_reisenberg ] . The central idea is to
construct a generating functional for spin foam amplitudes, which allows
to sum them with quantum field theory techniques. Let us give a concrete
illustration with the first GFT ever proposed, the Boulatov model [
boulatov ] , which generates Ponzano-Regge amplitudes. Following the
general QFT procedure, we want to encode the boundary states of the
model into functionals of one or several fields, and for definiteness
let us say a single scalar field @xmath . Let us moreover aim at the
lattice gauge formulation of the Ponzano-Regge amplitudes given in
equation ( 2.24 ). It is then natural to assume the field @xmath to have
support on several copies of @xmath . In its simplicial version, the
boundary states of the Ponzano-Regge model are labeled by closed graphs
with three-valent vertices, whose analogue in the field theory formalism
are convolutions of the fields @xmath . It is thus necessary to work
with three copies of @xmath , and hence natural to assume @xmath (with
respect to the Haar measure). Incidentally, one immediately recognizes
how to recover the spin network boundary states of the Ponzano-Regge
model: through the harmonic expansion of @xmath in terms of Fourier
modes labeled by triplets of spins. The partition function of the looked
for field theory will have the generic structure:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Gaussian measure defining the notion of propagation of
boundary data, and @xmath is the interaction part of an action, encoding
the non-Gaussian part of the dynamics. Note that, for reasons which will
become clear shortly, the kinetic part of the action is encoded in the
Gaussian measure @xmath , together with the (ill-defined) Lebesgue
measure on @xmath . Let us focus on the combinatorics first. A boundary
field is associated to a node of a spin network, while its variables
label the three links connected to this node. Therefore in the bulk the
GFT fields must label spinfoam edges, and a field variable be associated
to a couple @xmath where @xmath is a face incident on the edge @xmath ,
called a wedge (see Figure (b)b ). We want moreover to recover the
@xmath -valent interaction vertices of the Ponzano-Regge model when
constructing the perturbative theory, through an expansion of the
exponential term in ( 2.28 ). Therefore @xmath must consist in a single
term, which precisely convolutes four GFT fields according to a
tetrahedral pattern. Since in any QFT we are free to encode the
non-combinatorial aspects of the dynamics in the propagator rather than
the interaction, we can, without loss of generality fix:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a new coupling constant. This ensures that, whatever the
precise form of the propagator @xmath , the perturbative expansion of (
2.28 ) will be labeled by arbitrary @xmath -complexes verifying the
condition that at each vertex meet exactly @xmath edges and @xmath
faces, with a ’tetrahedral’ pattern. See Figure 2.1 .

We now need to find the correct covariance, so that the amplitudes
contain the relevant @xmath -functions ensuring triviality of the
holonomies around any face. Recall that the covariance defines a kernel
@xmath (the propagator), through:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first data which should be introduced in this kernel are the
holonomies @xmath associated to the lines of the foam. They cannot be
the field variables @xmath or @xmath themselves, which as we pointed out
rather label the wedges of the foam. Therefore @xmath should be
expressed as an integral over a single @xmath parameter. It should also
contain three @xmath functions depending on @xmath , such that when
constructing the amplitudes and integrating out the @xmath ’s one
recovers formula ( 2.24 ). It is then not difficult to convince oneself
and check that the solution is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, one can indeed show that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath runs over all the @xmath -complexes (without boundaries)
verifying the aforementioned combinatorial constraints, @xmath is the
number of vertices in @xmath , and @xmath is a symmetry factor. It is
now clear why we did not want to write the kinetic term of this field
theory in an exponentiated form: because of the integration over the
holonomy @xmath , @xmath does not define an invertible operator, and
therefore this representation is strictly speaking not available. A
different but equivalent way of understanding this point is sometimes
adopted (see for instance the presentation adopted in the classical
references [ Perez:2003 , rovelli_book , freidel_gft , daniele_rev2006 ]
). Instead of integrating over the whole Hilbert space @xmath with
respect to a degenerate Gaussian measure, one can restrict beforehand
the space of fields to the gauge invariant ones:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and use an invertible propagator (the trivial one with no @xmath
variable). The constraint ( 2.33 ) is nothing but the Gauss one in the
GFT setting. It implies that boundary states are really gauge invariant
(abstract) spin networks. Using an unconstrained space of fields with
the degenerate covariance ( 2.31 ) is morally equivalent, in the sense
that only the gauge invariant part of the field is propagated in this
framework. The reasons why we prefer to adopt the degenerate covariance
formalism are: a) it is mathematically rigorous; b) it allows to use
simple notions of locality for the interactions [ Krajewski:2010yq ] ;
c) it seems convenient to encode as much as the dynamics as possible in
the propagator, this way combinatorial issues and the problem of how
gravitational constraints should be imposed get clearly separated. In
particular, this thesis explores ways of defining a locality principle,
and covariances implementing the Gauss constraint, such that a
well-defined theory of renormalization becomes available.

The correspondence between GFTs and SFMs we have just illustrated is
very general, as the example of the Boulatov model hopefully makes it
clear. GFTs can from this perspective be characterized as quantum field
theories for spin networks, generalizing the correspondence between
relativistic QFTs and scattering states one finds at the root of
particle physics. The only constraints are on the valencies of the spin
networks nodes on the boundary, and the structures of the spin foam
vertices in the bulk. The former are determined by the field content,
while the latter depend on the choice of interactions. More precisely,
if we want to have @xmath -valent spin networks nodes in the boundary,
we need to bring in one new GFT field with @xmath variables; and to any
type of vertex in the spin foam amplitudes must be associated a certain
convolution of fields in @xmath . Therefore the formalism is in
principle general enough to accommodate any finite numbers of nodes in
the boundary, and any finite number of vertices in the bulk. Likewise,
the type of boundary data and dynamics can be specified at will by
changing the group and the covariance. In particular, any constraint
arising from the spin foam quantization, such as simplicity constraints,
can be included in the covariance. From this point of view, the Gauss
constraint is a defining feature of GFTs, since it is responsible for
the presence of holonomy degrees of freedom. This explains why we will
concentrate on this aspect in the remainder of this thesis.

The appeals of the GFT formalism from the point of view of SFMs and LQG
are numerous. First and foremost, the QFT formalism allows to fix
canonical weights for the sum over foams. While a full justification of
these weights from first principles is not available, they have the
merit of being well-defined, therefore completing the definition of
SFMs. They can moreover be partially justified: with an appropriate
definition of the GFT coupling constant, the combinatorial weight of a
complex is the order of its automorphism group, which can be argued to
be a discrete, purely combinatorial analogue of the diffeomorphism
group. Second, the divergences of SFMs are now understood as divergences
of the amplitudes of a field theory. Such features have to be expected
in any QFT, and tools to control them are well understood both
conceptually and mathematically, thanks to renormalization theory.
Through the embedding of SFMs into GFTs, the question of the value of
the cosmological constant and that of the occurrence of divergences
become clearly separated, as it seems to us they should be. A third
feature which can be seen as an advantage too, is that in GFT the
topology of space-time is itself dynamical. For instance in the version
of the Boulatov model introduced above, the foams contributing to the
partition function are dual to arbitrary gluings of tetrahedra, which
include in particular all types of triangulated topological manifolds,
but also more pathological structures. Therefore GFT can potentially
explain the local topology of macroscopic space-time, in addition to its
metric properties. This feature is sometimes called third quantization,
and we refer to [ ds_3 ] for a more detailed exposition in the context
of GFTs. Finally, as quantum field theories on local symmetry groups
rather than space-time, GFTs make possible to incorporate all the tools
which are so crucial to quantum field theories in a background
independent context. Especially, perturbative methods in the QFT sense
are available, without having to resort to perturbation in the
space-time sense. This is very different from the usual perturbative
approach to quantum gravity, which is so to speak doubly perturbative:
perturbative QFT methods are used to analyze quantum perturbations over
a background metric. This aspect of GFTs has already been taken
advantage of, in the limited context of ’graviton propagator’
calculations, where the existence and physical relevance of the
perturbative expansion in the coupling constants of GFTs is assumed from
the start [ lqg_propa1 , lqg_propa2 , lqg_propa3 ] .

In order to determine whether this list of merits is truly realized in
GFTs, a lot of work is needed, both at the conceptual and mathematical
level. The key result to achieve in this respect is to establish GFTs as
well-defined perturbative quantum field theories. To this effect, one
needs to generalize renormalization theory to this new context. It is
only equipped with such a new toolbox that we will be able to determine
whether a specific GFT model can be taken seriously as a field theory or
not, and in which sense. It seems that the key physical questions are to
be settled down only then. The most pressing one is to determine in
which sector of a given theory (if any) the classical effective dynamics
of GR lies. In particular, can we relate the first few orders of the
perturbative expansion to continuum macroscopic physics? Or, on the
contrary, does it emerge from the interaction of very many degrees of
freedom, and can as a result only be captured by non-perturbative
techniques, or by perturbation in a different phase of the theory? The
somehow mysterious interpretation of the coupling constants of a GFT
from the gravity perspective is certainly related. Whatever the answers
to these questions, for which in our view renormalization methods
applied to phase transitions could play a discriminant role, it must be
admitted that if GFTs are used to complete the definition of SFMs, the
problem of their renormalizability have to be faced head on and
resolved.

This concludes our summary of motivations for studying GFTs, from the
point of view of loop quantum gravity and spin foam models. As is
certainly clear to the reader, several points of the reasoning are
semi-heuristic and formal. Moreover, several key combinatorial aspects
of GFTs seem poorly motivated by the quantization procedures, and it
seems to us essentially independent of them. It is therefore of
paramount importance to take some distance with the quantization, and
present the more combinatorial motivations behind GFTs, which we do in
the next section.

### 2.2 Group Field Theories and random discrete geometries

#### 2.2.1 Matrix models and random surfaces

Since GFTs are in a sense higher dimensional incarnations of matrix
models, we start with a brief presentation of basic aspects of the
latter [ david1985planar , Ginsparg:1991bi , DiFrancesco:1993nw ,
Ginsparg:1993is ] . Matrix models are statistical models for matrix-like
degrees of freedom, in the sense that ’locality’ is based on a matrix
rather than point-wise product. For instance, let @xmath be an hermitian
matrix of size @xmath . We can construct an action @xmath for @xmath by
requiring it to be invariant under conjugation of @xmath . This plays
the role of ’locality’ principle in the same way as Lorentz and gauge
invariance are at the root of local quantum field theories, i.e. by
providing a set of allowed interactions. It is then possible to show
that @xmath has to be a sum of products of invariants of the form:
@xmath , with @xmath . If we further restrict to connected invariants,
then @xmath is simply a sum of such terms. The simplest non-trivial
connected invariant action retains the first two terms only:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a coupling constant. The partition function of the
matrix model is then defined by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the invariant measure on the set of @xmath hermitian
matrices. This theory can be expanded in perturbations in @xmath and
shown to generate Feynman amplitudes labeled by ribbon graphs . The
propagator, deduced from the quadratic Gaussian term in @xmath , can be
pictured as a line with two strands, each strand carrying one index of
the matrix @xmath . More precisely, the covariance of this theory
identifies indices as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The interaction part of the action introduces a single @xmath -valent
vertex, which identifies @xmath strands pairwise. The propagator and
interaction vertex are represented in Figure 2.2 .

The free energy @xmath is then indexed by closed and connected ribbon
graphs @xmath , an example of an open ribbon graph being given in Figure
2.3 .

The ribbon structure of the graphs allows to define the notion of face:
a face of @xmath is a set of strands forming a loop. We note @xmath the
number of ( @xmath -valent) vertices of @xmath , and @xmath its number
of faces. It is then not difficult to see that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a symmetry factor. The fact that the amplitude @xmath is
weighted by the number of faces is easy to understand: since in @xmath ,
the indices of the strands are identified by @xmath -functions across
propagators and vertices, one can trivially sum all of them but one per
face; we are therefore left with one free index per face, which sums to
@xmath . The main interest of the occurrence of such ribbon graphs in
the perturbative expansion of the matrix models, is that their duals are
triangulated surfaces. To see this, it suffices to associate a
transverse line to each propagator, and a triangle to each vertex, as
represented in Figures 2.2 and 2.3 . In this dual picture, the role of
the propagator is to identify pairwise the edges of the @xmath triangles
generated by @xmath , yielding a closed triangulated surface. Note that,
very importantly, the vertices of the triangulation are dual to the
faces of @xmath , so that a complete and unambiguous correspondence is
established between a ribbon graph and its dual triangulation. This
interpretation of matrix models as statistical models for discretized
surfaces is very general. The statistical ensemble one is spanning
depends on which matrix ensemble and which interactions are being used.
For instance, in the model we just presented, the hermiticity of @xmath
restricts the sum to orientable triangulations, while both orientable
and non-orientable triangulations would be included had we used
symmetric matrices instead. Also, one could work with quadrangulations
upon replacing the third order interaction by a fourth order one, or
include arbitrarily wild kinds of discretizations thanks to all the
other matrix invariants.

The first technical aspect which makes the link between matrix models
and random triangulations so interesting is the existence of a @xmath
expansion, bringing powerful analytical control over the formal sum (
2.37 ). One can use the arbitrary size of the matrix @xmath to unravel
universal properties of the statistical model, in the limit of
infinitely large matrices. In practice, one looks for a rescaling of the
coupling constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that, when @xmath : a) the most divergent configurations have a
uniform divergence degree at each order in @xmath ; b) these
configurations are infinitely many. In such a situation, @xmath can be
used as a new perturbative parameter, in such a way that the leading
order term in @xmath captures infinitely many orders in @xmath . This is
in this sense that a @xmath expansion captures non-perturbative effects.
In our context, large orders in the coupling constants correspond to
discrete surfaces with many building blocks, hence the @xmath expansion
is particularly relevant to the question of the continuum limit of such
discrete models. Let us consider again the model ( 2.35 ). The unique
value of @xmath verifying the two previous conditions is @xmath , and in
this case the amplitude of a graph @xmath becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us call @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the numbers of vertices, edges,
and triangles in the triangulation @xmath dual to @xmath . Each edge of
@xmath being shared by exactly two triangles, we have @xmath and
therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Euler characteristic of @xmath , and @xmath its
genus. Recall that closed two-dimensional topological manifolds are
fully characterized by two invariants, the Euler characteristic and the
orientability, so that in the orientable case we are considering the
genus fully determines the topology of the triangulation. Therefore the
@xmath expansion is actually a topological expansion:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

sums all the triangulations with genus @xmath . As a result, in the
limit of infinitely large matrices, spherical topologies ( @xmath )
dominate; and the more holes a non-spherical surface has, the more it is
suppressed.

Assuming that one can first take the large @xmath limit to restrict
oneself to the spherical sector, one can then look for a continuum limit
in this sector. Because @xmath contains all the spherical
triangulations, with arbitrary number of triangles, it is meaningful to
ask whether it is dominated by large triangulations in some regime of
@xmath . Such large order terms will start dominating the behavior of
@xmath close to its convergence radius. It can be shown that @xmath has
a non-zero and finite convergence radius, providing a critical value
@xmath for the coupling constant, and such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the critical exponent, and is equal to @xmath in this model,
so that the free energy associated to the spherical sector diverges
close to the critical point. At least at a formal level, this supports
the idea that a continuum phase of the theory is reached by tuning
@xmath to its critical value. We can illustrate this in the following
way. Suppose that each triangle of the model is assumed equilateral, and
attributed some elementary area @xmath . Then the mean area of a
triangulation in the statistical ensemble is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

So that if we send the fiducial area to @xmath when approaching
criticality, in such a way that the mean value of the area is kept
fixed, one obtains a statistical model for infinitely refined spherical
triangulations with a given area. This has certainly the flavor of the
continuum!

One can go further and construct statistical ensembles containing all
possible (oriented) manifolds. This is achieved in the so-called double
scaling limit, which consists in taking the large @xmath and critical
limits in a correlated manner. It is possible at all thanks to the fact
that @xmath can be shown to have the same critical point as @xmath , for
any @xmath . More precisely, one has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which suggests to take the joint limit @xmath and @xmath , keeping the
ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

fixed. In such a limit, the damping effect due to the large @xmath limit
and the enhancement of higher genera close to the critical point
compensate, in such a way that all topologies contribute to the free
energy:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are some computable constants.

The way these results are usually proven is through a rewriting of the
free energy in terms of @xmath invariant quantities, namely the
eigenvalues of @xmath . Such a tool is not (yet?) available in higher
dimensions, so we do not want to provide any details along this line
here. The interested reader may refer to [ david1985planar ,
Ginsparg:1991bi , DiFrancesco:1993nw , Ginsparg:1993is ] . It should
also be noted that these results are only a first step, and that the
precise correspondence between the discrete theory and its continuum
limit is studied by different means, for instance thanks to
Schwinger-Dyson equations for the so-called loop observables , which in
the large @xmath limit reproduce the Witt algebra [ Ginsparg:1991bi ,
DiFrancesco:1993nw , Ginsparg:1993is ] , and can be related to the
Wheeler-DeWitt equation for 2d quantum gravity [
staudacher_moore_seiberg ] . Finally, mathematically rigorous
characterizations of the continuum limit of matrix models have been
obtained thanks to random planar maps, see [ legall ] and references
therein.

As far as quantum gravity is concerned, what makes matrix models
interesting is their connection to quantum gravity in two dimensions. We
only recall the correspondence at the discrete level, which can be shown
to extend to the continuum phase thanks to the Schwinger-Dyson
equations. The action for gravity in two dimensions with cosmological
constants is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second equality is a consequence of the Gauss-Bonnet theorem.
The Einstein term being topological in two dimensions, only the Euler
characteristic and the area @xmath can be dynamical in the vacuum.
Intuitively, this suggests that a fine enough discretization of the
theory is enough to encode the dynamics of these two global degrees of
freedom. We can for instance introduce an equilateral triangulation
@xmath of @xmath , each individual triangle having a same area @xmath .
The Einstein term of ( 2.50 ) can then be replaced by @xmath , and the
area approximated by @xmath . This provides an action principle for a
discrete theory, from which we can deduce a path-integral quantization.
Remarkably, the resulting partition function is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

and can therefore be matched to the free energy ( 2.37 ) of the matrix
model (with the large @xmath rescaling). The sum over @xmath can include
arbitrary topologies, so that one really obtains a third quantization of
@xmath gravity. The correspondence imposes the following
identifications:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the large @xmath limit of the matrix model corresponds to the
weak coupling regime of @xmath gravity. Thanks to the double scaling,
one can moreover extend the sum over topologies to the continuum phase.

Let us summarize the situation. Matrix models are at first sight
algebraic models, with no particular relation to gravity or geometry in
general. However the relation to discrete geometry is readily seen at
the perturbative level, since Feynman amplitudes are labeled by
discretized surfaces. Still at the discrete level, the amplitudes can be
related to discrete gravity path integrals, the two coupling constants
of gravity being encoded in the coupling constant of the matrix model
and the size parameter @xmath . Finally, the matrix model formulation
allows to reach a continuum phase when sending @xmath to infinity,
dominated by spherical topologies, and which can also be extended to all
types of manifolds. In a sense, what matrix models achieve is a
definition of a measure on continuous geometries thanks to discrete
methods, which reminds the relationship between Riemann sums and the
Riemann integral.

#### 2.2.2 Higher dimensional generalizations

The success of matrix models motivated extensions to higher dimensions
already in the nineties, called tensor models [ Ambjorn_tensors , gross
, Sasakura:1990fs ] . Viewing a matrix as a @xmath -tensor, it is
natural to introduce @xmath -tensors in @xmath dimensions. The action
@xmath of a tensor is inspired by its matrix counter-part: the kinetic
term convolutes indices of two tensors pairwise, and is interpreted as
the identification of two @xmath -simplices; and the interaction is
built in such a way as to represent elementary @xmath -cells. It is also
natural to work with a single interaction, dual to a @xmath -simplex, as
it is the interaction with the smallest number of fields which can be
given a @xmath -dimensional interpretation, and also any discretization
of a manifold can be subdivided in such a way that all cells are
simplices. For example, in three dimensions, one can define:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all the indices run from @xmath to @xmath . As we will see later
on, the type of tensors one is working with has important implications.
This part of the generalization from matrix models is also not obvious,
and the strategy which was adopted in the early nineties was to
symmetrize the tensor indices. Since one does not want to give them any
physical meaning, it seems at first sight a reasonable assumption, but
it is not the only way to fulfill the requirement, and is responsible
for key difficulties of this approach. One major challenge is to control
the overwhelmingly complicated sum over triangulations generated in
perturbative expansion. Contrary to matrix models, not all of them are
discretization of topological manifolds: quite differently, mild
singular contributions such as pseudo-manifolds are included, but also
highly degenerate triangulations with extended singularities (see for
instance [ Gurau:2010nd ] , in the context of GFTs). This comes from the
fact that in higher than two dimensions, prescribing simple local gluing
rules for @xmath -simplices along their @xmath -subsimplices is not
restrictive enough to eliminate these pathological structures. In
particular, and as we will explore in more details in the next section,
the data encoded in these simple combinatorial models is not rich enough
to capture the structure of the simplices of dimension strictly less
than @xmath . For instance, in the model defined by the action ( 2.53 ),
no data is associated to the vertices of the triangulation, therefore
the topological structure around the vertices of the triangulations is
essentially arbitrary [ Gurau:2010nd ] .

With hindsight, this lack of combinatorial structure is what prevented
all the achievements of matrix models from being reproduced in higher
dimensions. Without the necessary analytical control over the
perturbative series, no @xmath expansion could be formulated for these
early versions of tensor models, and therefore none of the other appeals
of matrix models could be investigated either. The only part of the
story which remained true was the interpretation of the amplitudes as
discrete gravity path integrals, at least for triangulations of
manifolds. Interpreting the elementary @xmath -simplices as equilateral,
a discrete metric can be assigned to each configuration, in the same way
as in two dimensions. The amplitudes themselves can then be matched to
the exponential of a discrete version of the Einstein-Hilbert action.
Volume terms coming from the cosmological constant are again related to
the coupling constant @xmath , and the curvature is captured by deficit
angles around @xmath -simplices. Such considerations gave birth to the
Dynamical Triangulations program, and later on their Causal versions,
where ensembles of discrete space-times are generated and summed over
numerically rather than by analytical means. We refer to the lecture
notes [ Ambjorn:2012jv ] for details and references.

This situation changed dramatically thanks to the pioneering work of
Gurau, which upon slightly restricting the combinatorial structures of
tensor models, could define a @xmath expansion. A wealth of results
could be gathered after this breakthrough, giving new support in favor
of analytical studies of random triangulations.

#### 2.2.3 Bringing discrete geometry in

We can now explain how GFT comes about in this discrete approach to
quantum gravity. Tensor models and dynamical triangulations are the
minimalistic backbone of discrete gravity path integrals, in the sense
that metric degrees of freedom are encoded in a purely combinatorial
way. While this was fine enough in the case of two dimensional gravity,
where only topology matters, the strategy can be questioned when it
comes to three or four dimensions. In general relativity enter several
important background structures. A topological manifold of the
appropriate dimension is one such structure, and is arguably exhaustive
in two dimensions. However, this topological manifold has to be endowed
with a differential structure, which is not uniquely specified by the
topology in four dimensions. Most importantly, local Lorentz invariance
can also be argued to be a primary ingredient of any quantum theory of
gravity. It is experimentally tested with an overwhelming precision, and
seems to be rather hard to make emergent from a more fundamental theory.
In this respect, getting the continuum of GR out of a fundamentally
discrete model seems ambitious enough, so that it seems reasonable to
save ourselves the burden of explaining Lorentz invariance as well.

In GFTs, a notion of local Lorentz invariance (or Euclidean invariance
in Euclidean models) is assumed from scratch. To this effect, the purely
combinatorial indices of tensor models become instead elements of some
subgroup of the Lorentz or rotation group. For example in a 3d Euclidean
context, one goes from the interaction part of ( 2.53 ) to ( 2.29 ) by
turning the indices into @xmath group elements. It is in this
combinatorial sense that a GFT field can be considered a tensor.
However, that is not all: after this new type of data has been
introduce, one needs to provide them with a discrete geometric meaning.
We simply follow the matrix/tensor models reasoning: if the GFT field
@xmath is assumed to represent an elementary building block of geometry,
then the geometric data should refer to this building block. Let us
again use the Boulatov model as an example, in which case @xmath is to
be interpreted as a flat triangle, and the variables @xmath label its
edges. It is the role of the constraint ( 2.33 ) to introduce an @xmath
flat discrete connection at the level of the amplitudes, encoded in the
elementary line holonomies @xmath . The natural interpretation of the
variable @xmath is as the holonomy from a reference point inside the
triangle, to the center of the edge @xmath . Thanks to the flatness
assumption, this holonomy is independent of the path one chooses to
compute @xmath . The meaning of the constraint ( 2.33 ) is also clear:
it simply encodes the freedom in the choice of reference point. From the
discrete geometric perspective, the Boulatov model can therefore
naturally be called a second quantization of a flat triangle : the GFT
field @xmath is the wave-function of a quantized flat triangle, and the
path integral provides an interacting theory for such quantum geometric
degrees of freedom. This point of view was already present in the early
stages of SFMs [ Barbieri1997 , BaezBarrett_tetra ] , and has guided the
development of this research field ever since. It was more recently
advocated in [ Baratin:2010wi , daniele_rev2011 ] , providing a new look
at the construction of four-dimensional models [ bo_bc , bo_holst ] .

The natural question which can arise at this point is: which type of
geometric data one should introduce? Or more specifically, why should we
work with holonomy variables rather than simply edge vectors, as is done
for example in Regge calculus [ lr_loll ] ? As it turns out, there is a
general correspondence between these two alternatives, which gives us
the opportunity to introduce the Lie algebra formalism for GFTs,
initially introduced in [ Baratin:2010wi ] . To avoid unnecessary
complications, we illustrate this dual representation on the Boulatov
model restricted to the @xmath group. The technical tool allowing to use
(non-commuting) Lie algebra variables @xmath , is the group Fourier
transform [ PR3 , majidfreidel , karim ] . In our case, it maps @xmath
to a space @xmath , endowed with a non-commutative @xmath -product. The
Fourier transform of @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are non-commutative plane-waves, and functions on @xmath
are now identified with functions on @xmath invariant under @xmath . The
definition of the plane-waves involves a choice of coordinates on the
group. Following [ Baratin:2010wi ] , we adopt:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for @xmath we denote @xmath , and @xmath is the trace in the
fundamental representation of @xmath . Note that other choices are
possible, and some may be more convenient than others [ cdr_duflo ] .
The Lie algebra variables can be given a simple metric interpretation,
as vectors associated to the edges of the triangles [ Baratin:2010wi ] .
One can therefore start from the Lie algebra representation, and provide
an independent construction of the theory, following a similar procedure
as in group space. The same combinatorial structure of the action can be
assumed, entailing the same simplicial interpretation, except that the
pointwise product for functions on @xmath is replaced by the
non-commutative and non-local @xmath -product. The latter is induced by
the group structure of @xmath , as dual to the convolution product for
functions on the group. Defined first on plane-waves:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is then extended to the image of the non-commutative Fourier
transform, i.e. @xmath , by linearity. This formalism becomes
particularly interesting when it comes to the geometric constraints.
Indeed, if @xmath have to be interpreted as the edge vectors of a flat
triangle, they should close, as for i

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

This condition needs to be imposed at the operator level on the GFT
field @xmath . A possible version of this projector is constructed out
of a non-commutative notion of @xmath -function. Defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is easy to verify that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore @xmath plays the role of Dirac distribution at point
@xmath in @xmath . We can therefore impose the following closure
constraint on the GFT field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is then easy to check that transforming back ( 2.60 ) to @xmath gives
back the gauge invariance condition ( 2.33 ). This confirms that the
Boulatov model can be understood as a second quantization of a flat
triangle, and we refer to [ Baratin:2010wi ] for more details.

In four dimensions, the same correspondence between group and Lie
algebra representation has been put to profit [ bo_bc , bo_holst ] .
There, the GFT field represents a quantum tetrahedron, and Lie algebra
elements correspond to bivectors associated to its boundary triangles.
In addition to the closure constraint (again equivalent to the Gauss
constraint in group space), additional geometricity conditions have to
be imposed to guarantee that the bivectors are built from edge vectors
of a geometric tetrahedron. These additional constraints are nothing by
the simplicity constraints, and non-commutative @xmath -functions can
again be used to implement them.

### 2.3 A research direction

Let us summarize the two possible takes on GFTs we have been presenting
so far. We first focused on quantization procedures, either in canonical
or covariant form, applied to Einstein’s field equations. The key steps
entering this line of thoughts were: a) adopt connection and flux rather
than metric variables at the classical level; b) thanks to canonical LQG
techniques, show that spin network functionals are good kinematical
states for quantum GR; c) resort to a semi-heuristic covariant
formulation, spin foams, to identify the dynamics of these states; d)
introduce GFTs as generating functionals for spin foam amplitudes.
Already from this point of view, we could see non-trivial combinatorial
assumptions entering GFT models, as well as unorthodox quantization
rules motivating spin foam models for four-dimensional gravity.
Actually, discrete geometric considerations rather than strict
quantization procedures are arguably at the root of most of the modern
spin foam models. As a result, the combinatorics should play an
important role, but seems essentially unconstrained by these procedures:
one usually works with simplicial complexes because it seems like a
natural starting point. However, there is no strong case for it, even
less from the GFT point of view: as in any quantum field theory, it
would be preferable to have a large set of interactions at our disposal,
determined by a symmetry principle. The second set of works we focused
on, matrix and tensor models, put on the contrary most of their emphasis
on the combinatorics. GFTs in this perspective are simply enriched
tensor models, where tensor indices carry geometrical information. The
conceptual gap between 2d and 4d gravity supports the idea that such
additional data might be needed in 4d, contrary to 2d where purely
combinatorial models are able to capture the very limited metric aspects
of gravity.

As for example put forward in [ daniele_rev2011 ] , we would like to use
these two sets of incomplete motivations for GFTs as a way to find new
research directions. If we allow ourself to make a simple synthesis
between the two, we could say that GFTs are quantum field theories of
discrete geometries, in which boundary states are LQG like, namely a
subset of spin network functionals (for the appropriate group). The key
questions to ask can then be split into two classes. The first concerns
model building, in the sense of finding the appropriate notion of
quantum discrete geometry, both in the boundary and in the bulk. The
second concerns more generic features of the formalism, such as the
combinatorics, symmetry principles, regularization and renormalization.
It should be noted that these two sets of questions are rather
independent and should therefore better be explored in parallel. In this
thesis, we are only concerned with the generic aspects of GFTs, and
therefore we will mostly work in situations where discrete geometric
aspects are either irrelevant, or well-controlled and unambiguous. More
precisely, we would first like to understand to which extent GFTs can be
defined rigorously as perturbative quantum field theories. And second,
one would like to develop tools to explore the large
triangulations/foams regime of GFTs. Whatever the position one adopts as
regards discreteness in GFTs and SFMs, such regimes exist and therefore
deserve to be studied. This is especially true in the current situation,
in which the connection between the most refined models and continuum GR
remain rather elusive. Whether this connection is to show up at the
perturbative level already seems rather unlikely in the discrete gravity
interpretation of these models, and if any such connection exists one
would rather expect an emergence scenario [ daniele_hydro ] . In such a
mindset, the large triangulations regime is the physically relevant one.
These two open problems will be addressed by two complementary means:
large @xmath methods similar to the @xmath expansion of matrix models;
and renormalizability studies of enriched GFT models, called Tensorial
Group Field Theories (TGFTs). The latter will be established as the
first well-behaved perturbative quantum field theories related to spin
foam models, which is in our opinion the strongest result of this
thesis. Key to these two series of results are new combinatorial tools
which recently revived tensor models. In the next section, we therefore
give some motivations for introducing them, and a detailed account of
the combinatorial backbone provided by these new improved tensor models.

## Chapter 3 Colors and tensor invariance

In any case, one does not have the right today to maintain that the
foundation must consist in a field theory in the sense of Maxwell. The
other possibility, however, leads in my opinion to a renunciation of the
time-space continuum and to a purely algebraic physics.
Albert Einstein , letter to Paul Langevin, October 1935. ¹ ¹ 1
translated and cited by John Stachel in [ stachel1986einstein ] .

Colors were first introduced by Gurau as a way to restrict the class of
complexes generated by GFT models [ Gurau:2009tw ] . In addition to
giving a handle on their topological properties [ Gurau:2010nd , jimmy ]
, it was soon shown that colored models support a @xmath expansion [
RazvanN , RazvanVincentN , Gurau:2011xq ] . Aside from these purely
combinatorial and topological considerations, a careful study of the
shift symmetry of BF theory and its imprint on the Boulatov model [
diffeos ] gave more support to the physical relevance of the colored
models. We will briefly recall these two sets of initial motivations in
the first section of this chapter.

The discovery of the @xmath expansion then triggered a lot of activity,
mainly focused on colored tensor models [ Gurau:2011xp , critical ,
dr_dually , v_revisiting , v_new , jr_branched , wjd_double ] . These
can be seen as a revival of the purely combinatorial approach to quantum
gravity, but also as a necessary step towards the understanding of more
involved GFTs. Interestingly, just like matrix models, colored tensor
models have already found applications outside quantum gravity [
vrv_ising , v_dimers , vh_dimers , pspin , vf_packed ] . This is because
they provide universal probabilistic tools [ universality ] , and as
such can be expected to be relevant to a wide range of statistical
physics problems. We introduce the main properties of colored tensor
models in the second section of this chapter.

Finally, a key evolution we would like to comment on in the third
section is the introduction of tensor invariance [ r_vir , universality
, uncoloring ] . It was indeed soon realized that the color restriction
can be understood as a @xmath symmetry, where @xmath is the rank of the
tensors. This opened a whole new set of applications, and in particular
allowed to launch a renormalization program for Tensorial Group Field
Theories (TGFTs), that is for GFTs based on tensorial interactions [
tensor_4d , vincent_tt2 ] .

### 3.1 Colored Group Field Theories

#### 3.1.1 Combinatorial and topological motivations

In order to understand the difficulties with GFTs as introduced so far,
let us consider again a generic 3d model, defined by the partition
function ( 2.28 ) and the interaction ( 2.29 ). We do not need to make
any assumption about the covariance @xmath at this stage, since we are
mainly concerned with the labels of the Feynman amplitudes, not their
structure. These labels are @xmath -stranded graphs, built out from the
elementary vertex shown in Figure 2.1 . A (closed) @xmath -stranded
graph can be equivalently thought of as a @xmath -complex, with faces
identified by the closed circuits of strands.

The key objection put forward in [ Gurau:2010nd ] is that, while the
lines and faces of the @xmath -complex unambiguously identify the
triangles and edges of the dual triangulation, there is no combinatorial
data associated to its vertices. As a result, the tetrahedra can be
glued in arbitrary wild fashions along there common vertices, which
leads to the presence of extended topological singularities. That is to
say that the topological space naturally associated to such a
pathological triangulation contains points with neighborhoods not
homeomorphic to a @xmath -ball, and that these singular points can form
subspaces of dimension higher than @xmath . Hence, these triangulations
cannot be interpreted as topological manifolds. Even worst, they are not
homeomorphic to pseudomanifolds , which are milder versions of singular
topological spaces (see again [ Gurau:2010nd ] ). Examples of such
configurations can easily be constructed by gluing vertices in such a
way that a given face runs several times through the same line. It is
therefore natural to look for combinatorial prescriptions which prevent
the generation of such faces, called tadfaces .

These unwelcomed properties of ordinary GFTs were cured by the
introduction of new data in the action: the colors. These are purely
combinatorial labels which identify the @xmath -simplices constituting a
given @xmath -simplex. One therefore needs @xmath -colors in a rank-
@xmath GFT, labeling @xmath independent fields. It is moreover
convenient to work with complex fields, which will ensure nice
orientability properties. For instance, the colored rank- @xmath GFT is
defined in terms of fields @xmath , each distributed according to a
(complex) Gaussian measure @xmath , and the interaction convolutes the
four fields together:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where in the second line we kept the convolution pattern implicit ² ² 2
It is made explicit in Figure 3.1 . It is the same as in equation ( 2.29
), up to a reordering of the variables. . The only effect of the
coloring is to reduce the combinatorial complexity of the Feynman graphs
generated by the GFT: they must be bipartite and colorable . The first
condition comes from the complex nature of the field: there are two
types of vertices, associated to the interaction of @xmath or @xmath
fields respectively; and propagator lines can only connect two vertices
of different types. The second condition comes from the colors: each
line is now equipped with a color label, and only four lines with
distinct colors can interact. But, and this is essential, the amplitude
of a colorable and bipartite stranded graph in the colored GFT is
identical to its amplitude in the non-colored theory.

The main advantage of the colored model is that it generates
pseudomanifolds only [ Gurau:2010nd ] . In the 3d context we are
focusing on, this means that at most pointlike topological singularities
can occur, located at the vertices of the triangulations. This
topological information is fully encoded in the colored structure of the
stranded graphs, which can equivalently be represented by colored graphs
.

###### Definition 1.

Let @xmath . A @xmath -colored graph is a bipartite regular graph of
valency @xmath , whose edges are colored by labels @xmath , and such
that at each vertex meet @xmath edges with distinct colors.

These graphs have been extensively used in the mathematical literature,
as an efficient combinatorial way of representing topological manifolds
[ FerriGagliardi , Vince_gene ] . This goes under the name of
crystallization theory. These techniques have been partly rediscovered
and partly directly imported into the GFT context, though with a
different nomenclature, and one notable difference: crystallizations are
a particular subclass of @xmath -colored graphs which represent
manifolds, while in GFT we cannot avoid dealing with the singular
pseudomanifolds as well. The general formalism is discussed at length in
[ Gurau:2011xp ] , and we should content ourselves with the main ideas
here, which we again introduce in three dimensions. To begin with, we
will represent the vertex interaction associated to @xmath (resp. @xmath
) fields by a white (resp. black) dot, and a propagator between fields
of color @xmath with a line of color @xmath . The first interesting
point to notice is that the stranded substructure of a Feynman graph can
be fully inferred from its colored representation. Indeed a strand can
be canonically labeled by a couple @xmath of colors, where @xmath and
@xmath are the colors of the two types of lines in which the strand
runs. See Figure 3.1 . Therefore the faces, which are connected circuits
of strands, are equivalently labeled by connected cycles of edges of
color @xmath and @xmath . And due to the color prescription, tadfaces
cannot occur in colored GFTs. This solves a first pathology of ordinary
GFTs.

The second key aspect is that the colors give direct access to the
vertices of the triangulation. First, they can be attributed a color
label in the following way: in a tetrahedron, the vertex of color @xmath
is the one opposite to the triangle of color @xmath . Consider a @xmath
-colored graph @xmath . We define the @xmath - bubbles of color @xmath
as the connected components of edges with colors in @xmath . See Figure
3.2 for an example.

In the same way as the @xmath -colored graph @xmath represents a
simplicial complex of dimension @xmath , a @xmath -bubble @xmath is a
@xmath -colored graph and represents a triangulated two dimensional
surface. This is nothing but the the boundary of a 3d cell dual to a
particular vertex @xmath . And hence the topology of the neighborhood of
@xmath can be directly read out from that of the surface encoded by
@xmath : if it is a sphere (i.e. of genus @xmath ), @xmath is regular,
otherwise (i.e. of genus @xmath ) it is topologically singular. We will
use this idea at length in Chapter 4 .

The notion of bubble is very general. In arbitrary dimension @xmath , a
@xmath -colored graph @xmath comes with nested sets of @xmath -bubbles,
for @xmath , simply defined as the maximally connected subgraphs made of
edges with @xmath fixed colors. They define particular embedded surfaces
of dimension @xmath , dual to the @xmath -simplices of the complex
encoded in @xmath , which in turn provide a full homology for the
topological spaces generated by colored GFTs [ Gurau:2009tw ,
Gurau:2011xp ] .

#### 3.1.2 Motivation from discrete diffeomorphisms

A second argument in favor of colors one can find in the literature
relies on the symmetries of discrete gravity models. However, it mainly
applies to 3d for now, and therefore is not as generic as the
combinatorial and topological motivations.

It goes as follows. Because of the strict duality between spin foam
models and discrete gravity path-integrals, as for example uncovered in
[ Baratin:2010wi ] , it is tempting to implement discrete gravity
symmetries directly at the level of the GFT. Of particular interest is
the diffeomorphism group: if one wants to reach a continuous limit in
which the full symmetry of GR is restored, identifying a residual action
of the diffeomorphism group at a discrete level, and subsequently
turning it into a symmetry (or at least an approximate one) is a natural
strategy. This point of view has long been advocated by Bianca Dittrich
and collaborators [ bianca_review ] . Thanks to the metric variables
introduced in [ Baratin:2010wi ] , this could be partially explored at
the GFT level by the authors of [ diffeos ] , who focused on the
Boulatov and Ooguri models. In particular, they identified a translation
symmetry in the Boulatov model, a quantum-deformed version of vertex
translation invariance interpreted as discrete diffeomorphism
invariance. It is then natural to try to use this symmetry as a defining
feature of the Boulatov model, acting directly on the fields and leaving
the action invariant. But this could only be achieved in the colored
version of the model, the reason being essentially that in order to
translate a given vertex in a tetrahedron, one needs to act on specific
edge variables of three of its triangles. Therefore the triangles need
to be identified by additional labels in the action: the colors.
Moreover, they argued that this symmetry would systematically be broken
at the quantum level in a non-colored model.

In order to make this argument stronger, one would need to investigate
it further in a four-dimensional context. In the Ooguri colored model, a
similar translation symmetry could be uncovered [ diffeos ] , this time
associated to the edges of the 4d complexes. It however has no geometric
interpretation, and is broken by the imposition of simplicity
constraints. Hence it cannot be used in favor of colored models for
four-dimensional quantum gravity.

We will come back to these symmetries in Chapter 4 , to motivate new
formulations of the Boulatov and Ooguri models which are well adapted to
the computation of scaling bounds.

### 3.2 Colored tensor models

Let us now introduce tensor models in some details. They rely on the
same structures as colored GFTs, but exact calculations are made a lot
easier. Hence, this provides a simplified context in which to introduce
the main tools we will use again in the next sections.

#### 3.2.1 Models and amplitudes

Colored tensor models turn out to have very specific properties from
dimension three onwards, we will therefore exclude the matrix case and
assume @xmath from now on. The degrees of freedom are @xmath colored
rank- @xmath tensors @xmath , and their conjugates @xmath . @xmath is
again the color index, and the indices run from @xmath to @xmath . From
the GFT perspective, these tensors can equivalently be considered as
truncated version of the Fourier transforms of fields defined on @xmath
copies of a compact Lie group. For instance, the Fourier dual of @xmath
is @xmath , and can be truncated to a set of cardinal @xmath . But
because of the choice of covariances made in tensor models, they are
essentially insensible to the nature of the group. The kernels of the
propagators are given by simple Kronecker @xmath ’s with respect to the
indices and the colors. For any @xmath , we define the Gaussian measure
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The interaction is given by a simplicial term and its conjugate. We
introduce a notation with two indices ³ ³ 3 Additions are understood
modulo @xmath in the color set, and @xmath is identified with @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which makes its definition compact:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For simplicity of the discussion, we already introduced the unique
rescaling of the coupling constant @xmath which makes the large @xmath
expansion possible. The partition function of this tensor model expands
as a power series in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the sum runs over @xmath -colored graphs, @xmath is the number of
nodes of a graph @xmath , and @xmath its amplitude. The latter is easily
computed. Each node brings a @xmath factor, and identifies indices two
by two, according to the face structure of the graph. Following a given
face across propagators and vertices, we are able to trivially sum all
the Kronecker @xmath ’s, until we have just one index left in this face.
This gives a free sum and hence a factor @xmath per face contributing to
the amplitude. Therefore, we simply have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the set of faces of the graph @xmath .

#### 3.2.2 Degree and existence of the large N expansion

The @xmath expansion of tensor models relies on a rewriting of the
amplitudes ( 3.7 ) in terms of appropriate combinatorial objects. Of
particular relevance is the notion of jacket , first introduced in [ lin
] , and better understood in [ RazvanN , RazvanVincentN , jimmy ] .

###### Definition 2.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -colored graph. A jacket @xmath of @xmath is a
@xmath -subcomplex of the ( @xmath -complex represented by) @xmath ,
labeled by a cycle @xmath in the color set (or equivalently by @xmath ).
@xmath consists of the same nodes and edges as @xmath , while its faces
are the faces of colors @xmath .

The jackets label particular ribbon subdiagrams in the stranded diagrams
encoded by the colored graphs, which are dual to @xmath -dimensional
discretized surfaces embedded in the dual simplicial complexes [ jimmy ]
. They are also orientable, thanks to the complex structure of the
tensor models, and therefore their topology is fully captured by a
single positive integer: the genus. It is moreover possible to count the
faces of a graph @xmath in terms of the combinatorial data associated to
all its jackets, and prove a simple relation with their genera (see [
Gurau:2011xp ] and references therein):

###### Proposition 1.

The amplitude of a @xmath -colored graph is equal to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , called degree of @xmath , is the sum of the genera of its
jackets:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This very important result shows the existence of the @xmath expansion:
given its expression, @xmath is a positive integer and therefore the
divergence degree at large @xmath is uniformly bounded by @xmath . At
each order of the @xmath expansion, one needs to sum all the graphs with
a given degree, in the same way as one needed to sum all triangulations
with a given genus in matrix models. Notice however that, while @xmath
encodes some topological information about the graph @xmath , it is not
a topological invariant (see again [ Gurau:2011xp ] for a detailed
discussion of the topological properties of colored tensor models).

#### 3.2.3 The world of melons

After the discovery of the @xmath expansion, the research efforts mainly
focused on the leading order sector. The only configurations which
survive when @xmath is sent to infinity are the @xmath graphs. They were
given a simple recursive characterization in [ critical ] , in terms of
so-called melons . An elementary melon is a connected subgraph with two
nodes, @xmath internal lines, and @xmath external legs, as represented
on the left-side of Figure 3.3 .

In [ critical ] , it is first demonstrated that an @xmath graph
necessarily contains an elementary melon; and in a second step, that
contracting an elementary melon as pictured in Figure 3.3 does not
affect the degree of the graph. The second property is easy to
understand from formula ( 3.7 ), since @xmath nodes and @xmath faces are
suppressed in the contraction process. As for the first, it relies on
specific combinatorial relations, which we do not want to elaborate on
here. Therefore, any connected leading-order graph can be reduced to the
unique graph with two nodes, called the supermelon , in a contraction
process which involves only deletions of elementary melons.
Reciprocally, any such graph can be obtained from the supermelon and
successive dressings of its lines with elementary melons. These graphs
are called melonic , an example of which is provided in Figure 3.4 .

The free-energy of the melonic sector was also studied in details in [
critical ] , and was shown to have a finite radius of analyticity in
@xmath . Close to the critical value @xmath , graphs with very many
melons dominate, which signals the transition to a continuum phase. The
melonic free-energy @xmath behaves like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the vicinity of the critical point, with a critical exponent @xmath
which turns out to be independent of the dimension @xmath . The nested
structure of melonic graphs suggests that this phase is a "branched
polymer" one, describing a very crumpled metric. This last point has
been rigorously confirmed in the recent work [ jr_branched ] : the
continuous emergent space at the critical point has Hausdorff dimension
@xmath and spectral dimension @xmath .

From the quantum gravity perspective, this result can be interpreted in
two ways. Either a well-behaved emergent spherical space has to be
looked for in a double scaling or a generalization thereof, in a similar
fashion as higher genera are incorporated to matrix models; or it can
alternatively be understood as one other sign suggesting that tensor
models need to be supplemented with additional pre-geometric data.
Ongoing efforts aim at exploring this alternative, with first
encouraging results towards the realization of a double scaling in
tensor models [ wjd_double ] , and preliminary steps towards the
analysis of a melonic phase transition in the Boulatov-Oguri GFTs [
boulatov_phase ] .

### 3.3 Tensor invariance

#### 3.3.1 From colored simplices to tensor invariant interactions

A new set of developments of tensor models have been triggered by the
introduction of tensor invariant interactions. It was first realized in
[ r_vir ] that, in a rank- @xmath colored tensor model, @xmath fields
can be directly integrated, yielding an effective theory for the last
field. The new effective interactions are labeled by @xmath -bubbles (in
the color of the last field), as easily understood from the point of
view of the initial perturbative expansion: instead of summing over the
initial interactions and propagators, one first integrates the
propagators in three of the colors, yielding new effective bubble
vertices to which the propagators in the last color can be hooked. These
interactions are infinitely many, and the coupling constants in front
are functions of the initial @xmath . What is remarkable with these
simple tensor models is that their kernels are also products of
Kronecker @xmath ’s, which identify indices according to which face they
belong. If one furthermore assumes the new coupling constants to be
independent, one obtains a whole class of tensor models with a single
field, but an infinite set of freely adjustable interactions.

Let us assume the single effective field to have color @xmath , and the
bubble vertices to be constructed out of color @xmath to @xmath . The
only faces which matters are the color- @xmath ones, and are identified
thanks to the colored structure of the bubbles. With the notations
introduced before, in a given bubble interaction @xmath , the @xmath
index of a @xmath field is identified to the @xmath index of a @xmath ,
and both are in the same position in these tensors. We can therefore
interpret the color @xmath as labeling the position of an index in the
tensors @xmath and @xmath . And the color conservation of the faces in
the initial colored models translates into the requirement that: in the
bubble @xmath , an index in the @xmath position of a tensor @xmath must
be contracted with an index of a @xmath in the same position.

These considerations allowed the authors of [ uncoloring ] to develop an
axiomatic formulation of random tensor models, based on this
single-field framework. Consider a complex rank- @xmath tensor @xmath ,
and assumes that it transforms as a tensor products of fundamental
representations of @xmath . That is to say that matrices @xmath act on
@xmath and its conjugate as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This large symmetry group, @xmath , acts independently on each of the
indices. The action can then be required to be tensor invariant , i.e.
invariant under @xmath . It turns out [ universality ] that tensor
invariants are generated by monomials, which contract the indices of
@xmath tensors @xmath and @xmath tensors @xmath , in such a way that the
@xmath index of a @xmath is always contracted with the @xmath index of a
@xmath . They are labeled by @xmath -colored graphs, with white (resp.
black) dots representing @xmath (resp. @xmath ) tensors, and a line of
color @xmath picturing the contraction of two indices in the @xmath
position. They are the analogues of the trace invariants of matrix
models. If we moreover restrict to connected such invariants, we find
that the action is a sum of bubble interactions, i.e. a sum of monomials
labeled by connected @xmath -colored graphs. A general probability
theory for such independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) tensors
has been constructed at the perturbative level [ universality ] . It
relies on a generalization of the @xmath expansion for colored tensor
models, which provides the tools to prove universality theorem akin to
the central limit theorem [ universality ] . Another avenue towards the
same results is provided by Schwinger-Dyson equations [ v_revisiting ] ,
which generalize the loop equations of matrix models [ r_vir , r_sdgene
] . They even allowed to uncover the existence of slightly modified
@xmath expansions, which retain more than melonic graphs at
leading-order [ v_new ] . Finally, recent non-perturbative studies [
r_constructive ] of the same models opened a new era, in which
constructive field theory methods [ rz_loop1 , rz_loop2 ] are expected
to deepen our understanding of the large @xmath limit of i.i.d. tensor
models.

#### 3.3.2 Generalization to GFTs

The concept of tensor invariance unlocked a new understanding of tensor
models, which allows to view the colors as a consequence of a symmetry
principle, rather than labels of extra fields introduced by hand. With
insight, the relative failure of analytical methods in the early
incarnations of tensor models [ Ambjorn_tensors , gross ,
Sasakura:1990fs ] is tied to an unfortunate symmetrization of the tensor
indices. The colored substrate making the topology and combinatorics
tractable is only recovered with unsymmetrized tensors. The wealth of
results gathered in this new framework establish tensor models as a very
active field of research, in rapid development. From the point of view
of spin foam models and group field theories, it is at the same time a
competitor and an important source of inspiration. The more we will
learn about tensor models, the more we will be able to understand the
quantum field theory properties of group field theories.

In particular, the notion of tensor invariance seems to be of paramount
importance, as will be illustrated in Chapters 5 , 6 and 7 . It has been
first applied to fields defined on group manifolds in [ tensor_4d ] ,
which considers a 4d GFT based on the @xmath group. The main innovation
of this article is to replace the sharp cut-off in Fourier space, which
would immediately yield a tensor model, with a non-trivial propagator
based on the Laplace operator on @xmath . This introduces a non-i.i.d
@xmath weight into the propagator, hence defining a non-trivial field
theory. In this context, tensor invariance provides a notion of
locality, well-adapted to a renormalizability analysis. The field theory
of [ tensor_4d ] is the first renormalizable instance in a large class
of GFTs based on bubble interactions, known as Tensorial Group Field
Theories (TGFTs). They have been generalized to various groups and
propagators [ josephsamary , joseph_etera , u1 , fabien_dine , su2 ,
joseph_d2 ] , slowly bridging the gap with more involved 4d quantum
gravity models. It is in our view a very important line of research to
pursue, to which a large part of this thesis is dedicated.

## Chapter 4 Large N expansion in topological Group Field Theories

In this chapter, we present results about the large @xmath expansion of
topological GFTs, initially obtained in [ vertex ] and [ edge ] . We
first focus on the Boulatov model, and then generalize to its
four-dimensional counter-part, the Ooguri model, which can be considered
the backbone of any of the current quantum gravity models. Our main
purpose will be to illustrate how the geometric data encoded in the
group or algebra variables of the fields can be exploited to understand
the scalings of the amplitudes with respect to the large @xmath
parameter. We will in particular detail how both of these models can be
reformulated in variables adapted to the symmetry uncovered in [ diffeos
] . While we think these formulations can be useful in various
situations, we will only present direct applications to the large @xmath
expansion. The two main results in this respect will be: scaling bounds
in terms of the bubbles of the Feynman diagrams, which prove that
topological singularities do not contribute to the first few orders of
the large @xmath expansion; scaling bounds in terms of the jackets which
slightly generalize the jacket bounds of [ RazvanN , RazvanVincentN ] ,
and thereby provide an independent way of proving the existence of the
@xmath expansion of these models.

### 4.1 Colored Boulatov model

#### 4.1.1 Vertex variables

##### Colored Boulatov model and shift symmetry

We begin with a complete definition of the colored Boulatov model, and
the construction of its vertex representation, as introduced in [
diffeos ] and further developed in [ vertex ] . For clarity of the
presentation, we will restrict again to functions on @xmath , identified
as functions @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . This
will allow us to use the group Fourier transform of [ majidfreidel ] ,
which is bijective in the case of @xmath , but not in the case of @xmath
. Note however that we could work with the full @xmath group, at the
price of using the generalized Fourier transform introduced in [ karim ]
. As this would introduce heavy notations without changing any of the
scaling bounds we can deduce from the vertex formulation, we refrain
from doing so and work within the simplified framework. Recall that the
group Fourier transform maps functions @xmath to functions @xmath
defined on the Lie algebra @xmath . The @xmath -product endows this
space of Lie algebra functions with a non-commutative structure,
reflecting the group structure of @xmath . It is indeed the Fourier dual
of the convolution of functions in @xmath , in the sense that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This implies in particular that an integral of the point-wise product of
two functions on the group manifold is equal to the integral over @xmath
of the @xmath -product of their Fourier transforms:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is convenient at this stage to work ’on-shell’, i.e. in a space of
fields verifying the Gauss constraint. We therefore introduce four
complex fields @xmath , labeled by a color index @xmath , verifying the
gauge invariance condition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

as well as the @xmath invariance. The colored Boulatov model [ cboulatov
] can then be defined by the action:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and the partition function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the (formal) Lebesgue measure on the space of gauge
invariant fields. Alternatively, one can work with the Fourier
transformed fields @xmath , and a non-commutative path integral weighted
by an action with the same structure as ( 4.4 ), except that the @xmath
-product is used in place of the pointwise product. The geometrical
interpretation of the fields and of the interactions is recalled in
Figure 4.1 . By convention, we will refer to the interaction between
@xmath fields (resp. @xmath fields) as the clockwise (resp.
anti-clockwise) interaction, this nomenclature referring to the
graphical representation we adopt to distinguish these two interactions.

In [ diffeos ] , this model was shown to respect (quantum) symmetries,
given by actions of the Drinfel’d double @xmath on the (’on-shell’)
fields. We will focus on the translational part of these actions,
interpreted as (discrete) diffeomorphisms [ laurentdiffeo ,
biancadiffeos , biancabenny ] . They have four generators @xmath , each
@xmath acting non-trivially on fields of color @xmath . For instance,
@xmath acts on @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be interpreted as translations of the edges @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively by @xmath and @xmath , with a deformation given by the
@xmath -product. This is clearer in metric variables, where the previous
equation can be (schematically) written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a result, the action of @xmath on the field of color @xmath can
geometrically be interpreted as a deformed translation of one of its
vertices, as represented in Figure 4.2 . Furthermore, we can assign
colors to the vertices of the tetrahedron defining the interaction term,
with the convention that @xmath should be the vertex opposed to the
triangle of color @xmath (as introduced in the previous chapter). This
induces a color label for the vertices of the different triangles. In
this picture, the action of @xmath on @xmath corresponds to a
translation of the vertex of color @xmath in the triangle of color
@xmath .

This geometrical interpretation generalizes to any generator and any
field: @xmath translates the vertex of color @xmath in @xmath (if any)
by a quantity @xmath . With our conventions, the symmetries are
therefore given by the following equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that the Hopf algebra deformations (i.e. the @xmath -products) are
defined such that the plane-waves generating the translations are always
of the form @xmath . This feature has also a geometrical meaning: it
guarantees that the transformed fields stay invariant under diagonal
left action of @xmath , that is the triangles remain closed after
translation of one of their vertices.

To be complete, we would need to specify how these translations act on
products of fields. This step, which depends on the @xmath co-product,
again amounts to a choice of @xmath -product orderings of the plane
waves resulting from the actions on individual fields. One result of [
diffeos ] is that it is possible to define them in such a way that the
action, and in particular its interaction term, are left invariant. We
postpone this task to the next section, where the use of vertex
variables will make the definitions more geometrically transparent.

The interpretation of these symmetries is very nice. As just mentioned,
they are interpreted as translations of the vertices of the
triangulation, which at the level of simplicial gravity are the discrete
counterparts of the diffeomorphisms [ biancadiffeos ] . At the discrete
gauge field theory level, that is in group space, they impose triviality
of the holonomy around a loop encircling a vertex of the boundary
triangulation (this is apparent in the group representation of the GFT
interaction vertex), which is the content of the diffeomorphism
constraints of 3d gravity. Finally, in the spin foam formulation they
generate the recurrence relations satisfied by @xmath -symbols [
BarrettCraneWdW , eterasimonevalentin ] , which again encode the
diffeomorphism invariance of the theory in algebraic language. We refer
to [ diffeos ] for a detailed discussion of these aspects.

##### Vertex Lie algebra variables

Following the interpretation of the symmetries as vertex translations,
it is tempting to change variables so that the new fields directly
depend on the generators of these translations. The idea is simply to
write each edge Lie algebra variable as a difference between the
positions of its two endpoints (with respect to some arbitrary reference
point). Each triangle is now to be described by the three positions of
its vertices, as represented in Figure 4.3 . However, due to the
non-commutative nature of this symmetry, one would actually like to
define a twisted version of this change of variables, schematically:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s stand for implicit internal @xmath -products. To
this effect one can introduce the map @xmath , which to any
left-invariant field @xmath , associates a function of three @xmath
elements, defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The variable @xmath is interpreted as a position variable for the vertex
shared by the edges @xmath and @xmath . The intrinsic geometry of a
triangle in @xmath is fully characterized, up to rotations, by
specifying three edge vectors constrained to close. If we are given the
three positions of its vertices instead, there is a redundancy: a
simultaneous translation of all the vertices simply corresponds to a
change of the origin of the coordinates in @xmath and does not affect
the geometry. This redundancy should also manifests itself in the
properties of the function @xmath . However, because the translation
symmetry is encoded in a quantum group acting on products of
representations, in order to define it properly we need to specify an
ordering of the arguments of the fields. We therefore interpret @xmath
as a tensor product of representations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then introduce the global translation operator @xmath , defined
on tensor products of plane-waves by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We immediately verify that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore @xmath maps the space of left-invariant functions in @xmath to
a set of functions of three @xmath elements invariant under @xmath . One
can moreover prove it to be injective, and hence bijective between
@xmath and its image. We will not detail this point here, but we will do
it for the slightly more involved Ooguri model, in Proposition 4 . This
property ensures that the theory can fully be formulated with vertex
variables, provided by the new fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The key point of this transformation lies in the following: the initial
gauge invariance condition, that is diagonal left-translation invariance
in group space, is traded for a global (twisted) translation invariance
in Lie algebra vertex variables.

As already proven in [ diffeos ] , the original Boulatov action can then
be re-written in terms of the new fields @xmath . With the conventions
of this thesis, we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We notice that in all the integrals we have one free variable which can
be fixed to any value without changing the value of the action; this
amounts to a choice of origin from which measuring the position of the
vertices. This is also reflected in the four translation symmetries not
being independent, one of them being automatically verified when the
others are imposed; in other words, the model knows about the intrinsic
geometry of the triangles and of the tetrahedra they form, and correctly
does not depend on their embedding in @xmath .

We remark also that, in the interaction, each vertex variable appears in
three different fields, so that we have a @xmath -product of three terms
for each @xmath . The extra signs encode orderings of the @xmath
-products, which can again be interpreted as defining the orientations
of the triangles. Consider for example the triangle of color @xmath .
From Figure 4.2 , its orientation is given by the cyclic ordering @xmath
of its edge variables, which induces a natural cyclic ordering of its
vertices: @xmath (notice that by convention, we actually choose the
reverse ordering). This induces in turn an ordering of the triangles
attached to the vertex @xmath : @xmath (see again the left part of
Figure 4.2 ). This is the (cyclic) order in which, in the clockwise
interaction term, the @xmath -product of fields having @xmath in their
arguments (that is @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ) has to be computed. In
the anticlockwise interaction term, this has to be reversed. That is why
the variable @xmath appears with a positive sign in the first
interaction term, and a minus sign in the second. This discussion
generalizes to any color, so that in the end signs in front of variables
@xmath are fully determined by the ordering of variables in the field
@xmath of the same color.

##### Shift symmetry in vertex variables

Now we have a vertex representation of the classical theory, it is
interesting to discuss further the translation symmetries. As expected,
we have simpler formulas in this representation.

Let us first discuss the action of translations on individual fields.
The transformations read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus each field @xmath can be interpreted as living in the
representation space of (the translation part of) three copies of the
deformed 3d Poincaré group @xmath . This makes the interpretation of
these transformations as vertex translations more explicit, and
clarifies the very definition of the GFT.

The deformation of the translations manifests itself when acting on
products of fields. This is a question we left open in the previous
sections, exactly because it is more easily understood in the vertex
formulation. To define the action of the translations on a product of
fields, we need to interpret it as a tensor product. There is no
canonical choice: for example the integrand @xmath in the interaction
term ( 4.1.1 ) can be interpreted as the evaluation of @xmath , but also
of @xmath , and generally of any permutation of the representation
spaces. The Hopf algebra deformation of the translations required to
make the interaction invariant will then depend on this additional
convention. For definiteness let us interpret the term @xmath as the
evaluation of @xmath . The Hopf algebra structure of the symmetries then
has to be consistent with orderings of @xmath -products (i.e. signs) in
equation ( 4.1.1 ). This requires to distinguish colors @xmath from
@xmath , since the corresponding variables have opposite signs in (
4.1.1 ). All this suggests the following definition of translations, on
products of fields, which we give in group variables. If @xmath are
living in the representation space of @xmath , then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With this definition, and the tensor product interpretation of the
interaction term we gave, the action is indeed invariant under
translations. For instance, in metric variables, the integrand of the
interaction part of the action is simply translated with respect to its
variable of color @xmath under the transformation @xmath . As a result,
and because it is defined by integrals over the whole space @xmath , the
invariance follows.

##### Vertex group variables

As far as the quantum theory is concerned, and in particular for
practical calculations, it is convenient to Fourier transform back the
vertex formulation to group space. The dual group variables are @xmath ,
Fourier duals of the @xmath . Due to the translation invariance of the
Lie algebra fields, in group space the configuration fields are
distributions @xmath of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are regular functions. It is interesting at this point to
notice the double duality between algebra/group and edge/vertex
variables: one has to impose closure constraints in algebra edge
variables and group vertex variables; the same translate into
translation invariance in group edge variables and algebra vertex
variables. The precise forms of these different constraints are
summarized in Table 4.1 .

In terms of the newly defined fields, the action takes the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with the notation convention @xmath , and a vertex function defined by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The notations in the vertex function are as follows: upper indices label
triangles or equivalently fields, and lower indices are associated to
vertices, with the convention that a color @xmath labels the vertex
opposite to the triangle of the same color @xmath (see Figure (a)a ).

Notice the appearance of a kernel of the kinetic term (i.e. the
distributional part of the fields @xmath ). This is the Fourier dual of
the translation invariance of the fields we described in the Lie algebra
representation. It is interpreted as a consistency constraint on the
three group elements associated to a quantized triangle: their ordered
product needs by construction to be trivial.

The vertex function consists (first line) in the same distributional
factors of the fields @xmath , imposing the mentioned consistency
conditions, while the second lines are flatness conditions associated to
paths around the vertices of the tetrahedra, hence guaranteeing flatness
of the connection in the boundary of the tetrahedron (see Figure 4.4 ).
Note that only three of these flatness constraints appear in the
interaction kernel, while a tetrahedron has four vertices. This is
obviously because only three of these flatness constraints are
independent. We can therefore choose any triplet of these four
constraints ¹ ¹ 1 The fourth one, associated to the vertex of color 1
being simply @xmath . to express the same distribution, implementing all
four constraints.

##### Quantum amplitudes

Now that we have well-understood the constraints that need to be imposed
in vertex variables, we can provide a rigorous definition for the
partition function @xmath in these variables. We resort to a non
degenerate Gaussian measure @xmath over the space of regular fields
@xmath , which combines the translation invariance constraint with the
ill-defined Lebesgue measure into a well-defined Gaussian covariance:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Only the exponential of the interaction part of the action remains to be
integrated, to give a suitable definition of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A couple of remarks are in order. First, only the flatness part of the
kernel of the interaction has been used in the definition of @xmath .
This is because the distributional nature of the configuration fields
@xmath has already been taken care of in the measure. Were we to
integrate @xmath and not @xmath , we would pick up products of equal
distributions in the amplitudes, hence further divergences. Second, at
this formal level, which of the four flatness constraints we use to
define @xmath does not matter (see the resulting graphical
representation in Figure 4.5 ). In the regularized theory, to which we
turn in the next subsection, this is not the case, and we expect
different choices to give amplitudes with the same scaling behavior but
differing by factors of order @xmath (in the cut-off). That is why,
contrary to the regularization chosen in the paper [ vertex ] , we will
use the symmetric regularization in the color indices of [ edge ] .
Finally, it is important to stress that the vertex formulation of the
path-integral we just introduced is strictly equivalent to the usual
Boulatov model, written in terms of edge variables. At the level of
gauge invariant fields, our construction amounts to a simple change of
variables in terms of which the fields are expressed. Therefore the
Jacobian of the transformation evaluates to one.

Formally, we can expand the partition function as a power series in
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the amplitudes @xmath are labeled by closed colored graphs. White
nodes are associated to anticlockwise vertices, and black nodes to
clockwise ones. They contribute with an integrand respectively equal to
@xmath or @xmath times the kernel ( 4.22 ). Each line of color @xmath is
associated to a covariance ( 4.23 ), with @xmath . An example of the
correspondence between colored and stranded representations is provided
in Figure 4.6 , for the elementary melon graph. Also illustrated in this
figure is the fact that the vertex variables make the @xmath -bubbles
explicit, as opposed to the faces in the edge variables. Indeed, in the
stranded representation, let us consider a connected component of
strands of color @xmath . It is a graph of a non-commutative @xmath
scalar field theory on a Lie algebra space-time @xmath , with momentum
space @xmath , the interaction being essentially momentum conservation
at each node. From the simplicial perspective, it is dual to the bubble
around a vertex of color @xmath , and encodes its topological structure.
Precisely, each line of this @xmath -graph can be assigned an additional
individual color: that of the colored @xmath -graph line it is part of.
Thus we really have a colored @xmath -graph, which is therefore dual to
a closed and orientable triangulated surface [ Vince_2d , lrd , diffeos
] : the bubble. The overall amplitude associated to a 4-graph is
therefore given by @xmath graphs encoding the structure of the bubbles,
glued to one another through propagators (associated to triangles).

As far as computations are concerned, the main advantage of the vertex
formulation, is that most of the non-trivial constraints encoded in the
propagators can be integrated out straight away. This is because one of
the four @xmath -functions associated to stranded nodes is missing in
each interaction kernel. A consistent choice throughout a given graph
@xmath therefore allows to associate all the strands of a given color,
say @xmath , to integration variables which appear in no more than one
propagator each. The corresponding @xmath -functions can therefore be
integrated to @xmath , and one is left with reduced amplitudes built out
of interaction vertices of the type shown in Figure (b)b . One achieves
in this case a factorization of the integrands of the amplitudes in
terms of color- @xmath bubble contributions, initially proven in [
vertex ] . This is of course possible with any color @xmath , and yields
the general formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the order of @xmath , @xmath is its set of bubbles of
color @xmath , @xmath the set of vertices in a bubble @xmath , @xmath
the set of triangles in a bubble @xmath that share one of its vertices
@xmath , and finally @xmath is the set of triangles of color @xmath in
the dual complex. The geometrical interpretation of this expression is
very natural: the bubble terms in the first parenthesis encode flatness
around each of the vertices of the triangulated surface, and the terms
in the second parenthesis encode the consistency conditions in triangles
of color @xmath . One thus obtains an effective description of the model
in terms of triangulated 3-cells whose boundaries have color @xmath ,
the bubbles. In Figure 4.7 , we illustrate this result by showing a
portion of a bubble @xmath , dual to a vertex @xmath . The effective
interaction term associated to @xmath imposes a trivial holonomy around
the vertex @xmath .

In the regulated theory, this factorization allows to derive nice bounds
on the amplitudes: on the one hand, one can understand the effect of
singularities at vertices of color @xmath ; on the other hand, one can
derive jacket bounds, which give information about the global topology
of the 4-colored graph, and of its dual simplicial complex.

#### 4.1.2 Regularization and general scaling bounds

Because the amplitudes of the Boulatov model are generically divergent,
we need to regularize it. We adopt here the regularization scheme of [
edge ] , which is well-adapted to the computation of scaling bounds in
vertex variables. This differs from the regularization used in [ vertex
] in two respects: a) the cut-off is introduced at the level of the
potential @xmath ; b) instead of a sharp cut-off in the harmonic
expansion of the @xmath -functions, we will use heat kernels. The first
point is in contrast with what has been and will be again advocated for
renormalization, where keeping a fixed notion of locality in the
interaction is very profitable. In the present situation, locality does
not play any role, and on the contrary it is at the level of the
covariances that the correspondence between edge and vertex variables
has been established. It seems therefore preferable to keep the full
Gaussian measures and regularize the interactions, this way the relation
between scaling bounds in the two formulations is more transparent. Let
us elaborate a bit on this second point, and introduce the heat kernel.
The @xmath -function on @xmath expands as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, the heat kernel at time @xmath on @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the characters of @xmath . We see that @xmath converges
to the @xmath -distribution when @xmath , and therefore provides us with
a regularization of the @xmath -function. The three properties of this
regularization we will use in this and later chapters are the following.
First, @xmath is a positive function, which will be very convenient for
bounding amplitudes. Second, these functions behave nicely with respect
to the convolution product:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, when @xmath , we have the following asymptotic formula ² ² 2
This formula holds on any compact excluding @xmath , a simple derivation
can be found in the Appendix A.1 . :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Riemannian distance between @xmath and the identity,
and @xmath . In particular we will use the fact that @xmath at small
@xmath . @xmath is the parameter with respect to which the @xmath
expansion will be constructed.

We define the regularized theory by the following partition function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.32)
     @xmath   @xmath                     (4.33)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Before moving on to the analysis of the regularized amplitudes, let us
discuss briefly the role of the regularization chosen. Note, in fact,
that we have chosen a symmetric regularization in the colors, hence the
re-introduction of the flatness constraint around the vertex of color
@xmath , together with the appropriate rescaling. The main advantage of
such a symmetric regularization is that discussing bounds from different
bubble factorizations will be made easier, as will be detailed shortly.

On the one hand, this regularization is slightly different from the
natural scheme one would use in edge variables (see for instance [
ValentinJoseph ] , which also largely motivated the heat kernel
regularization used in [ edge ] ). This is because it does not
correspond to a regularization of the @xmath -functions imposing
flatness of the wedges dual to edges in the GFT interaction vertex (thus
encoding the piece-wise flatness of the simplicial complexes generated
in the GFT expansion). On the other hand, regularizations that make
bubble factorizations explicit after transformation to vertex variables
are very natural also when these last ones are used. For example, we
could use a non-symmetric regularization of the interaction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allows to write the amplitudes in a factorized form similar to (
4.27 ), with @xmath . This corresponds exactly, in edge variables, to
regularizing only the @xmath -functions associated to edges which do not
contain the vertex of color @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.35)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We see, then, that equation ( 4.32 ) interpolates between the four
possible regularizations of this type.

The main fact that makes this form of the regularized amplitude ( 4.32 )
convenient for our purposes is that, using the positivity of the heat
kernel, one can bound any of the four flatness constraints by @xmath ,
and obtain bounds on amplitudes which have the same expression as with a
regularization of the non-symmetric type ( 4.34 ), but maintaining the
symmetry among colors manifest up to this last step.

One can then show that, for any graph @xmath and any choice of color
@xmath , the regularized amplitude @xmath admits the following bound:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the number of triangles in a bubble @xmath that
contain the vertex @xmath .

Let us now see how this formula allows to derive interesting scaling
bounds. The general idea is that we would like to remove the remaining
propagator constraints, which are in a sense non-local quantities (from
the point of view of the bubbles), and prevent us from trivially
integrating the amplitudes. A simple way of doing it is to pick up a
second color label @xmath , and bound all the flatness constraints
associated to vertices of color @xmath by their value at the identity.
In the resulting bound, all the propagator constraints will then have an
independent variable of color @xmath , allowing us to trivially
integrate them. We are finally left with two @xmath graphs,
corresponding to the strands in the two remaining colors @xmath and
@xmath . Now, each connected component of such a graph is dual to a
vertex (of the same color) of the simplicial complex. Therefore,
integrating a tree in each of these components, and bounding the final
expression by its value at the identity, we arrive at:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.37)
  -- -- -- --------

where for any @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

is equal to the number of tetrahedra in the simplicial complex that
contain @xmath . Finally, remarking that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can rewrite this bounds using powers of heat kernels with the same
parameter, for instance @xmath . This allows to show that for any
constant @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

we asymptotically have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In addition to the bound ( 4.1.2 ), we will also need the following
combinatorial lemma from [ vertex ] :

###### Lemma 1.

Let @xmath be a connected vacuum graph. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Choose two colors @xmath . From @xmath we construct a connectivity graph
@xmath , whose vertices are the bubbles of color @xmath and @xmath .
Then for any @xmath and @xmath we draw a line between them if and only
if @xmath has a vertex dual to @xmath in its triangulation. We call
@xmath the number of lines of @xmath , and @xmath its number of
vertices. Now remark that the fact that @xmath is connected implies that
@xmath is also connected. In fact, the bubbles of color @xmath are all
connected in @xmath by lines of color @xmath . But these lines are
themselves part of bubbles of color @xmath , which means that two
bubbles of color @xmath are connected if and only if their dual vertices
appear in a same bubble of color @xmath , that is if and only if they
are connected to a same element in the graph @xmath . So @xmath is
connected. A maximal tree in this graph has @xmath lines, which implies
the simple inequality: @xmath . To conclude, first notice that by
construction @xmath is equal to @xmath . Still by construction, for any
@xmath , @xmath has to be greater than the number of lines ending on
@xmath in @xmath . Therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

In the following paragraphs, two kinds of bounds on the divergence
degree @xmath of a connected vacuum graph @xmath will be provided. The
notion of divergence degree we adopt is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which measures the divergence behavior of a graph @xmath in units of
@xmath .

#### 4.1.3 Topological singularities

##### Bubble bounds

Let us first derive the bubble bounds, which allow to analyze the
behavior of topologically singular configurations. These were first
derive in [ vertex ] , but we follow here the more direct proof of [
edge ] . Starting from ( 4.1.2 ), the derivation is straightforward. As
a first step, we simply apply Lemma 1 with @xmath and @xmath . This
gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We then use the definition of the genus of a bubble @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the combinatorial relation between the number of edges and faces

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

to write:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain a uniform bound in the number of interaction vertices
(dual tetrahedra), one must rescale the GFT coupling constant with
appropriate powers of @xmath , namely:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

We summarize this result in the following proposition:

###### Proposition 2.

Using the rescaling ( 4.51 ), the divergence degree @xmath of any
connected vacuum graph @xmath of the colored Boulatov model verifies,
for any color @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

As an immediate corollary of the previous proposition, one can give a
bound in terms of the number of pointlike singularities of a given
color:

###### Corollary 1.

With the rescaling of the coupling constant ( 4.51 ), the divergence
degree @xmath of any connected vacuum graph @xmath verifies, for any
color @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of singular vertices of color @xmath .

In summary: in the perturbative expansion of the Boulatov GFT model,
singular simplicial complexes are generically suppressed, uniformly in
the number of tetrahedra. Provided that these bounds are saturated, we
have just established the existence of a @xmath expansion in which the
leading order graphs represent regular manifolds. We therefore now turn
to the question of the optimality of the bubble bounds.

##### Optimality of the bounds

In order to address this question, we need to be able to compute the
exact power-counting of a sufficiently rich set of graphs. In this
respect, we propose to first design elementary pieces of graphs which
have one unique bubble of color @xmath , and a certain number of
external legs. We will then be able to build connected vacuum graphs
with any kinds of bubbles out of these elementary graphs. Of course we
want to keep the combinatorics of these elementary graphs rather simple,
to be able to do exact calculations.

It is then natural to start from minimal @xmath -graphs representing
@xmath -dimensional orientable surfaces of a given topology. They are
called canonical graphs in the mathematical literature (see [ Vince_2d ]
and references therein). A canonical graph of genus @xmath has @xmath
nodes. Figure 4.8 shows the canonical graphs of genus @xmath , @xmath
and their generalization to any genus @xmath . We refer to [ Vince_2d ]
for proofs of these statements and further comments.

We are ready to build our elementary graphs. For a given genus @xmath we
start from the canonical graph shown in Figure 4.8 , and add external
legs of color @xmath on every node. This gives a set of canonical
bubbles with external legs, from which we can in principle construct any
topology generated by the colored Boulatov model. To keep the
combinatorics of the graphs simple, we will focus on linear chains of
such bubbles. To this effect, we can first contract @xmath pairs of
external legs, keeping only two of them free, in each of these canonical
bubbles. More precisely, for each genus @xmath we define the graph
@xmath as shown in Figure 4.9 .

The reason why these graphs are useful lies in the following lemma (see
Figure 4.10 ):

###### Lemma 2.

Let @xmath be a colored graph, with a subgraph @xmath for some @xmath .
Call @xmath the graph obtained after replacement of @xmath by the graph
@xmath . Then, with the rescaling of the coupling constant ( 4.51 ),
@xmath scales like:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.54)
  -- -- -- --------

###### Proof.

We first adopt a representation of the amplitude adapted to the color of
the bubble we want to analyze. Let us assume that @xmath has external
legs of color @xmath , we then use inequality ( 4.27 ) with @xmath ,
which is certainly an equality in the scaling sense. Now remark that a
canonical triangulation of a bubble of genus @xmath has only three
vertices. Indeed, dual of vertices (of the triangulation) of color
@xmath are closed chains of strands alternatively of color @xmath and
@xmath . It is easy to see that there is only one such closed chain of
strands in the canonical graph of genus @xmath . So the dual
triangulation has only one vertex of color @xmath , and similarly for
colors @xmath and @xmath . This means that in the amplitude of @xmath ,
the @xmath subgraph contributes with only three heat kernels associated
to its dual vertices, and @xmath @xmath -functions associated to
pairings of lines of color @xmath . Moreover, these pairings are such
that the arguments in the heat kernels associated to the vertices
simplify upon integration (thanks to the convolution formula), and the
contribution of @xmath to the amplitude of @xmath is equal, in the
scaling sense ³ ³ 3 Since we are only interested in the scaling behavior
here, we do not pay attention to the combinatorial factors resulting
from the convolutions of heat kernels. , to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the variables @xmath and @xmath are that of the two external legs
of @xmath . The @xmath are associated to the @xmath remaining lines of
color @xmath , and can be integrated. We obtain a term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

which reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath . These two terms differ by a factor @xmath , which
concludes the proof. ∎

This is all we need in order to saturate the bubble bounds. We call
@xmath the chain of @xmath graphs @xmath as represented in Figure 4.11 .
Chains of @xmath graphs being maximally divergent spheres [ scaling3d ]
, this suggests that the chain @xmath could be a dominant graph in the
class of graphs with singularities @xmath . So let us first compute
these amplitudes.

###### Lemma 3.

Let @xmath , and @xmath . Then, with the rescaling of the coupling
constant ( 4.51 ), @xmath scales as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Lemma 2 ensures that @xmath behaves like @xmath times @xmath . As proved
in [ scaling3d ] , @xmath is dual to a sphere and maximally divergent. A
way to see it here is to remark that with the scaling we chose for the
coupling @xmath , a @xmath subgraph whose two external strands are not
paired behaves like a propagator (straightforward calculation), so that
we can replace all subgraphs @xmath but one by propagators. We are left
with the simplest graph corresponding to a sphere, that is again the
melon graph which behaves like @xmath . ∎

This concludes the study of bubble bounds for the Boulatov model. We
have confirmed that, upon rescaling of the coupling constant as given by
( 4.51 ), a @xmath expansion can be defined. The first term of this
expansion, scaling like @xmath , only contains regular manifolds, while
topological singularities are tamed according to Proposition 2 . This
establishes the existence of a regime of the GFT in which the local
topology of space-time emerges from a richer set of possibilities. To go
further, and make contact with the way the existence of the @xmath
expansion was first established, we focus next on another type of
bounds, associated to jackets rather than bubbles.

#### 4.1.4 Domination of melons

##### Jacket bounds

The jacket bounds are crucial to the @xmath expansion. We will not only
show that they can also be deduced from our framework, in a rather
straightforward way, but also that the vertex reformulation of the model
allows to derive a stronger bound than the original one [ RazvanN ] .
This will also prove that the next-to-leading orders of the Boulatov
model are most probably not populated by the same graphs as in the
i.i.d. tensor model.

Jackets are two dimensional closed and orientable surfaces embedded in a
simplicial complex [ jimmy ] . In the simplicial complex dual to a
4-colored graph @xmath , we have three different jackets, each labeled
by a pair @xmath of cyclic permutations of the color set [
FerriGagliardi , Vince_gene ] . We can identify them as follows. We
assign a color @xmath to any edge between two vertices of colors @xmath
and @xmath . Then, to each tetrahedron, one associates a rectangle,
whose edges are so constructed: for any color @xmath , the middle point
of the edge of the tetrahedron of color @xmath is joined to the middle
point of the edge of color @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 The addition in the color set is
of course understood modulo @xmath . . An example is given in Figure
4.12 . Gluings of tetrahedra induce gluings of these elementary
rectangles, providing a quadrangulated surface: this is a jacket. The
construction just outlined also makes clear why there are three possible
jackets that can be embedded in the simplicial complex. Also, one can
show that these three jackets correspond to three possible reductions of
the Boulatov model to a matrix model by reduction with respect to the
diagonal gauge invariance (closure constraint) at the level of the
action [ jimmy ] .

Before moving on to the computation of the bound, we need to express the
genus of a jacket @xmath in terms of combinatorial quantities of @xmath
. This is the purpose of the following lemma:

###### Lemma 4.

The jacket of color @xmath of a colored graph @xmath has genus:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath respectively the sets of tetrahedra and edges of
color @xmath in the simplicial complex dual to @xmath .

###### Proof.

The jacket @xmath is an orientable surface, hence its genus is related
to its Euler characteristic by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the sets of faces, edges and
vertices of @xmath . But, by construction:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the set of triangles in the simplicial complex. Since
each triangle is shared by two tetrahedra, we also have @xmath , and the
result follows. ∎

Let us now consider a connected vacuum graph @xmath , and one of its
jackets @xmath . We can use the previous lemma to write @xmath with data
suitable to bubble factorizations. Indeed, for any distinct colors
@xmath and @xmath , one immediately has:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

since to any bubble @xmath dual to the vertex @xmath , and vertex @xmath
, one uniquely associates the edge @xmath . Therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now try to make @xmath appear in the bounds we computed so far.
Applying Lemma 1 to ( 4.1.2 ), with @xmath , we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Averaging this expression and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

then yields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . As for the bubble bound, a uniform jacket bound in the
number of GFT interaction vertices (tetrahedra of the simplicial
complex) is obtained by a simple rescaling of the coupling constant,
which turns out to be identical to ( 4.51 ). This is not surprising,
since from our analysis of the bubble bounds, this rescaling is the
unique one supporting a non-trivial @xmath expansion. We summarize our
result in the following proposition:

###### Proposition 3.

With the rescaling of the coupling constant ( 4.51 ), the divergence
degree @xmath of any connected vacuum graph @xmath verifies, for any of
its jackets @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, the following bound holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that, as anticipated, this bound is stronger than the usual
jacket bound, proven in [ RazvanN ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

We know already that, if a 3d complex has a jacket with genus zero, the
complex is of spherical topology (trivial fundamental group) [
Gurau:2011xp ] . Therefore, we conclude that the leading order graphs in
the @xmath expansion not only index regular manifolds, as could be
deduced from the bubble bounds, but also spherical ones. Moreover, since
these leading order graphs also have degree @xmath , they must be
melonic, which proves that the same graphs populate the leading orders
of the colored Boulatov model and of the i.i.d. rank- @xmath colored
tensor model. We on the contrary expect to find differences at some
point in the sub-dominant contributions, since the decay ( 4.68 ) is
stronger than a decay in the degree of the graphs.

We conclude by noting also that the same bound could give further
insights into the topology of the higher order terms of the same
expansion, due to the following fact. Just as we know that @xmath is a
topological invariant, called regular genus, similarly @xmath is also
well-defined, and by definition a topological invariant (the @xmath is
taken over the equivalence class of graphs representing a given
topology). If @xmath and @xmath are not identical, then our results
allow to derive a non-trivial topological bound in terms of @xmath .

##### 1-dipole contractions

We conclude this presentation of the @xmath expansion of the Boulatov
model with a discussion of @xmath -dipole contractions, as seen from the
vertex variables. Dipole moves are used in crystallization theory [
FerriGagliardi ] to map colored graphs encoding the same topology to one
another. In tensor models, @xmath -dipoles are of particular relevance,
because they leave the amplitudes invariant (see for instance [
Gurau:2011xp ] ). In the Boulatov model, they only conserve the scalings
of the amplitudes with the cut-off, not their exact values, which is the
property on which Gurau relied in its derivation of the @xmath expansion
[ RazvanN ] . In our approach, it is again thanks to this approximate
invariance that we can verify that melonic graphs indeed all saturate
the jacket bounds, and are therefore the leading order graphs. A @xmath
-dipole of color @xmath is a line of same color which joins two nodes
having no other line in common (see the left side of Figure 4.13 ). It
is moreover said to be non-degenerate when it separates two distinct
bubbles (of color @xmath ). Its contraction amounts to deleting the
color- @xmath line and its two boundary nodes, and reconnecting the
@xmath open lines thus created according to their colors. See Figure
4.13 . In this chapter, we are only interested in non-degenerate @xmath
-dipoles, so we will often omit the qualifier.

Let us consider a graph @xmath , and two different bubbles @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath , glued through a triangle @xmath . We make in addition
the assumption that at least one of them, say @xmath , is a sphere. The
contribution of the two bubbles to the amplitude @xmath is given by a
factor of the form:

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the vertices of @xmath . Before
integrating with respect to @xmath , we would like to get rid of @xmath
, which imposes the closure of the triangle @xmath . Because we are only
interested in the scaling of @xmath , we can assume that this constraint
is also imposed by a heat kernel at time of order @xmath . Using the
other closure and flatness constraints in @xmath , we see that it is
equivalent to saying that the holonomy along a path circling @xmath in
@xmath has to be flat (see Figure 4.14 ), again up to the width of the
heat kernels. Iterating the process shows that this path can actually be
deformed arbitrarily. But @xmath is a sphere, hence simply connected. We
can therefore contract the path around another triangle of @xmath , and
write the constraint @xmath as the closure condition in this triangle.
We thus see that @xmath is redundant and can be set to @xmath without
changing the scaling of the integral.

We can now safely integrate the @xmath variables, which corresponds to
removing @xmath and taking the connected sum of @xmath and @xmath . We
denote this connected sum @xmath and refer for instance to [ Vince_2d ,
francesco ] for more details. This leads to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But we also have that (the second equality crucially depends on @xmath
being a sphere):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that in the end the contribution of the two bubbles is that of their
connected sum. We recover the relation found in [ RazvanN ] , between
the amplitude of the initial graph @xmath and the one after absorption
of the planar bubble @xmath in @xmath , noted @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath sign is meant to denote that the equality holds only in
the scaling sense.

This shows that the amplitudes are invariant under @xmath -dipole
contractions in the power-counting sense. This can be applied to melonic
graphs, which can be reduced to the elementary melon after a complete
set of @xmath -dipoles have been contracted. It is then easy to check
that this elementary melon scales like @xmath , and thereby confirm that
the leading order contributions of the @xmath expansion exactly consist
in the melonic sector.

### 4.2 Colored Ooguri model

The purpose of this section is to extend the previous results to four
dimensions, namely to the colored version of the Ooguri model [ Ooguri ,
cboulatov ] . Just like the Boulatov model, it is a GFT quantization of
@xmath theory, this time with the group @xmath (or @xmath for
simplicity). Because 4d gravity models are constructed by constraining
the data appearing in such a model, either at the level of the GFT
action or directly at the level of its Feynman amplitudes, we see the
results presented in this section as a first step towards performing a
similar analysis in 4d gravity models.

We will first show that the colored Ooguri GFT model, usually formulated
in terms of group-theoretic data associated to triangles in @xmath
-dimensional simplicial complexes [ cboulatov ] , can equivalently be
written with data associated to edges in the same simplicial complexes.
Similarly to the Boulatov model, such a formulation will allow to
factorize the amplitudes in terms of bubbles (here the @xmath -bubbles),
and to use new computation tools to derive bounds on the regularized
amplitudes. The two main results of this construction will be again: a)
a bound on topologically singular vertices, resulting in a clear
separation between leading order graphs corresponding to regular
manifolds and sub-dominant graphs associated to non-manifold
configurations; b) a new proof and an improvement of the so-called
jacket bound [ RazvanN , RazvanVincentN , Gurau:2011xq ] , which
moreover does not rely on topological moves (dipole contractions).

#### 4.2.1 Edge variables

##### Action and partition function

The colored Ooguri model is a field theory of five complex scalar fields
@xmath , each of them defined over four copies of @xmath , which respect
the following gauge invariance condition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Like in three dimensions, they are interpreted as quantized building
blocks of spatial geometry, here tetrahedra. The @xmath variables are
interpreted as parallel transports of an @xmath connection from the
center of the tetrahedra to the centers of their boundary triangles. The
action encodes the gluing of five tetrahedra to form a four-simplex via
the interaction term, while the kinetic parts mimic the identification
of two tetrahedra along their boundary triangles:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.74)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.75)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

A graphical representation of the two terms of this action is given in
Figure 4.15 .

There is also a metric representation [ Baratin:2010wi ] of the same
model in terms of Lie algebra variables, obtained via a group Fourier
transform, this time for the group @xmath . As in the 3d case, we will
however restrict ourselves to @xmath , for which a simple invertible
group Fourier transform is available, and the generalized framework [
karim ] is not needed. As before, functions on @xmath will be identified
with functions @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath . We adopt the notation
@xmath , and similarly for Lie algebra elements, and introduce the
plane-waves

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The group Fourier transform is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

and sends the convolution product on @xmath to a @xmath -product,
defined on plane-waves as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Besides these definitions, we will explicitly use the fact that the
@xmath -distributions on @xmath can be decomposed in plane-waves as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dually, a non-commutative @xmath -distribution on @xmath can be defined
by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

which verifies, for any algebra function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

In analogy with what has been done in three dimensions, we would like to
use the gauge invariance condition to re-express the action in terms of
fields whose arguments are associated to simplices of one dimension
less: in this case, from triangles to edges. The main difference with
the 3d situation however, is that the numbers of edges and triangles in
a tetrahedron do not match: a tetrahedron consists in four triangles,
but six edges.

At the level of a field @xmath , whose variables are associated to 4
different triangles, this translates into the fact that one can
construct six independent edge variables @xmath from pairs of triangle
variables @xmath . For example:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This means that, in order to match the number of degrees of freedom in
the two representations, we will have to use more constraints than in
the Boulatov model. These constraints will reflect geometrical
conditions on the holonomies in a tetrahedron. Remarking that the
variable @xmath represents the holonomy from the center of the triangle
@xmath to the center of the triangle @xmath , we see that for any
distinct indices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where from now on we use the notation: @xmath . There are a priori four
such equations to impose (one for any triplet @xmath , i.e. one for any
vertex of the tetrahedron). However, only three of them are independent,
since for example:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

All this suggests to introduce new fields @xmath , implicitly defined by
⁵ ⁵ 5 From now on, we will denote by @xmath the @xmath -distribution on
@xmath , and by @xmath (resp. @xmath ) its counterpart on @xmath (resp.
@xmath ). :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This idea can be made precise using the group Fourier transform
previously introduced. For any function @xmath , we define a function
@xmath of six @xmath elements:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.86)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

As in the 3d case, such a function is invariant under a simultaneous
(deformed) translation of all its arguments; in this case, however, no
geometric interpretation of the variables appearing as field arguments
nor of such invariance can be given, due to the fact that we are not
dealing with geometric tetrahedra, but simply with combinatorial
simplices to which variables from the classical phase space of discrete
BF theory are associated. The variables do not describe a geometric
tetrahedron, and the translation symmetry of each field cannot be
interpreted as the translation of the vertices (or the edges) of the
tetrahedra in some embedding into @xmath ; in fact, it is generated by a
Lie algebra element of @xmath and not by a vector in @xmath . It is
again the manifestation of the shift symmetry of @xmath theory, but
contrary to what happens in three dimensions, it cannot be traced back
to a geometric action on the elements of the triangulations. In the GFT
context, it has been studied in details in [ diffeos ] , both in the
triangle and edge formulations. And as in the 3d case, a proper
description of the invariance of the field under such deformed
translations (in the Lie algebra) requires that we interpret the
products of plane-waves as tensor products, taken in the order in which
we wrote them.

With this convention in mind, @xmath is invariant under the following
symmetries (only three of them being independent):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.87)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.88)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.89)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These transformations correspond to a simultaneous translation of the
Lie algebra variables associated to three edges sharing a vertex in a
quantum tetrahedron by the same Lie algebra variables associated to such
common vertex. For instance, @xmath translates the three edges sharing
the vertex of color @xmath .

Let us call the space of such invariant fields @xmath , and @xmath the
space of fields in @xmath that satisfy the gauge invariance ( 4.72 ). We
now prove that the map from triangle group variables to the Lie algebra
edge variables is one-to-one.

###### Proposition 4.

@xmath is a bijection between @xmath and @xmath . Its inverse maps any
@xmath to:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.91)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where only three @xmath are being integrated, the others being fixed to
any value.

###### Proof.

Let us call @xmath the map defined by the previous formula, and show
that @xmath and @xmath are the identity.

We first choose @xmath , and check that @xmath . Using the definitions,
we immediately have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
     @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integration over the @xmath give three @xmath -functions. For
example, if we choose @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as integrating
variables, we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.94)
     @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

We remark that the three @xmath -functions impose that @xmath is
independent of @xmath , therefore the three remaining plane-waves are
equal to @xmath . We can finally introduce a resolution of the identity
@xmath , and obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.96)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.97)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.98)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that we used the gauge invariance of @xmath in the last line.

Now, let us take @xmath , and show that @xmath . We have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Each integral with respect to a variable @xmath gives a non-commutative
@xmath -function involving six different Lie algebra elements. For
example, the integral over @xmath gives a @xmath . The three others are
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . After integration of variables @xmath ,
one obtains:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, thanks to the invariance of the field @xmath , ends the proof.∎

This proposition ensures that an edge formulation is indeed possible.
Moreover, the translation invariance of the fields in @xmath guarantees
that, to construct the edge representation in group space, one just
needs to plug ( 4.2.1 ) in ( 4.73 ). In terms of the new fields @xmath ,
the action can be written:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.101)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where of course @xmath is the (group) variable associated to the edge
shared by the triangles @xmath and @xmath in the tetrahedron of color
@xmath (thus opposite to the vertex of the same color). In this formula,
@xmath is the measure factor associated to the field @xmath (i.e. a
product of three @xmath -functions as in the kinetic term), and @xmath
is defined by: @xmath . These @xmath ’s are holonomies around edges in
the boundaries of the 4-simplex corresponding to the GFT interaction
vertex, in the very same way as the 3d case was giving flatness
conditions around vertices in boundaries of tetrahedra. As remarked
earlier, there are ten edges in a 4-simplex, hence ten flatness
conditions to impose (one for each choice of triplet of distinct colors
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ). However, only six of them are independent,
which is why the same number of @xmath -functions of this type appear in
the interaction. For the same reason, one is free to choose any set of
six independent @xmath to write the distribution encoding flatness. As
in 3d, this freedom will prove very useful.

The partition function is defined through a path integral, with the
propagator encoded in the covariance of a Gaussian measure @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.102)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with respect to which we integrate the exponential of the interaction
part of the action ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note however that the interaction part does not
include the constraints @xmath , since they are already imposed in the
propagator. :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.103)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.104)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We kept variables of integration implicit in @xmath , and called @xmath
the distribution encoding flatness in ( 4.101 ). The kernel @xmath is
represented as a stranded graph in Figure 4.16 ⁷ ⁷ 7 In order to limit
the number of crossings, we have reorganized the strands of the
different fields. .

##### Amplitudes

In this section, we explore a similar route as in the 3d case, and
propose a way to write amplitudes in such a way that the integrand
factorizes into bubble contributions. At this stage, everything is
formal (the amplitudes are generically divergent in the absence of
regularization), but will be a precious guide in order to derive bounds
once a cut-off is added.

We first pick up a given color (say @xmath ) and choose the six edges of
the tetrahedron labeled by @xmath to impose the flatness conditions in
any given 4-simplex. This corresponds to working with holonomies @xmath
such that one of the indices is equal to 5. We can for example express
the distribution @xmath in ( 4.101 ) as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This expression involves 18 independent variables @xmath , 6 of them
with @xmath , and 3 for each @xmath . Therefore, when computing the
amplitude of a colored graph @xmath , all the propagators with @xmath
will have three strands with free endpoints, that can be integrated
straightforwardly. As a result, the closure conditions associated to
tetrahedra of color @xmath will have trivial contributions. Let us
verify it for a tetrahedron of color @xmath . The integral that we have
to compute in this case is of the form:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath does not depend on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , since
@xmath does not explicitly appears in the expression we chose for @xmath
. Successively integrating these variables we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.107)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

which shows that the amplitude is unchanged if all the propagators of
color @xmath are replaced by trivial ones.  Therefore, as in the 3d
case, we are lead to simplified expressions for the amplitudes, where
all propagators of color @xmath are trivially integrated. This allows to
factorize the integrand of the amplitude into bubbles (of color @xmath )
contributions. Since within these bubbles all the propagators are
effectively trivial, we can contract each connected component of strands
in a bubble to one node. This is easily understood by looking at Figure
4.16 : in each bubble, all the internal strands are part of lines of
colors @xmath , that is those that effectively contain only three
strands; since the constraints associated to these propagators have been
integrated with respect to the deleted strands, the remaining strands
encode simple convolutions of @xmath -functions that can be successively
integrated out. The last @xmath -distribution in a connected component
of strands encodes flatness of its dual edge. We call @xmath the set of
bubbles of color @xmath , @xmath the set of edges in a bubble @xmath ,
@xmath the set of tetrahedra of color @xmath . With these notations, the
amplitude of @xmath (with @xmath nodes) can be written as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath depending on orientation conventions.

The different types of bounds we will prove in the next paragraphs will
rely on two different ways of trivializing the interaction kernels, so
that in the above expression, the integration of the last propagators
coupling the variables of different bubbles can be performed. The two
strategies give an expression for the amplitudes in which different
combinatorial substructures in a 5-colored graph (and in its dual
simplicial complex) are singled out. They will respectively be used to
obtain bounds referring to the 4-bubbles, or bounds in terms of jackets.

The first possibility we will describe consists in trivializing three
constraints associated to a tree of edges in each tetrahedron, and this
will lead straightforwardly to a bubble bound. The second strategy
amounts on the contrary to trivializing the constraints associated to
the three edges of a same triangle in each tetrahedron. Only two @xmath
-functions per propagator will be easily integrable in this case, and
the remaining ones will allow to factorize the integrand in terms of
Boulatov integrands, henceforth giving a bound involving Boulatov
amplitudes of @xmath -bubbles. This will instead lead to a jacket bound.

#### 4.2.2 Regularization and general scaling bounds

The amplitudes as written are of course divergent and need to be
regularized to be given rigorous meaning.

A nice aspect of the latter formulation of the Ooguri model lies in the
fact that the constraints associated to edges need not to be regularized
in order to make the amplitudes finite, as it will be shortly proven. In
other words, only the dynamics of the theory is affected by the cut-off
procedure, and not the kinematical space of fields in terms of which the
theory is defined. As in the 3d case, we will use a heat kernel
regularization of the @xmath -distributions, that with respect to a
sharp cut-off will have the main advantage of being positive. The @xmath
@xmath -distribution splits into a product of two @xmath terms: for any
@xmath , @xmath . Given our parametrization of the space of functions on
@xmath , we can define a regularized distribution for @xmath using
@xmath heat kernels:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We therefore define the regulated partition function as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is the regulated interaction, associated to the kernel:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the product runs over the 10 possible choices of 3 colors among 5.
Note that we again chose a symmetric regularization in the colors, hence
the rescaling by @xmath .

The same kind of comments as in 3d apply here. First, this choice of
symmetric regularization is convenient as it will allow to easily
average over color attributions. Second, we could have as well chosen a
non-symmetric regularization, compatible with the map @xmath . For
example, a regularized interaction

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

in triangle variables corresponds to a regularized interaction kernel

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in edge variables, which in turn implies an explicit factorization of
the amplitudes in terms of bubbles of color @xmath . This is the exact
analogue of ( 4.108 ) in the theory with cut-off.

With the symmetric regularization, this type of factorization is
recovered as a bound only, but for arbitrary color @xmath . Moreover
this bound will be always saturated in power-counting. It is obtained by
bounding four redundant flatness conditions in all the interactions. For
instance, if we use the color @xmath as before, we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where now the product runs over the 6 flatness conditions involving the
color @xmath . Thanks to the positivity of the regularization, and the
convolution properties of the heat kernel, this immediately yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.115)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where for any edge @xmath in a bubble @xmath , we denote by @xmath the
number of tetrahedra in @xmath that contain @xmath .

We now have to integrate the remaining propagators, using the two
possible sets of variables evoked before.

We start with the first strategy and look for integrating variables
associated to a tree of edges in each tetrahedron. There are two kinds
of such trees: three edges sharing a same vertex; or three edges such
that the first one shares a vertex with the second, the second with the
third, but the third does not share any vertex with the first one (see
Figures (a)a and (b)b ). Of course we want to use the colors to define
these trees, so that the same simplification takes place in all the
tetrahedra of a given simplicial complex. The notations are as follows:
we will associate the color @xmath to an edge involving flatness
constraints @xmath . Such an edge is therefore dual to a (maximal)
connected subgraph of @xmath , involving only lines of colors @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . ⁸ ⁸ 8 Note that this convention differs from the one
used in 3d to label vertices, as here the latter would amount to
labeling an edge by the two line colors on which its dual graph does not
have support. For definiteness, we will use variables involved in
flatness conditions around edges of colors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
a choice corresponding to a tree of the first kind (i.e. Figure (a)a ).

Since each strand is connected to two interactions, the integrals to
compute are not simple convolutions, therefore difficult. To circumvent
this problem we simply bound all the heat kernels implementing flatness
constraints of colors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by their value at the
identity, and then integrate the propagators. This yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.116)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The only term left to integrate is a product of integrals associated to
connected @xmath graphs (whose lines are strands of the initial graph).
Each of these is dual to an edge of color @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .
Integrating a maximal tree of strands in each of these graphs, then
bounding the last @xmath -function by its value at the identity, we
obtain the general bound:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

coincides with the number of @xmath -simplices containing the edge
@xmath .

Remarking that, when @xmath goes to zero:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can rewrite this bounds using powers of heat kernels with the same
parameter, for instance @xmath . This allows to show that for any
constant @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we asymptotically have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.121)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

This formula will be the central tool in the bounds on pseudo-manifolds
we will derive below. Before moving to a second important formula
following from the factorized expression for the amplitudes, we remark
that we can simply choose @xmath .

The second strategy we suggested to bound formula ( 4.115 ) also starts
from a splitting of edge colors into two parts:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can integrate the propagators with respect to variables @xmath and
@xmath , which are only involved in the first factor:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.123)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The interesting feature of this formula is the following: the last line
is the integrand of the Boulatov amplitude of the 3d colored graph
obtained from @xmath by deleting the lines of color @xmath ! Since the
connected components of this graph are the bubbles in @xmath , it is
tempting to factorize their 3d amplitudes. The simplest way do so is to
bound the @xmath -functions appearing in the first two lines that
involve variables from the third. We wrote the last inequality in such a
way that these are exactly the terms in the second line. Therefore:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last line is now exactly a product of bubble 3d amplitudes: @xmath .
As for the integral in the first line, it is associated with the graph
made of all the strands of color @xmath which, as in the previous case,
we bound by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The net result is that, for any constant Q such that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we asymptotically have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.126)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As before, we remark that @xmath is a valid choice.

#### 4.2.3 Topological singularities

In this section, we would like to use equation ( 4.121 ) to give a bound
on the amplitudes of simplicial complexes with pointlike singularities.
As in 3d, we need to introduce a combinatorial quantity which determines
whether a bubble is spherical or not. Unlike in 3d however, this cannot
be the genus, since the Euler characteristic of a manifold in odd
dimensions is 0, irrespectively of its topology. We therefore propose to
use the notion of degree introduced in tensor models (see previous
chapter and [ RazvanN , RazvanVincentN , Gurau:2011xq ] ): @xmath ,
where the sum runs over the jackets of the @xmath -bubble @xmath , and
@xmath is the genus of the jacket @xmath . Indeed, the degree is 0 only
for a specific set of simplicial decompositions of the sphere (those
associated to melonic graphs [ critical ] ). As a result, in this 4d
case we will prove a bound on simplicial complexes which have
non-melonic bubbles, that is on a subclass of manifolds as well as on
singular pseudomanifolds. But, remarking that all the jackets of a
non-spherical bubble have genus bigger than @xmath , we will refine the
bound for singular pseudomanifolds, which will in the end take the same
form as in 3d.

Let us consider a connected and closed colored graph @xmath . We propose
to use the bound ( 4.121 ) to deduce a bound on the divergence degree
@xmath of @xmath . Since the pre-factor @xmath can be chosen to be
@xmath , only the parameter @xmath in ( 4.121 ) matters, and @xmath ,
that is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since this expression involves only quantities associated to edges and
@xmath -bubbles of the simplicial complex, let us show that the sum of
the degrees of the same bubbles can also be expressed in terms of
similar quantities, namely we first prove:

###### Lemma 5.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Proof.

Indeed, by definition of the degree of a bubble @xmath , and by formula
( 4.59 ), we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are cycles over @xmath . ⁹ ⁹ 9 Note that we also used the
fact that labeling jackets by cycles over vertex colors as in ( 4.59 ),
is equivalent to labeling them by cycles over edge colors. There are
three different jackets in @xmath , and each of them has support over
four edge colors out of six, therefore:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.130)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Summing over the bubbles, and using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we finally obtain the claimed equality. ∎

We therefore just need to make @xmath appear on the right-hand-side of
inequality ( 4.127 ). To this aim, and as in the 3d case, we prove a
combinatorial lemma:

###### Lemma 6.

For any edge coloring @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Proof.

Consider the graph @xmath whose nodes are the elements of @xmath , and
links are constructed as follows: there is a link between a bubble
@xmath and @xmath if and only if @xmath appears in the triangulation of
@xmath .  We first show that, because @xmath itself is assumed to be
connected, @xmath is also connected. Let @xmath and @xmath be two
elements of @xmath . The connectivity of @xmath ensures that there
exists a sequence of @xmath bubbles @xmath , such that: for any @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath share a tetrahedron @xmath . Hence: for any @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath share an edge @xmath . So, in @xmath , @xmath is a
connected path from @xmath to @xmath . Finally, remarking that any
element of @xmath is by definition connected to at least one element of
@xmath , we conclude that any two nodes of @xmath are connected.  Call
@xmath the number of links of @xmath . Its number of nodes being equal
to @xmath , the connectivity implies that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

But for any @xmath , the number of lines @xmath connected to @xmath in
@xmath verifies: @xmath . This is because @xmath is the set of available
edges of color @xmath in the bubble (some of which might be identified
when gluing the different bubbles together), and @xmath is the true
number of edges of color @xmath in @xmath , once all the identifications
of edges have been taken into account. Since by construction

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we conclude that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

∎

This, together with ( 4.127 ) and ( 4.128 ), immediately yields the
wanted result:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Of course, we have a similar bound for any color @xmath .

This formula is particularly simple when the coupling constant @xmath is
appropriately rescaled:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is also the setting of the @xmath expansion of the Ooguri model,
as initially found in [ Gurau:2011xq ] , and as will be confirmed
shortly. Thus we have obtained the following:

###### Proposition 5.

With the rescaling of the coupling constant ( 4.137 ), the divergence
degree @xmath of a graph @xmath verifies, for any color @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Given that any pointlike singularity implies a degree greater than zero,
we therefore see that, like in 3d, the more pointlike singularities of
the same color a simplicial complex has, the more its amplitude is
suppressed with respect to the leading order ( @xmath ). We can make
this point a bit more precise, making use of a lemma, a simple proof of
which can be found in the review [ Gurau:2011xp ] ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 This result
is actually generalizable to any dimension, since a graph with a planar
jacket has a trivial regular genus , a property that in turn
characterizes spheres (see [ FerriGagliardi , Vince_gene ] and
references therein). :

###### Lemma 7.

If a connected @xmath -colored graph @xmath possesses a spherical
jacket, then @xmath is dual to a sphere.

###### Proof.

See Proposition 3 in [ Gurau:2011xp ] . ∎

In particular, this implies that if a bubble @xmath is not spherical,
all its jackets have genus at least @xmath , and therefore: @xmath .
This allows to prove the following corollary:

###### Corollary 2.

With the rescaling of the coupling constant ( 4.137 ), the divergence
degree @xmath of any connected vacuum graph @xmath verifies, for any
color @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of singular vertices of color @xmath .

This result is very similar to what we have proven in 3d, showing
suppression of singular pseudomanifolds with respect to the leading
order ( @xmath ), therefore consisting only of manifolds. In particular,
in both cases singular pseudomanifolds all have convergent amplitudes.

Finally, as anticipated in the beginning of this section, we notice that
equation ( 4.138 ) also constrains the amplitudes of a special class of
manifolds: those which have non-melonic bubbles.

###### Corollary 3.

With the rescaling of the coupling constant ( 4.137 ), the divergence
degree @xmath of any connected vacuum graph @xmath verifies, for any
color @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of non-melonic bubbles of color @xmath .

#### 4.2.4 Domination of melons

##### Jacket bounds

The notion of jacket of a graph @xmath we used in 3d generalizes to any
dimension. They are closed surfaces labeled by pairs @xmath of cyclic
permutations of @xmath , in which the graph @xmath can be regularly
embedded [ FerriGagliardi , Vince_gene ] ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 In contrast with the
3d case, we construct the jackets in terms of data related to the graph
@xmath itself, as opposed to its dual simplicial complex. If the two
descriptions are of course equivalent, we find more convenient to work
with @xmath itself in 4d, since representing or even giving an intuitive
picture of simplicial complexes is necessarily more difficult than in
3d. . The jacket @xmath is the closed surface constituted of all the
faces of colors @xmath in @xmath , glued along there common links. Its
genus can be easily computed in terms of combinatorial data associated
to @xmath :

###### Lemma 8.

The jacket @xmath of a @xmath -colored graph @xmath has genus:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the order of @xmath , and @xmath is the set of faces of
color @xmath (dual to the set of triangles of color @xmath in the
simplicial complex).

###### Proof.

By definition, the Euler characteristic of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the set of faces, edges and
vertices of @xmath . But, by construction:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of lines in @xmath . Since moreover @xmath ,
we conclude that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

∎

Jackets have been used in the Ooguri model to compute bounds on
amplitudes [ Gurau:2011xq ] . Interestingly, our construction allows to
slightly strengthen these results, which we demonstrate now. Discarding
pre-factors, formula ( 4.2.2 ) immediately implies the following bound
on the degree of divergence of a graph @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the degree of divergence of the @xmath amplitudes
represented by the bubble graph @xmath . Since the choice of colors is
arbitrary this generalizes immediately. For any cycle @xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From this, we would like to deduce an inequality involving the genus of
the jacket @xmath associated to the cycle @xmath . This can be done in
three steps. First remark that for any @xmath , and @xmath different
from both @xmath and @xmath , the set of faces @xmath can be partitioned
in terms of the faces @xmath of the bubble graphs @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

But since the set of faces @xmath is dual to the set of edges @xmath in
the simplicial complex associated to @xmath , we immediately obtain the
following equality of cardinals:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular, the sum over @xmath in ( 4.146 ) is equal to @xmath .
Second, we can use lemma 6 to bound @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, we can use a bound of the type ( 4.64 ) to bound the @xmath
terms:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

All in all we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is our final result, which as in 3d is particularly nice once the
coupling constant has been appropriately rescaled.

###### Proposition 6.

With the rescaling of the coupling constant ( 4.137 ), the divergence
degree @xmath of a connected vacuum graph @xmath verifies, for any
jacket @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular, we notice that the strongest bound is obtained by
considering the maximum of the genera of all the 12 jackets of the graph
@xmath . Also, we see that all graphs with a jacket of genus greater
than @xmath have convergent amplitudes, just like singular
pseudomanifolds.

This has to be compared with the known jacket bound, which is weaker and
is a direct corollary of the previous result:

###### Corollary 4.

With the rescaling of the coupling constant ( 4.137 ), the divergence
degree @xmath of a connected vacuum graph @xmath verifies:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Proof.

The degree of @xmath is defined by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that averaging the previous bound over the @xmath jackets of @xmath
immediately gives the standard jacket bound. ∎

##### @xmath expansion

Similarly to the Boulatov model, we have just seen how focusing on the
formal symmetries of the Ooguri model can lead to interesting scaling
bounds on the amplitudes. While at first sight the edge formulation in
4d seems to be tailored to the analysis of bubble divergences only, it
has been demonstrated that jacket bounds are also contained in the basic
scaling bounds ( 4.121 ) and ( 4.2.2 ). Therefore we again recover from
this analysis that leading order graphs must be degree @xmath , hence
melonic. The reciprocal can be proved in the same way as in 3d, by
analyzing how the scaling behavior of the amplitudes is left invariant
by non-degenerate @xmath -dipole moves. Therefore, the edge formulation
of the Ooguri model provides an independent proof of the existence of
the @xmath expansion, and of the fact that the first term in this
expansion is provided by the melonic sector of the theory.

Methodologically, it is interesting to point out the recursive nature of
this strategy: scaling bounds for the Boulatov model enter the proof of
scaling bounds for the Ooguri model. It is therefore tempting to
conjecture that such a pattern could be used to devise a general proof
of the existence of the @xmath expansion, for topological GFTs of
arbitrary dimensions. We however do not want to explore this path
further, first because the existence of such an expansion has already
been settled down [ Gurau:2011xq ] , and more importantly because we are
ultimately interested in @xmath quantum gravity models.

The most interesting outcome of the edge formulation of the Ooguri model
is a refinement of the jacket bounds, turning the average of the genera
of the jackets into a supremum. While this does not play any role at
leading order, this certainly affects the type of graphs contributing to
lower orders in @xmath . We could therefore expect specific signatures
of the Ooguri model, different from that of the i.i.d. @xmath tensor
model, at lower orders in @xmath . Where such differences exactly lie,
and whether they have the potential to affect the critical behavior of
such models has yet to be determined, but it is already clear that the
edge formulation could be used to advance further in this direction.

## Chapter 5 Renormalization of Tensorial Group Field Theories:
generalities

The "renormalization group" approach is a strategy for dealing with
problems involving many length scales. The strategy is to tackle the
problem in steps, one step for each length scale.
Kenneth G. Wilson , Nobel Lecture, December 1982.

In this chapter, we finally move to the renormalization aspects of this
manuscript. We first focus on the general formalism, and highlight the
new features one needs to introduce in order to handle TGFTs with
connection degrees of freedom. Two examples, taken from [ u1 ] and [ su2
] , will be treated in details in the last two chapters of this thesis.

### 5.1 Preliminaries: renormalization of local field theories

For the reader’s convenience, we start with a brief introduction of
standard material about renormalization theory for local quantum field
theories [ vincent_book , vincent_2002 ] . This allows us to introduce
the main concepts and multiscale tools we will then generalize to TGFTs.

#### 5.1.1 Locality, scales and divergences

Let us, for the sake of simplicity, consider a bosonic scalar field
@xmath in @xmath -dimensional flat (Euclidean) space-time. The free
theory is specified by a kinetic action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mass and @xmath the Laplacian on @xmath . A quantum
interacting theory for such a scalar field can be formally specified
through the partition function:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the (ill-defined) Lebesgue measure on the space of
fields, and @xmath is the interaction part of the action. The latter is
constrained by the physical symmetries of the model one is considering,
among which Poincar invariance when space-time is flat, or rather
Euclidean invariance in the Wick rotated version we are focusing one.
The interactions are required to be local in space-time, which means
that @xmath should be a linear combinations of monomials of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We consider the simplest situation here, but of course further
restrictions coming from different types of symmetries, for instance
gauge symmetries, should be implemented in more complicated theories. In
addition to that, we will also require @xmath to be positive, to avoid
quantum instabilities of the vacuum. Hence we assume:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the (real) bare coupling constants.

Note that the derivatives introduced in the kinetic term softly break
the locality of the interactions. This is one aspect we will generalize
to the tensorial world, as advocated in [ vincent_tt1 , vincent_tt2 ] .

The kinetic part of the action can be combined with the Lebesgue measure
into a well-defined Gaussian measure @xmath whose covariance @xmath
encodes the propagator of the theory:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In our case, @xmath is invariant under translations, we will therefore
use the notation @xmath . The Fourier transform of this function is
proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the momentum, thereby
introducing an energy scale into the theory. By means of Schwinger’s
trick, which consists in the simple equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can encode the scale in the real parameter @xmath and show by Fourier
transforming back to configuration space that @xmath is equal to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The second factor in the integrand is nothing but the heat kernel on
@xmath at time @xmath . When @xmath , this covariance is ill-defined at
coinciding points ( @xmath ), since in this case the integrand is not
integrable in the neighborhood of @xmath . This is the source of UV
divergences, arising from infinitely close points in configuration
space, or equivalently modes with arbitrary high momenta. To make sense
of the theory, one should therefore first regularize and then
renormalize it. Since the divergences have been identified as coming
from the neighborhood of @xmath , a convenient way of regularizing the
covariance is provided by a cut-off @xmath on the Schwinger parameter
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can then expand perturbatively this theory with cut-off around the
free theory ( @xmath ), and for definiteness we can assume that only a
finite number of coupling constants @xmath are turned on. By Wick’s
theorem, the partition function takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are (vacuum) Feynman graphs, @xmath a symmetry factor
associated to a graph @xmath , @xmath its number of vertices of valency
@xmath , and @xmath its amplitude. The amplitude @xmath is computed as
usual, by associating (cut-off) propagators to lines, interaction
kernels to vertices, and convoluting them according to the pattern of
@xmath . The purpose of perturbative renormalization theory is to give a
meaning to this perturbative expansion (as a formal multi-series) in the
limit @xmath , that is when the divergences contained in the propagators
start manifesting themselves in the amplitudes. This procedure will in
particular imply further constraints on the parameters of the theory,
such as the dimension @xmath or the coupling constants.

#### 5.1.2 Perturbative renormalization through a multiscale
decomposition

The modern understanding of renormalization theory dates back to Wilson,
who provided a deep physical understanding of the mathematical
procedures underlying it. We introduce here one such procedure, the
multiscale analysis, together with the Wilsonian perspective.

The key idea of renormalization is to organize physical processes
according to the scales at which they happen. The first assumption one
can make in this respect, is that a theory with cut-off @xmath can be
trusted when it comes to computing scattering amplitudes between
boundary states with small enough energies i.e. such that @xmath . The
key questions Wilson asked were: how is this approximation affected when
one moves the cut-off up? is it self-reproducing?

The multi-scale representation of field theories investigates these
questions in a discrete setting. Rather than changing the cut-off in a
continuous fashion, one instead uses slices of scales with non-zero
width. To this effect, let us fix an arbitrary constant @xmath , and
assume the cut-off to be of the form @xmath , with @xmath an integer.
The half-line @xmath is then partitioned into slices @xmath , with a
geometric progression, except for the last @xmath slice which is simply
@xmath . This allows to split the propagation of the field into
contributions from these different @xmath -labeled scales. Using the
simpler notation @xmath , we can define the propagator at scale @xmath
by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

in such a way that ¹ ¹ 1 Notice the convention adopted from now on:
lower indices label the slices, while upper ones indicate the cut-off. :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The random field can then be decomposed into independent contributions
@xmath from each scale @xmath , distributed according to the Gaussian
measures @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The renormalization group flow allows to integrate out the highest
energy scales, slice by slice. As far as low energy processes are
concerned, the fine UV effects can be captured by new effective coupling
constants @xmath and mass @xmath , which are the new parameters of the
theory once the cut-off @xmath has been lowered down to @xmath . More
precisely, discrete flow equations for these coupling constants can be
deduced from the ansatz:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In this formula, @xmath contains the slow moving modes of the field, and
new indices have been introduced to take the fact that the coupling
constants must be redefined at each step into account. To compute the
effective action @xmath at scale @xmath from its counter-part at scale
@xmath , one needs to first integrate the high energy shell @xmath , and
then compute a logarithm. These two steps can be best understood at the
level of the Feynman expansion, where taking the logarithm is equivalent
to restricting to connected graphs. This is what makes the latter so
useful to renormalization. The approximation procedure itself consists
in expanding the leading-order terms in this expansion, the divergent
graphs, around their local contributions. These can be reabsorbed into
the coupling constants at scale @xmath , while the finite corrections
are irrelevant in the UV and are therefore discarded. This defines a
discrete renormalization group flow, which allows to deduce
renormalizable coupling constants (at scale @xmath ) from the bare ones
(at scale @xmath or @xmath when this makes sense) to @xmath . A theory
is called renormalizable if solutions to the general ansatz ( 5.16 )
which involve only a finite number of non-zero coupling constants (at a
given scale) can be found. This is nothing but asking the theory to be
predictive: with a renormalizable theory, once the coupling constants at
a given scale have been measured all (lower energy) scattering processes
can be computed in principle.

We already see that renormalizability depends on a subtle interplay
between scales and locality. In particular, only the high energy pieces
of the divergent graphs will need to be renormalized. It is explicit
from the renormalization group ansatz ( 5.16 ), in which by definition
only the high energy slices contribute to the corrections to the
coupling constants. Once these have been taken care of, no UV divergence
remains in a renormalizable theory. To see this at the level of the
Feynman amplitude of a connected graph @xmath , one can expand each
propagator as in ( 5.13 ), which gives rise to the multiscale expansion
of the amplitude @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an attribution of one scale index per line of @xmath ,
and in @xmath the @xmath integrals have been restricted to the
appropriate slices. To give full justice to the renormalization group
perspective, it is then preferable to bound @xmath in a @xmath
-dependent and optimal way, rather than relying on crude bounds on
@xmath . It is particularly important if one wants to prove
renormalizability at all orders in perturbations. Technically, such
bounds are obtained in two steps. One first focuses on the covariance,
and proves that there exist constants @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This bound is a simple consequence of the definitions ( 5.10 ), and
captures the peakedness properties of the propagators at high energy in
an optimal way [ vincent_book ] . One then plugs this bound in the
amplitude @xmath , and optimize it according to the scale attribution
@xmath . To this effect, one introduces the notion of high subgraph ,
constructed as follows: call @xmath the set of lines of @xmath with
scales higher or equal to @xmath ; we label its connected components
@xmath , with @xmath running from @xmath to some integer @xmath . The
@xmath ’s are the high subgraphs of @xmath , that is its connected
subgraphs with internal scales strictly higher than the external scales
(i.e. the scales labeling the external legs). Seen from their external
legs, such subgraphs ’look’ local, because of the high energy carried by
the internal propagators. From the general argument above, they are
therefore expected to be responsible for the divergences, and for the
flow of the coupling constants. It can indeed be shown [ vincent_book ]
that:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.19)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the degree of divergence of a subgraph @xmath . In this
particular case:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of loops, and @xmath still denotes the number
of internal lines. Equation ( 5.19 ) is a multiscale generalization of
the usual superficial power-counting argument, which allows to
systematically investigate renormalizability at all orders in
perturbation theory. The divergent subgraphs are those with @xmath , and
can generate divergences when they are high, while the contributions
from convergent subgraphs ( @xmath ) are always finite. Therefore only
the former need to be renormalized.

We will introduce the full machinery of perturbative renormalization
directly at the level of the TGFTs. We only recall here how
renormalizability can be inferred from the fundamental bound ( 5.19 ).
The key point is to recast the divergent degree in an appropriate form.
In the present situation, we can use the combinatorial relations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of external legs. This allows to show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

To ensure renormalizability, @xmath must first be bounded from above,
otherwise arbitrarily fast divergences would appear in the UV. Second,
the number of external legs of a divergent graph must also be bounded,
otherwise the divergences would turn on local couplings @xmath with
arbitrarily high @xmath . These two conditions require the coefficient
in front of @xmath to be positive, and the coefficients in front of each
@xmath to be negative, hence:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath , @xmath , therefore only single-vertex graphs (called
tadpoles ) contribute to the divergences. There is only a finite number
of divergent graphs in this case, irrespectively of the value of @xmath
. Such a theory is called super-renormalizable , and can be renormalized
via a Wick ordering procedure, for any polynomial interaction [ Simon ]
. The models presented in Chapter 6 are tensorial generalizations of
these @xmath theories. When @xmath , @xmath , and therefore no
renormalizable interacting theory can exist. The only two remaining
possibilities are: @xmath and @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath . They are
called just-renormalizable [ salmhofer , vincent_book ] , because they
generate an infinite number of divergent graphs. As far as fundamental
interactions are concerned, just-renormalizablity turns out to be the
norm, and we will therefore pay them special attention in the tensorial
world as well. On general grounds, we can also expect a close parallel
between models supporting a @xmath expansion and just-renormalizable
field theories. The first condition for the existence of a @xmath
expansion, an upper bound on the divergence degree, is the analogue of
the renormalizability condition; and the second, the existence of an
infinite number of leading-order graphs, is similar to the additional
just-renormalizability condition. Field theories are only more refined
in the sense that the specific scaling of the coupling constants one
chooses by hand in a @xmath expansion is instead implemented through a
non-trivial propagator kernel. The large @xmath phase is so to speak
dynamically encoded in the renormalization group flow.

A last point we would like to comment on is the question of asymptotic
freedom . The @xmath theory in four dimensions we have just introduced
suffers from a Landau pole effect: having the renormalized coupling
constant ( @xmath ) fixed to a finite value requires the effective
coupling constants @xmath to blow up when @xmath . Therefore the
perturbative expansion cannot be trusted all the way down to the UV.
Such theories cannot easily be expected to describe fundamental
interactions, in particular gravity. QCD on the contrary is an example
of asymptotically free theory, which means that its coupling constant
flows to @xmath in the UV. This property is responsible for the phase
transition from quarks to hadrons, and is in this sense also desirable
in TGFT: not only it could make the perturbative treatment of a quantum
theory of gravity well-defined all the way down to the UV, but it could
also dynamically generate phase transitions such as
discrete-to-continuum ones [ vincent_tt1 , vincent_tt2 ] .

### 5.2 Locality and propagation in GFT

In order to extend the perturbative techniques outlined in the previous
section to GFTs, one needs to equip oneself with appropriate
generalizations of the key structures entering renormalization theory.
Of particular importance is the splitting of the action into kinetic and
interaction terms, which is the guiding thread we decide to follow here.
If we look at space-time based quantum field theories from a more
abstract perspective, the notion of scale encoded in the spectrum of the
propagator is to be seen as primitive, irrespectively of its physical
interpretation. It is nothing more than an abstract parameter allowing
to decimate the degrees of freedom, going from regions with many degrees
of freedom to regions with few. Such a definition of scale survives in
our background independent context, even in the absence of any clear
physical interpretation. As explained in the introduction of this
thesis, our attitude at this stage is to regard the specific notion of
scale we will use as a fundamental postulate of the models we will
consider. In a sense we are reversing the usual perspective: instead of
relying on a predefined and physically transparent notion of scale to
construct and interpret renormalization theory, we introduce an abstract
renormalization group as a primary structure and look for its
consequences. It remains to be seen how fruitful such a point of view
can be on the physical side, but what will already be clear in this
thesis is that it allows to construct mathematically consistent
perturbative GFTs. In addition to the propagator, entailing the
definition of scale, we will need to adopt a locality principle,
understood as a prescription for the possible non-Gaussian perturbations
introduced in the interaction. This will again have nothing to do with a
space-time based notion of locality, but will play the same role in the
subtraction of infinities, hence keeping the same nomenclature seems
justified. In this section, we review possible choices of propagators
and locality principles, which also gives us the opportunity to place
the results of this thesis in the context of past and future works.

#### 5.2.1 Simplicial and tensorial interactions

As already explained, essentially two types of interactions have been
explored so far in the GFT literature: simplicial interactions and
tensor invariants. While the first choice seems natural in the discrete
gravity context of spin foam models, it seems rather awkward when it
comes to GFT. Indeed, when interpreted as Feynman amplitudes of a
quantum field theory, spin foam amplitudes have no reason to be built
out of a single vertex interaction. The type of interactions one allows
in a field theory should be specified by a locality principle, as
opposed to (heuristically motivated but) essentially arbitrary
combinatorial restrictions. On top of clarifying the assumptions made in
the construction of a model, a locality principle is essential to
renormalization, providing the necessary flexibility to reabsorb
divergences in effective couplings. Complementarily, it is in this
context that renormalization proves its full power, leading in the best
case scenario to a finite set of relevant couplings. A last important
point which can be achieved with tensorial interactions but seems out of
reach with simplicial ones is positivity, which is at the core of the
stability of the vacuum.

Since the aim of this thesis is to explore how GFTs can be turned into
rigorous QFTs, adopting tensorial invariance as a locality principle
seems obviously preferred to the rigid framework of simplicial
interactions. Motivations from the gravity side are so far missing, but
given the dramatic progress entailed by tensor invariance in tensor
models, and the arbitrariness of simplicial restrictions, it is at the
very least one first interesting prescription to explore further.
Moreover, there is a limited relation between color models and tensor
invariant ones: i.i.d tensor invariant models are the single field
effective versions of colored i.i.d models. This exact correspondence
does not survive when spin foam constraints are added, as is for example
illustrated by the vertex (resp. edge) formulation of the Boulatov
(resp. Ooguri) model. Although a bubble factorization is achieved with
this method, thus providing an effective single-field model where
interactions are labeled by the bubbles, these interactions are not
tensor invariants. This is due to the presence of @xmath -functions
enforcing flatness conditions inside each bubble. These enriched bubble
interactions can provide an alternative locality principle, however
presumably leading to a more difficult renormalizability analysis. On
top of that, it is not clear so far whether such complications are
relevant, we therefore decide to stick to tensor invariance for now.
Moreover, if one modifies the colored Boulatov model in such a way that
only one field is subject to the Gauss constraint, the other three being
i.i.d, one can integrate out the i.i.d fields and obtain a single-field
tensor invariant version of the Boulatov model. Therefore the
correspondence between colored and tensor invariant models is not
completely lost when leaving the i.i.d world.

Let us summarize the arguments invoked to use tensor invariant rather
than simplicial interactions:

-   tensor invariant interactions are specified by a locality principle;

-   they are infinitely many;

-   positivity of the interactions can be achieved with tensor invariant
    interactions;

-   a tensor invariant GFT can be obtained as a single-field effective
    model of a colored GFT.

Group field theories based on such a locality principle have been called
Tensorial Group Field Theories (TGFTs). A large variety of such models
can be considered, depending on the rank of the tensors, the space in
which the indices leave, and the propagator.

#### 5.2.2 Constraints and propagation

The second element entering the definition of a GFT we would like to
restrict is the propagator, or equivalently the Gaussian measure around
which the local interactions introduce perturbations. In all the GFTs
encountered so far in this thesis, the propagator is a projector, hence
ultra-local. For instance, the propagator of i.i.d tensor models reduces
to the identity operator, while that of the Boulatov and Ooguri models
is the projector on gauge invariant fields. Both have spectra contained
in @xmath , and therefore cannot provide any non-trivial notion of
scale. A natural way of changing this situation, originally advocated in
[ ValentinJoseph , tensor_4d ] , is to simply add non-trivial
differential operators on top of such structures. The specific operator
chosen in [ tensor_4d ] , concerned with a @xmath rank- @xmath TGFT
without constraints was the Laplacian. While this conservative choice is
certainly worth-exploring, it is not clear yet whether it is unique in
any sense. Motivations from the quantum gravity side are inexistent, but
the Laplacian is to some extent called for by quantum field theory.
First, the analysis of [ ValentinJoseph ] suggests that the radiative
divergences of the @xmath -point functions of the Boulatov and Ooguri
models generate an additional Laplacian term, which should therefore be
included in the bare theory to start with. Second, it was advocated in [
vincent_tt2 ] that some generalization of Osterwalder-Schrader
positivity, which is one of the axioms of space-time based Euclidean
quantum field theories, should also hold in the context of TGFTs. With
this assumption, Laplace-type propagators are singled out as the
positive propagators with the strongest decay in the UV. Hence they are
the ’best’ operators one can consider from the point of view of
renormalization ² ² 2 One can also very well consider models with lower
order differential operators, as for example in [ josephsamary ] , but
using second order operators leads to a maximal set of renormalizable
couplings. . In our opinion, these partial arguments give enough support
to motivate studies of TGFTs with Laplacian propagators, which will be
the focus of the remainder of this thesis. However, a sense of necessity
is certainly lacking, and complementary motivations coming from the
gravity side would be most welcomed.

The work on TGFTs we are about to introduce was motivated by one key
breakthrough: a four-dimensional model with group @xmath of the purely
tensor type (i.e. without any constraint) could be proven perturbatively
renormalizable at all orders [ tensor_4d ] , and even asymptotically
free [ josephaf ] soon after! This model has moreover up to @xmath
terms, a property which together with the absence of Landau pole in the
UV, contrasts with the ordinary @xmath local quantum field theory. It
was already clear at this stage that introducing tensor invariance and
Laplace terms in GFTs was a good move, with the first example of
perturbatively well-defined GFT all the way down to the UV. This theory
is however purely combinatorial in nature, with no discrete geometric
data carried by the group elements at the level of the amplitudes. The
@xmath group arises on the contrary merely as the Fourier dual of @xmath
, providing continuous labels for infinite size tensors. The
regularization of such a model in group space is therefore akin to a
large @xmath cut-off on the size of the tensors, and the renormalization
group flows from larger to smaller values of @xmath .

A program aiming at bridging the gap with spin foam 4d quantum gravity
models was initiated in [ u1 ] . The first step in this program consists
in reintroducing connection degrees of freedom in the amplitudes, thanks
to a Gauss constraint. This step is now essentially completed, and the
subject of the end of this manuscript. In [ u1 ] the general class of
field theories with gauge invariance and Laplace terms both implemented
in the propagator was introduced. For simplicity a @xmath
four-dimensional model, with no geometric meaning but same structure as
more involved models, was investigated in details, and proven
super-renormalizable at all orders, for any finite number of tensorial
interactions. On top of introducing the main techniques allowing to
handle the holonomy contributions in the amplitudes, this example
confirmed that gauge invariance models are generically ’more’
renormalizable than their purely tensorial counter-parts. Such results
were extended to similar Abelian models in [ fabien_dine ] , which were
proven just-renormalizable. Meanwhile, a more systematic study of
just-renormalizablity was explored in [ su2 ] , and the first
non-Abelian model could be proven just-renormalizable. This latter model
possesses the additional (very welcomed) following properties: a) it is
three-dimensional and therefore the symmetry group @xmath matches the
dimensionality of quantum space-time; b) it is the only potentially
just-renormalizable model for which this geometric interpretation holds.
From this point of view, the first result of [ tensor_4d ] generalizes
very well to GFTs related to non-trivial spin foam models, and in
particular to a variant of the Boulatov model for Euclidean gravity in
three dimensions. The second aspect, asymptotic freedom, was first
settled for two Abelian models in [ dineaf ] , and is currently under
investigation for the rank- @xmath @xmath model of [ su2 ] . We will
present partial calculations at the very end of the last chapter,
suggesting that the latter is again asymptotically free [ beta_su2 ] .
This is very encouraging, and supports the idea that asymptotic freedom
might be generic in TGFTs [ joseph_d2 ] . All in all, it seems that
TGFTs are now mature enough to be applied to four-dimensional quantum
gravity models. The next step in the near future will therefore be to
introduce some version of the simplicity constraints entailing
geometricity in 4d. First calculations have been already done for the
EPRL model [ aldo ] , of the kind which in our view should be more
systematically performed in a TGFT context.

The remainder of this chapter is concerned with the general structure of
TGFTs with gauge invariance, and their renormalization. We will in
particular conclude with the general classification of potentially
just-renormalizable models established in [ su2 ] . In the next two
chapters we will move to concrete examples, first the Abelian models
from [ u1 ] , and finally the more physically relevant TGFT of [ su2 ] .

### 5.3 A class of models with closure constraint

#### 5.3.1 Definition

A generic TGFT is a quantum field theory of a single tensorial field,
with entries in a Lie group. We assume @xmath to be a compact Lie group
of dimension @xmath , and the field to be a rank- @xmath complex
function @xmath , with @xmath . The statistics is then defined by a
partition function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Gaussian measure characterized by its covariance
@xmath , and @xmath is the interaction part of the action.

The first ingredient, locality as tensor invariance, can be thought of
as a limit of a @xmath invariance, where @xmath is a cut-off on
representation labels (e.g. spins) in the harmonic expansion of the
field. To avoid mathematical complications, we will not try to
characterize this symmetry group in the @xmath limit, but simply define
tensor invariants as convolutions of a certain number of fields @xmath
and @xmath such that any @xmath -th index of a field @xmath is
contracted with a @xmath -th index of a conjugate field @xmath . As
explained in Chapter 3 , they are dual to @xmath -colored graphs, built
from two types of nodes and @xmath types of colored edges: each white
(resp. black) dot represents a field @xmath (resp. @xmath ), while a
contraction of two indices in position @xmath is associated to an edge
with color label @xmath . Connected such graphs, the @xmath -bubbles,
generate the set of connected tensor invariants. See Figure 5.1 for
examples in dimension @xmath . We assume that the interaction part of
the action is a sum of such connected invariants

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a finite set of @xmath -bubbles, and @xmath is the
connected invariant encoded by the bubble @xmath .

The Gaussian measure @xmath must first implement a non-trivial dynamics,
through a propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Laplace-Beltrami operator on @xmath , acting on
color- @xmath indices. On top of that it must take the gauge invariance
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

into account. The resulting covariance can be expressed as an integral
over a Schwinger parameter @xmath of a product of heat kernels on @xmath
at time @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.28)
              @xmath   @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This is nothing but a gauge-averaged version of the Schwinger
representation of ( 5.26 ). This decomposition of the propagator
provides an intrinsic notion of scale, parametrized by @xmath .
Divergences result from the UV region (i.e. @xmath ), hence the need to
introduce a cut-off ( @xmath ), and subsequently to remove it via
renormalization. Note also that the definition of high energy region is
canonical once the propagator is specified: it simply corresponds to
this corner of @xmath -space from which divergences originate, and
should not be endowed with any a priori geometric meaning.

Like uncolored tensor models, the perturbative expansion of such a
theory is captured by Feynman graphs whose vertices are @xmath -bubbles,
and whose propagators are associated to an additional type of colored
edges, of color @xmath , represented as dashed lines. When seen on the
same footing, these @xmath types of colored edges form @xmath -colored
graphs. To a Feynman graph @xmath , whose elements are @xmath -bubble
vertices ( @xmath ) and color- @xmath lines ( @xmath ), is therefore
uniquely associated a @xmath -colored graph @xmath , called the colored
extension of @xmath . See Figures 5.2 and 5.3 for examples of Feynman
graphs in @xmath and @xmath . The connected Schwinger functions are
given by a sum over line-connected Feynman graphs:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of external legs of a graph @xmath , @xmath
its number of vertices of type @xmath , and @xmath a symmetry factor.
The amplitude @xmath of @xmath is expressed in terms of holonomies along
its faces, which can be easily defined in the colored extension @xmath :
a face @xmath of color @xmath is a maximal connected subset of edges of
color @xmath and @xmath . In @xmath , @xmath is a set of color- @xmath
lines, from which the holonomies are constructed. We finally use the
following additional notations: @xmath is the sum of the Schwinger
parameters appearing in the face @xmath ; @xmath or @xmath is the
adjacency or incidence matrix, encoding the line content of faces and
their relative orientations; the faces are split into closed ( @xmath )
and opened ones ( @xmath ); @xmath and @xmath denote boundary variables
in open faces, with functions @xmath and @xmath mapping open faces to
their “source" and "target" boundary variables. The amplitude @xmath
takes the form:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.31)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

An important feature of the amplitude of @xmath is a @xmath gauge
symmetry:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is the target (resp. source) vertex of an
(oriented) edge @xmath , and one of the two group elements is trivial
for open lines. It is the gauge invariance ( 5.27 ) imposed on the TGFT
field that is responsible of this gauge invariance at the level of the
Feynman amplitudes, and for their expression ( 6.1.3 ) as a lattice
gauge theory on @xmath . It is completely analogous to the gauge
symmetry of the Boulatov and Ooguri models, except that it is associated
to bubbles rather than individual nodes of the colored graphs. When
@xmath is connected, it is convenient to gauge fix the @xmath variables
along a spanning tree @xmath of the graph:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the integrand of ( 5.31 ), for every line @xmath . We will use such
gauge fixings in the following.

#### 5.3.2 Graph-theoretic and combinatorial tools

We collect here a number of definitions and results, first introduced in
[ u1 ] and subsequently refined in [ su2 ] , which are key to the
analysis we will perform in the following. The shift from the usual QFT
notion of locality to tensor invariance requires non-trivial
generalizations of the ordinary graph-theoretic notions underlying
renormalization theory. Probably the most important one in this respect
is that of quasi-local subgraphs , that is connected subgraphs which,
from the point of view of their external legs, look local.

A major role will be played by the faces of the graph, which is where
the curvature of the discrete connection introduced by the new gauge
invariance condition is assigned. To be clear, the faces are followed
easily by drawing the colored extension @xmath of the graph @xmath . The
color- @xmath faces of @xmath are the alternating circuits of lines of
color 0 and @xmath in @xmath , and can be either closed (internal) or
open (external). Rather than the usual incidence matrix @xmath between
lines and vertices of ordinary graph theory, it is the incidence matrix
of lines and closed faces @xmath in @xmath which plays the leading role
in TGFTs [ lrd , vincent_renGFT , lin , tensor_4d ] , as shown by
formula ( 5.31 ). To precisely define this matrix one needs an
orientation of both the lines and the faces. Then @xmath is @xmath if
the face @xmath goes through the line @xmath with the same orientation,
@xmath if the face @xmath goes through the line @xmath with opposite
orientation, and finally @xmath otherwise. The colored structure ensures
the absence of tadfaces, i.e. faces which pass several times through the
same line, hence the @xmath is well-defined.

We start with the notion of subgraph. In ordinary graph theory a
subgraph of a graph @xmath is most conveniently defined as a subset
@xmath of lines of @xmath , so that a graph with @xmath lines has
exactly @xmath subgraphs. Such a subset of lines is then completed
canonically by adding the vertices attached to the lines and the
external lines, also called legs. The latter are defined by first
cutting in the middle all lines of @xmath . Legs of @xmath then
correspond either to true legs of @xmath attached to vertices of @xmath
or to half-lines of @xmath attached to the vertices of @xmath . Finally,
ordinary connectedness of @xmath can be defined in terms of the ordinary
incidence matrix @xmath of @xmath : the connected components of @xmath
correspond to the maximal factorized rectangular blocks of this matrix.
Hence elementary connections between lines come from their common
attached vertices.

Recalling that a tensorial graph @xmath has color- @xmath internal lines
and external legs, @xmath -bubbles as vertices, and faces, the
definition of a subgraph for TGFTs is a natural generalization of the
ordinary definition.

###### Definition 3.

A subgraph @xmath of a graph @xmath is a subset of lines of @xmath ,
hence @xmath has exactly @xmath subgraphs. @xmath is then completed by
first adding the vertices that touch its lines. The faces closed in
@xmath which pass only through lines of @xmath form the set of internal
faces of @xmath . The external faces of @xmath are the maximal open
connected pieces of either open or closed faces of @xmath that pass
through lines of @xmath . Finally all the external legs or half-lines of
@xmath touching the vertices of @xmath are considered external legs of
@xmath .

We denote @xmath and @xmath the set of lines and internal faces of
@xmath , and @xmath and @xmath the set of external legs and external
faces. When no confusion is possible we also write @xmath , @xmath etc
for the cardinality of the corresponding sets. Moreover, the subgraph
made of the lines @xmath will simply be denoted @xmath .

Example. In Figure 5.2 , @xmath has two lines ( @xmath ) which touch two
vertices, giving @xmath . Six additional half-lines are hooked up to
these two bubbles, giving a total of @xmath external legs. Finally,
@xmath has four faces in total: two of them are internal, of color
@xmath and @xmath respectively, hence @xmath ; the two others are
external faces of color @xmath , hence @xmath . Note that the connected
pieces of (the colored extension of) @xmath which consist of two
external legs and a single colored line should not be considered as
external faces.

On top of the usual notion of connectedness of subgraphs, to which we
will refer as vertex-connectedness in order to avoid any confusion, we
will heavily rely on the similar concept of face-connectedness . While
the former focuses on incidence relations between lines and vertices,
the latter puts the emphasis on incidence relations between lines and
faces.

###### Definition 4.

1.  The face-connected components of a subgraph @xmath are defined as
    the subsets of lines of the maximal factorized rectangular blocks of
    its @xmath incidence matrix (with entries in @xmath ).

2.  A subgraph @xmath is called face-connected if it has a single
    face-connected component.

3.  Let @xmath be a graph. The face-connected subgraphs @xmath are said
    to be face-disjoint if they form exactly @xmath face-connected
    components in their union @xmath .

The notion of face-connectedness is finer than vertex-connectedness, in
the sense that any face-connected subgraph is also vertex-connected. It
should also be noted that with the previous definition, the
face-disjoint subgraphs @xmath can consist of strictly less than @xmath
face-connected components in @xmath itself. What really matters is that
there exists a subgraph of @xmath into which @xmath form @xmath
face-connected components.

Examples. In Figure 5.2 , @xmath and @xmath are both vertex-connected,
while only @xmath is face-connected. @xmath has two face-connected
components: @xmath and @xmath . In Figure 5.4 , @xmath and @xmath are
face-disjoint because they are their own face-connected components in
@xmath . On the other hand, they are not face-connected components of
@xmath , which is itself face-connected. This illustrates the subtelty
in the definition of face-disjointness we just pointed out.

It is convenient to define elementary operations on TGFT graphs at the
level of their underlying colored graphs, where dipole moves play a
prominent role. In the renormalization context, dipole moves will be
used as a way to consistently erase faces with high scales. Therefore
topological considerations will be essentially irrelevant, and we adopt
from now on a new definition of dipoles, which does not distinguish
degenerate from non-degenerate ones. Moreover, since only color- @xmath
lines carry propagators, we also only consider those dipoles having an
internal line of color @xmath .

###### Definition 5.

Let @xmath be a graph, and @xmath its colored extension. For any integer
@xmath such that @xmath , a @xmath -dipole is a line of @xmath whose
image in @xmath links two nodes @xmath and @xmath which are connected by
exactly @xmath additional colored lines.

###### Definition 6.

Let @xmath be a graph, and @xmath its colored extension. The contraction
of a @xmath -dipole @xmath is an operation in @xmath that consists in:

1.  deleting the two nodes @xmath and @xmath linked by @xmath , together
    with the @xmath lines that connect them;

2.  reconnecting the resulting @xmath pairs of open legs according to
    their colors.

We call @xmath the resulting colored graph, and @xmath its pre-image.
See Figure 5.5 .

This purely combinatorial notion of contraction of lines can be extended
to arbitrary subgraphs.

###### Definition 7.

We call contraction of a subgraph @xmath the successive contractions of
all the lines of @xmath . The resulting graph is independent of the
order in which the lines of @xmath are contracted, and is noted @xmath .

###### Proof.

To confirm that this definition is consistent, we need to prove that
dipole contractions are commuting operations. Consider two distinct
lines @xmath and @xmath in a graph @xmath , and call @xmath the subgraph
made of @xmath and @xmath . We distinguish three cases.

1.  @xmath is disconnected. This means that @xmath and @xmath are part
    of two independent dipoles, with no colored line in common, and the
    two contraction operations obviously commute.

2.  @xmath is connected, and none of its internal faces contain both
    @xmath and @xmath . This means that @xmath and @xmath are contained
    in two dipoles @xmath and @xmath , such that for each color @xmath ,
    at most one line of color @xmath connects @xmath to @xmath . Hence
    contracting @xmath (resp. @xmath ) does not change the nature of the
    dipole in which @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is contained. So here again,
    @xmath and @xmath are local objects which can be contracted
    independently.

3.  @xmath has @xmath internal faces containing both @xmath and @xmath .
    In this case, the contraction of @xmath (resp. @xmath ) changes the
    nature of the dipole in which @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is contained:
    @xmath internal faces are added to it. However, when contracting the
    second tadpole, these faces are deleted, so for any order in which
    the contractions are performed, all the internal faces are deleted.
    As for the external faces, the situation is the same as in the
    previous case, and the two contractions commute.

∎

We can also give a more global characterization of the contraction
operation.

###### Proposition 7.

Let @xmath be a subgraph of @xmath , and @xmath its colored extension.
The contracted graph @xmath is obtained by:

1.  deleting all the internal faces of @xmath ;

2.  replacing all the external faces of @xmath by single lines of the
    appropriate color.

###### Proof.

We prove this by induction on the number of lines in @xmath . If @xmath
contains one single line, then it is a dipole, and the proposition is
true according to the very definition of a dipole contraction. Now,
suppose that @xmath is made of @xmath lines, @xmath of them being
contained in the subgraph @xmath , and call the last one @xmath . The
set of internal faces in @xmath decomposes into several subsets. The
faces which are internal to @xmath are deleted by hypothesis when
contracting @xmath . Those common to @xmath and @xmath become internal
dipole faces once @xmath is contracted, so they are deleted when @xmath
is contracted, and the same is of course true for the remaining internal
faces which have @xmath as single line. The same distinction of cases
applied to external faces of @xmath allows to prove that they are
replaced by single lines of the appropriate color, which achieves the
proof. ∎

Contracting a subgraph @xmath can heavily modify the connectivity
properties of @xmath , depending on the nature of the dipoles this
operation involves. It is indeed easy to check that:

###### Proposition 8.

1.  For any vertex-connected graph @xmath , if @xmath is a line of
    @xmath contained in a @xmath -dipole, then @xmath is
    vertex-connected.

2.  For any @xmath , there exists a connected graph @xmath and a @xmath
    -dipole @xmath such that @xmath has exactly @xmath connected
    components.

This point is to be contrasted with usual graph theory, where an
elementary contraction moves simply amounts to shrinking a line until
its two end vertices get identified, and therefore conserves
(vertex-)connectedness.

Let us now understand how these combinatorial moves affect the
amplitudes. @xmath -dipole contractions play a particularly important
role in colored tensor models and GFTs, because they implement the
topological notion of connected sum of @xmath -bubbles. This remains
true in our context, the relevant move being the contraction of a @xmath
-dipole which is not a tadpole (i.e. a non-degenerate @xmath -dipole in
the usual nomenclature). Interestingly, the contraction of a full set of
such @xmath -dipoles is intimately related to the gauge-fixing procedure
sketched before. In a connected graph @xmath , a maximal set of @xmath
-dipoles can be successively contracted, by picking up a maximal tree of
lines @xmath . But we also know that in the Feynman amplitude of @xmath
, the group elements associated to this tree can be set to .
Incidentally, the purely combinatorial notion of contraction of lines of
@xmath is nothing but the result of trivial convolutions in the
amplitude @xmath . The only difference between @xmath and @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the fully contracted graph, is a set of simple integrals
with respect to Schwinger parameters, while their integrands have
exactly the same structure. This observation is crucial to the
definition of quasi-locality in TGFTs, which must be based on the
properties of the reduced graphs @xmath rather than @xmath itself.

In usual field theories, contraction moves are used to approximate high
energy pieces of the amplitudes by local vertices. This is easily
understood since propagators tend to bring neighboring vertices
together, and increasingly so the higher the energy. In TGFTs, a similar
picture can be proposed by focusing on faces rather than lines. A closed
face @xmath will tend to be associated to a trivial holonomy when the
Schwinger parameter @xmath gets small, that is when all the propagators
along @xmath have high scales. Therefore, in high subgraphs one will
always be able to approximate the closed face holonomies by , which can
be pictured as shrinking these faces to points. However, this does not
mean that this approximation can be recast as the amplitude of a
simplified graphs, for elementary holonomies along individual lines are
not necessarily themselves close to . Contrary to usual quantum field
theories, in which high subgraphs automatically look local (i.e.
point-like), there is an additional tension between global and local
properties in TGFTs, which precludes the automatic understanding of high
subgraphs as quasi-local (i.e. tensor invariant like) objects. A simple
way of understanding this point is that a subgraph whose closed faces
all have trivial holonomies can have non-trivial holonomies associated
to its external faces: therefore, from the point of view of its external
legs, such a subgraph introduces non-trivial parallel transports which
distinguish it from an elementary bubble vertex. We shall therefore
introduce combinatorial conditions which, when satisfied, allow to
interpret high subgraphs as quasi-local objects. In order to disentangle
the loss of tensorial invariance from the loss of connectedness, we
define two classes of subgraphs, the contractible and the tracial ones [
u1 ] .

###### Definition 8.

Let @xmath be a vertex-connected graph, and @xmath be one of its
face-connected subgraphs.

1.  If @xmath is a tadpole, @xmath is contractible if, for any group
    elements assignment @xmath :

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.33)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.  In general, @xmath is contractible if it admits a spanning tree
    @xmath such that @xmath is a contractible tadpole.

3.  @xmath is tracial if it is contractible and the contracted graph
    @xmath is vertex-connected.

A contractible graph is therefore a subgraph on which any flat
connection is trivial up to a gauge transformation. Note that this gauge
freedom is what makes the contraction with respect to a spanning tree an
essential feature of the definition. On the other hand, the notion of
traciality is independent of the choice of tree, as it is a statement
about @xmath , in which all internal lines of @xmath have been
contracted.

In the multiscale effective expansion, high divergent subgraphs will
give rise to effective couplings. To apply this procedure in our
context, such subgraphs need to be tracial, or at least contractible.
Traciality ensures that the divergence of a high subgraph can be
factorized into a divergent coefficient times a connected invariant. For
high divergent subgraphs which are contractible but not tracial, a
factorization of the divergences is still possible, but in terms of
disconnected invariants; these have been called anomalous terms in [
tensor_4d ] . It is not clear yet whether this is a major issue and how
these anomalies should be interpreted physically, but in the models
considered below all the divergent high subgraphs are tracial. Indeed we
already noticed that any @xmath -dipole with @xmath is contractible, and
that any @xmath -dipole is tracial, as its contraction also preserves
connectedness. Combined, these two facts provide us already with an
interesting class of tracial subgraphs. They are called melopoles [ u1 ]
because they combine the idea of melonic graphs and tadpoles. The high
divergent subgraphs appearing in the models studied in [ u1 ] , and to
which Chapter 6 will be devoted, are melopoles.

###### Definition 9.

In a graph @xmath , a melopole is a single-vertex subgraph @xmath (hence
@xmath is made of tadpole lines attached to a single vertex in the
ordinary sense), such that there is at least one ordering (or “Hepp’s
sector") of its @xmath lines as @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath
-dipole for @xmath .

The simplest melopole has just one line and is shown in Figure 5.6 (for
@xmath ). Its contraction within a connected graph (grey blob) results
in a connected graph times a coefficient (of which a graphical
representation is given).

###### Proposition 9.

Any face-connected melopole is tracial.

###### Proof.

Obviously it is contractible; and vertex-connectedness cannot be lost at
any stage if one contracts in the order of the correct Hepp’s sector. ∎

In just-renormalizable models [ su2 ] , a larger class of tracial
subgraphs will dominate, which extend the notion of melopole to an
arbitrary number of vertices. They are called melonic , and generalize
the melonic graphs encountered so far.

###### Definition 10.

In a graph @xmath , a melonic subgraph is a face-connected subgraph
@xmath containing at least one maximal tree @xmath such that @xmath is a
melopole. ³ ³ 3 This definition is chosen so that at least one internal
face of @xmath runs through any line of any melonic subgraph. @xmath
itself is considered melonic if it is melonic as a subgraph of itself.
This definition will ensure Lemma 11 .

###### Proposition 10.

Any melonic subgraph is tracial.

### 5.4 Multiscale expansion and power-counting

We are now ready to introduce the multiscale expansion, and the
power-counting theorem that result. The latter was first proved for an
Abelian group @xmath in [ u1 ] , and provides an optimal bound in this
case. It was then extended to non-Abelian compact groups in [ su2 ] ,
with full details provided for @xmath only. When the group is
non-Abelian, the Abelian power-counting theorem remains valid, though it
does not provide an optimal bound in general. As we will see, it is
however optimal for contractible subgraphs, and hence for all the
subgraphs we will need to renormalize. For clarity of the presentation,
we focus on the Abelian case in this chapter, and even restrict to
@xmath in the proofs. The non-Abelian case will be reported on in more
details in Chapter 7 .

#### 5.4.1 Multiscale decomposition

As in usual local field theories, the multi-scale expansion relies on a
slicing of the propagator in the Schwinger parameter @xmath , according
to a geometric progression. We therefore fix an arbitrary constant
@xmath and for any integer @xmath , we define the slice of covariance
@xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to be compatible with the slicing, we choose a UV regulator of
the form @xmath , and denote the cut-off covariance by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then decompose the amplitudes themselves, according to scale
attributions @xmath where @xmath are integers associated to each line,
determining the slice attribution of its propagator. The full amplitude
@xmath of @xmath is then reconstructed from the sliced amplitudes @xmath
by simply summing over the scale attribution @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then introduce high subgraphs, and their inclusion tree: the
Gallavotti-Nicolò tree. The only difference with usual quantum field
theories, though a very important one, is that we will require high
subgraphs to be face-connected rather than only vertex-connected. This
is again in agreement with the structure of the amplitudes, whose
integrands factorize over face-connected components. While not
absolutely necessary, this choice is physically meaningful, and as will
be clear in the following will technically ease the analysis of the
renormalized series. It would however be possible to stick to the usual
notion of vertex-connected high subgraph, as is done in [ fabien_dine ]
.

###### Definition 11.

Let @xmath be a vertex-connected graph, with scale attribution @xmath .

1.  Given a subgraph @xmath , one defines internal and external scales:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath are the external legs of @xmath which are hooked to
    external faces.

2.  A high subgraph of @xmath is a face-connected subgraph @xmath such
    that @xmath . We label them as follows. For any @xmath , @xmath is
    defined as the set of lines of @xmath with scales higher or equal to
    @xmath . We call @xmath its number of face-connected components, and
    @xmath its face-connected components. The subgraphs @xmath are
    exactly the high subgraphs.

3.  Two high subgraphs are either included into another or
    line-disjoint, therefore the inclusion relations of the subgraphs
    @xmath can be represented as an abstract graph, whose root is the
    whole graph @xmath . This is the Gallavotti-Nicolò tree or simply GN
    tree .

#### 5.4.2 Propagator bounds

The idea of the multiscale analysis is to bound sliced propagators, and
deduce an optimized bound for each @xmath separately. To this effect, we
first need to capture the peakedness properties of the propagators into
Gaussian bounds. They can be deduced from a general fact about heat
kernels on curved manifolds: at small times, they look just the same as
their flat counterparts, and can therefore be bounded by suitable
Gaussian functions. In particular, the heat kernel on @xmath can be
parametrized by one angle @xmath , and expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the propagator can explicitly be written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.40)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can then prove generic bounds for the sliced propagators @xmath , on
which the whole power-counting will rely. Such bounds have been computed
in the model of [ tensor_4d ] , and immediately imply the following:

###### Proposition 11.

There exist constants @xmath and @xmath , such that for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The bound on the derivatives of @xmath is not necessary to the proof of
the power-counting theorem, but are crucial to establish the finite
character of the renormalized amplitudes of the models presented in
Chapter 6 . They are also generalizable to higher numbers of
derivatives, as will be necessary in Chapter 7 . For Abelian compact Lie
groups of dimension @xmath , @xmath ’s and @xmath are @xmath
-dimensional and, for example, the first bound becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.4.3 Abelian power-counting

##### Power-counting in a slice

The divergence degree of Abelian TGFT subgraphs in a single slice and
with a heat kernel regularization has been established and analyzed in [
lin ] . For an Abelian compact group of dimension @xmath it gives ⁴ ⁴ 4
The degree of a colored graph will not make any apparition in the last
three chapters of this thesis, we therefore allow ourselves to use the
same notation @xmath for the divergence degree of TGFTs.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the rank of the @xmath incidence matrix of @xmath (which
we recall takes only internal lines and faces into account). As we will
see, the @xmath integrations transform the @xmath term coming from the
propagator decays into a @xmath exponent. The gauge invariance, which
manifests itself in the @xmath integrals (and is absent in [ tensor_4d ]
), is responsible for the additional rank contribution.

If the subgraph @xmath is the union of several face-connected components
@xmath , the divergence degree factorizes as the sum of the divergence
degrees of the face-connected components. Indeed, from the very
definition of face-connectedness, the face-connected components are the
smallest pieces of @xmath on which the @xmath incidence matrix is
block-rectangular. Therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

which provides the finest understanding of the divergences.

In the case of non-commutative TGFTs the ordering of faces results in a
more subtle single-slice power-counting, established in [ vm1 , vm2 ,
vm3 ] . The divergences are exactly captured by a twisted divergence
degree @xmath , which is bounded by the Abelian one. Importantly for us,
Abelian and twisted divergence degree coincide for contractible
subgraphs.

##### Multiscale power-counting

Consider a graph @xmath , and the multi-scale decomposition of its
amplitude @xmath . The multiscale power-counting is a bound which, at
fixed momentum attribution @xmath , factorizes over all the @xmath nodes
of the Gallavotti-Nicoló tree (hereafter GN tree).

###### Proposition 12.

[Abelian power-counting] There exists a constant @xmath such that the
following bound holds:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.47)
  -- -- -- --------

###### Proof.

The idea is to combine the single-scale bound and the GN tree to obtain
a new optimized bound over scales. First we collect all the powers of
@xmath in front of the propagator bounds, and rewrite them as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

through the usual trivial identity @xmath . We then integrate the @xmath
variables in an optimal way, as was done in [ tensor_4d ] . In each face
@xmath , a maximal tree of lines @xmath is chosen to perform the @xmath
integrations. Optimality is ensured by requiring the trees @xmath to be
compatible with the abstract GN tree, in the sense that @xmath has to be
a tree itself, for any @xmath and @xmath . This results in a factor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is one decay per elementary strand ( @xmath term), except for one
strand in each closed face ( @xmath term). Combined with the previous
term, this gives a bound

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains to perform the @xmath integrals, using the remaining decay,
that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the lowest scale in the face @xmath . These integrals
should give the rank contribution to @xmath . In order to optimize this
effect, we should select a restricted set of faces @xmath such that the
submatrix @xmath with @xmath restricted to @xmath has rank @xmath in
each @xmath node, and forget the (redundant) decay factors from the
other faces in ( 5.48 ). This is analogue to selecting a spanning tree
@xmath and neglecting the loop lines decays in ordinary field theories.

To select @xmath , we start from the leaves of the GN tree and proceed
towards its root @xmath . In a leaf @xmath we select a first subset of
faces such that the restricted submatrix @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath has maximal rank; then we contract @xmath and continue the
procedure for the reduced graph and the reduced GN tree, until the root
is reached. At the end we obtain a particular set of faces @xmath .

At each node @xmath we have discarded the full incidence columns for
internal faces which were combinations of other columns of that node.
But because such faces were internal, these full columns have zeros
outside the @xmath block. Hence removing them cannot have any effect on
the lower GN nodes’ ranks. The conclusion is that the incidence matrix
reduced to @xmath , that is for which all internal faces not contained
in @xmath have been discarded, has still rank @xmath in each @xmath
node.

Discarding the decay factors for faces not in @xmath , we now need to
analyze the result of the integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

and prove that it gives @xmath . To this effect, in the graph @xmath we
can pick up a set @xmath of exactly @xmath lines such that the (square)
@xmath minor of @xmath has non-zero determinant. The @xmath square
incidence matrix @xmath must still have exactly @xmath rank in each
@xmath node (otherwise the @xmath columns @xmath for @xmath would not
generate a space of dimension @xmath , and the rank of the selected
@xmath square matrix would be strictly smaller than @xmath ).

We can now fix all values of the @xmath parameters of the lines not in
@xmath and consider the integrals

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

We change variables so that the integral becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath variables are functions of the fixed @xmath parameters
of the lines not in @xmath and @xmath is a Jacobian. This integral gives
@xmath , which by the condition on @xmath turns into @xmath as expected.

Remark finally that by Hadamard’s bound, since each column of this
determinant is made of at most @xmath factors @xmath (a line containing
at most @xmath internal faces), the Jacobian @xmath of the corresponding
change of variables is at most @xmath , hence can be absorbed in the
@xmath factor.

Finally we can integrate the fixed @xmath parameters for @xmath at a
cost bounded by @xmath since we assumed the group to be compact. ∎

It is important to note that, when the group is commutative (as we
assumed here), the multiscale Abelian bound is optimal, in the sense
that a lower bound of the same form could be derived, with only a
different constant @xmath . This can be checked step by step in the
derivation, starting from the propagator bounds on which we already
commented. We will come back to this power-counting theorem in Chapter 7
, where we will explain why it still holds in the non-Abelian case, and
why it is optimal for contractible subgraphs.

### 5.5 Classification of just-renormalizable models

In this section, we discuss the classification of possible
just-renormalizable models derived in [ su2 ] . On top of being very
general and constraining, therefore interesting, it requires a detailed
analysis of the Abelian divergence degree and of the properties of
melonic subgraphs. Hence it is a good way to get more familiar with
these structures and collect mathematical facts along the way.

#### 5.5.1 Analysis of the Abelian divergence degree

We come back to the general situation of a compact Lie group @xmath of
dimension @xmath , not necessarily commutative, and a rank- @xmath field
with @xmath . We assume for the moment that the Abelian power-counting
theorem holds in general, and for simplicity we call divergent (resp.
convergent ) a subgraph with @xmath (resp. @xmath ). Because the
divergent subgraphs in the generalized non-Abelian sense will turn out
to be contractible, this nomenclature is perfectly consistent. We also
denote by @xmath the maximal valency of @xmath -bubble interactions
appearing in the action (i.e. in the set @xmath ). The question we would
like to address is the following:

Which values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are likely to support
just-renormalizable theories?

The first step we need to take is to write @xmath in a form which makes
some key numbers associated to the subgraphs explicit. Let us consider a
face-connected subgraph @xmath with @xmath vertices, @xmath lines,
@xmath faces, and @xmath external legs. @xmath is the rank of the @xmath
incidence matrix of @xmath . When @xmath , face-connectedness imposes
@xmath , and one trivially has @xmath , which makes @xmath convergent.
From now on, we therefore assume @xmath . Face-connectedness imposes
that each line of @xmath appears in at least one of its internal faces.
For @xmath , @xmath is the number of bubbles with valency @xmath in
@xmath .

Remember that the incidence matrix has entries @xmath or @xmath since
the graphs we consider have no tadfaces.

Since we are going to make extensive use of contractions of graphs along
trees, as a way to gauge fix the amplitudes, we first establish the
change in divergence degree under such a contraction. It should come as
no surprise that contracting a tree in @xmath only affects @xmath
through its @xmath term, and this can be proven very concretely, in a
similar way as one would proceed to fully justify the gauge fixing
procedure [ pr1 ] .

###### Lemma 9.

Under contraction of a tree @xmath , @xmath and @xmath each do not
change so that @xmath .

###### Proof.

That @xmath does not change is easy to show: existing faces can only get
shorter under contraction of a tree line but cannot disappear (this is
true also for open faces).

@xmath does not change because of the gauge invariance. Given a tree
@xmath with @xmath lines, we can define the @xmath matrix @xmath which
has entries @xmath or @xmath in the following way: for any oriented line
@xmath we consider the unique path @xmath in the tree @xmath going from
vertex @xmath to @xmath and define @xmath to be zero if this path does
not contain @xmath and @xmath if it does, the sign taking into account
the orientations of the path and of the line @xmath . Remark that @xmath
for all @xmath .

Then for each (closed) face @xmath , made of @xmath , it is easy to
check that the induced loop on @xmath , made by gluing the paths @xmath
, which is contractible, must take each tree line @xmath an equal number
of times and with opposite signs. Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the line @xmath is a combination of the other lines, and the
incidence matrix after contracting @xmath maintains the same rank. ∎

We shall consider now a tensorial rosette [ addendum ] , namely the
subgraph @xmath obtained after contraction of a spanning tree ; it has
@xmath lines and a single vertex. The goal is to gain a better control
over its degree of divergence and the various contributions to it. The
key procedure to achieve the goal is to apply @xmath -dipole
contractions to the tensorial rosette, and establish how they affect the
divergence degree.

Note that @xmath is not necessarily face-connected, since the
contraction of tree lines affects how faces are connected to one
another. Recall also that a line is a @xmath -dipole if it belongs to
exactly @xmath faces of length @xmath .

Under a @xmath -dipole contraction we know that a single line and
possibly several faces disappear, hence the rank of the incidence matrix
can either remain the same or go down by 1 unit. Moreover only the faces
of length @xmath can eventually disappear. And if there exist such faces
the rank must go down by exactly @xmath , since we delete a column which
is not a combination of the others.

-   @xmath and @xmath , hence @xmath if @xmath ,

-   @xmath , and @xmath or @xmath , hence @xmath or @xmath if @xmath .

By definition, a rosette (with external legs) is a melopole if and only
if there is an ordering of its lines such that they can all be
successively contracted as @xmath -dipoles. In that case, we find that
@xmath . If the rosette is not a melopole, there is at least one step
where @xmath decreases by less than @xmath , so we expect such a
subgraph to be suppressed with respect to a melopole. However, @xmath
-dipole contractions with @xmath need not conserve vertex-connectedness,
so we need to refine this argument. To do so, we write the divergence
degree of any rosette in terms of the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of lines of the rosette. It will be
convenient in the following to consider (vertex)-disjoint unions of
rosettes, to which @xmath is extended by linearity. These disjoint
unions of rosettes will simply be called rosettes from now on, and their
single-vertex components will be said to be connected .

Since @xmath is the number of lines of any rosette of the graph @xmath ,
and @xmath does not depend on @xmath either, we know that @xmath is
independent of @xmath . It is therefore a function of equivalent classes
of rosettes. This way we obtain a nice splitting of @xmath , between a
rosette dependent contribution and additional combinatorial terms
capturing the characteristics of the initial graph:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first three terms do not depend on the rank @xmath , and provided
that @xmath can be understood, will give a simple classification of
divergences. To establish this central result about the values of @xmath
, one first needs to prove a technical lemma, about @xmath -dipole
contractions.

###### Lemma 10.

Let @xmath be a face-connected rosette (with @xmath ), and @xmath a
@xmath -dipole line in @xmath . If @xmath has more vacuum connected
components than @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

As stated before, such a move either lowers @xmath by @xmath or leaves
it unchanged. We just have to show that given our hypothesis, we are in
the first situation. We first remark that lines and faces can be
oriented in such a way that @xmath or @xmath . We can for instance
positively orient lines from white to black nodes, and faces
accordingly. With this convention, we can exploit the colored structure
of the graphs in the following way: for any color @xmath , each line
appears in exactly one face of color @xmath . For vacuum graphs, all
these faces are closed and correspond to entries in the @xmath matrix,
implying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath and any @xmath . Given the hypothesis on @xmath , we know
that up to permutations of lines and columns, @xmath takes the form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath matrix of a vacuum graph, one of the
additional vacuum components created by the contraction of @xmath .
@xmath is the @xmath matrix associated to the complement (possibly
several connected components) in @xmath . The additional line
corresponds to @xmath , and because @xmath is face-connected, it must
contain at least a @xmath under @xmath , and a @xmath above @xmath .
This leaves up to @xmath additional non-trivial entries in this line
above @xmath , denoted by the variables @xmath or @xmath . Let us call
@xmath the color of the face associated to the first column of @xmath .
Non-zero @xmath ’s are necessarily associated to different colors: call
them @xmath up to @xmath . This implies that the remaining color, @xmath
, only appears in faces of @xmath that do not intersect with @xmath .
Calling @xmath the columns of @xmath , and @xmath its first column, one
has:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The operation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

cancels the first column of @xmath , and when operated on the whole
matrix does not change the line @xmath . We conclude that @xmath . ∎

The essential property of the quantity @xmath is that it is bounded from
above, and is extremal for melopoles. More precisely we have:

###### Proposition 13.

Let @xmath be a connected rosette.

1.  If @xmath is a vacuum graph, then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  If @xmath is not a vacuum graph, i.e. has external legs, then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It is easy to see that @xmath is conserved under @xmath -dipole
contractions. In particular a simple computation shows that @xmath when
@xmath is a vacuum melopole, and @xmath when @xmath is a non-vacuum
melopole. We can prove the general bounds and the two remaining
implications in (i) and (ii) by induction on the number of lines @xmath
of the rosette @xmath .

-   If @xmath , @xmath can be both vacuum or non-vacuum. In the first
    situation, @xmath cannot be anything else than the fundamental melon
    with 2 nodes. It has exactly @xmath faces, a rank @xmath , so that
    @xmath . In the second situation, namely when @xmath is non-vacuum,
    the number of faces is strictly smaller than @xmath , as at least
    one strand running through the single line of @xmath must correspond
    to an external face. Since on the other hand the rank is @xmath when
    @xmath and @xmath otherwise, we see that @xmath , and @xmath
    whenever the number of faces is exactly @xmath . In this case, the
    unique line of @xmath is a @xmath -dipole, therefore @xmath is a
    melopole.

-   Let us now assume that @xmath and that properties (i) and (ii) hold
    for a number of lines @xmath . If @xmath is not face-connected (and
    therefore non-vacuum), we can decompose it into face-connected
    components @xmath with @xmath . Each of these components has a
    number of lines strictly smaller than @xmath , so by the induction
    hypothesis @xmath . Moreover, @xmath if and only if @xmath for any
    @xmath , in which case @xmath is a melopole since all the @xmath ’s
    are themselves melopoles. This being said, we assume from now on
    that @xmath is face-connected, and pick up a @xmath -dipole line
    @xmath in @xmath ( @xmath ).

    Let us first suppose that @xmath . @xmath has @xmath lines in its
    rosettes, and @xmath , which implies @xmath (with equality if and
    only if @xmath is itself a rosette). Moreover, @xmath is possibly
    disconnected and consists in @xmath vertex-connected components with
    @xmath , yielding @xmath connected rosettes (after possible
    contractions of tree lines). By the induction hypothesis, we
    therefore have @xmath , and @xmath if and only if @xmath consists of
    @xmath connected vacuum melopoles, in which case @xmath itself is a
    vacuum melopole. Similarly, @xmath if and only if @xmath consists of
    @xmath vacuum melopoles and @xmath non-vacuum melopole, in which
    case @xmath is a non-vacuum melopole.

    If @xmath , we either have @xmath or @xmath , which respectively
    imply @xmath or @xmath . The first situation is strictly analogous
    to the @xmath case, therefore the same conclusions follow. In the
    second situation, we resort to lemma 10 . Since @xmath has been
    assumed face-connected, and @xmath implies @xmath , the lemma is
    applicable: @xmath cannot have more vacuum connected components than
    @xmath . In particular, if @xmath is non-vacuum, @xmath , therefore
    @xmath . Likewise, @xmath when @xmath is vacuum.

    We conclude that the two properties (i) and (ii) are true at rank
    @xmath .

∎

###### Corollary 5.

Let @xmath be a vertex-connected subgraph. If @xmath admits a melopole
rosette (in particular, if @xmath is melonic), then all its rosettes are
melopoles.

###### Proof.

The quantity @xmath is independent of the particular spanning tree
@xmath one is considering. Therefore, if @xmath is a melopole then this
holds for any other spanning tree @xmath . ∎

#### 5.5.2 Just-renormalizable models

We are now in good position to establish a list of potentially
just-renormalizable theories. Indeed, by simply rewriting @xmath and
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

one obtains the following bound on the degree of non-vacuum
face-connected subgraphs:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we also know this inequality to be saturated (by melonic graphs),
it yields a necessary condition for just-renormalizable theories:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in such cases

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

We immediately deduce that only @xmath -point functions with @xmath can
diverge, which is a necessary condition for renormalization. Equation (
5.59 ) has exactly five non-trivial solutions (i.e. @xmath ), which
yields five classes of potentially just-renormalizable interacting
theories. Two of them are @xmath models, the three others being of the
@xmath type. A particularly interesting model from a quantum gravity
perspective is the @xmath theory with @xmath and @xmath , which can
incorporate the essential structures of 3d quantum gravity (model A). We
will focus on this case in Chapter 7 , but we already notice that the
same methods could as well be applied to any of the four other types of
candidate theories. Table 5.1 summarizes the essential properties of
these would-be just-renormalizable theories, called of type A up to E.

Models D and E have actually been studied and shown renormalizable in [
fabien_dine ] , in the Abelian case, and even asymptotically free in the
UV [ dineaf ] . Non-vacuum divergences of models A and B will only have
melonic contributions, while models C, D and E can also include
non-melonic terms. From our analysis, there could be: up to @xmath
divergent @xmath -point graphs in model C; up to @xmath divergent @xmath
-point graphs and @xmath divergent @xmath -point graphs in model D; up
to @xmath divergent @xmath -point graphs in model C. These require a
(presumably simple) refinement of proposition 13 . As for models of type
A and B, we would not need any further understanding of @xmath to
explore them further.

Finally, one also remarks that face-connectedness did not play any role
in the derivation of expression ( 5.60 ). Indeed, it is as well valid
for vertex-connected unions of non-trivial face-connected subgraphs,
which as we will see in Chapter 7 , is also relevant to
renormalizability.

#### 5.5.3 Properties of melonic subgraphs

Since they will play a central role in the remainder of this thesis, we
conclude this section by a set of properties verified by melonic
subgraphs, especially non-vacuum ones.

The first thing one can notice is that by mere definition, any line in a
melonic subgraph @xmath is part of an internal face in @xmath . This
means in particular that @xmath cannot be split in two vertex-connected
parts connected by a single @xmath -dipole line @xmath , since the three
faces running through @xmath would then necessarily be external to
@xmath . In other words:

###### Lemma 11.

Any melonic subgraph @xmath is @xmath -particle irreducible.

From the point of view of renormalization theory, this is already
interesting, as @xmath -point divergences in particular will not require
any further decomposition into @xmath -particle irreducible components.

We now turn to specific properties of non-vacuum melonic subgraphs. In
order to understand further their possible structures, it is natural to
first focus on their rosettes. The following proposition shows that they
cannot be arbitrary melopoles.

###### Proposition 14.

Let @xmath be a non-vacuum melonic subgraph. For any spanning tree
@xmath in @xmath , the rosette @xmath is face-connected.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a spanning tree in @xmath and let us suppose that @xmath
has @xmath face-connected components. In order to find a contradiction,
one first remarks that the contraction of a tree conserves the number of
faces, and even elementary face connections. That is to say: if @xmath
share a face in @xmath , they also share a face in @xmath . Therefore,
the lines of @xmath can be split into @xmath subsets, such that each one
of them does not share any face of @xmath with any other. We give a
pictorial representation of what we mean on the left side of Figure 5.7
, with @xmath . The internal structure of the vertices is ommited, the
@xmath subsets of lines are marked with different symbols, while the
tree lines are left unmarked.

The face-connectedness of @xmath is ensured by the tree lines, which
must connect together these @xmath subsets. Incidentally, there must be
at least one line @xmath which is face-connected to two or more of these
subsets. In particular ⁵ ⁵ 5 At this point we rely on @xmath , which
holds because @xmath is a tree. , we can find two faces @xmath and
@xmath which are face-disconnected in @xmath , and two lines @xmath such
that: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . See again the left side of Figure 5.7
, where @xmath and @xmath are explictly represented as undashed closed
loops.

Now, call @xmath the subgraph obtained after contraction of all the tree
lines but @xmath , i.e. @xmath . @xmath consists of two vertices,
connected by @xmath and a certain number @xmath of lines from @xmath
(see the right part of Figure 5.7 and the left part of Figure 5.8 ).
Through @xmath run at least two faces, @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is
their single connection, since they are disconnected in @xmath . This
requires the existence of two @xmath -dipole lines @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath , through which @xmath and @xmath respectively run. In Figure 5.7
we see that @xmath , but because @xmath is a tadpole line in @xmath , we
must choose @xmath . Otherwise, @xmath and @xmath could not close
without being connected in @xmath . The colored extension of @xmath can
thus be split into two groups of nodes, connected by @xmath lines and
@xmath colored lines (created by the contraction of @xmath , see the
right part of Figure 5.8 ). It is easy to understand that such a drawing
cannot correspond to a melopole. Indeed, the number of colored lines
connecting the two groups of nodes would need to be at least @xmath . ⁶
⁶ 6 A simple way to understand this last point is the following. Suppose
there are @xmath colored lines between the two groups of nodes. If none
of the @xmath lines between the two groups of nodes are elementary
melons, an elementary melon can be contracted in one of them, without
affecting the @xmath lines nor the @xmath colored lines between them. If
on the contrary one of the @xmath lines is an elementary melon, it can
be contracted. This cancels @xmath colored lines connecting the two
groups of nodes, and replaces it by a single one. Hence @xmath and
@xmath . By induction, one must therefore have @xmath , where the @xmath
on the right side is due to the last step @xmath . Hence @xmath , from
which we deduce:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath , this is incompatible with @xmath , and @xmath is also
incompatible with @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath , a contradiction also
arises, thanks to the colors. In the process of elementary melon
contractions, the first of the two lines to become elementary will
delete @xmath colored lines, say with colors @xmath and @xmath , and
replace it by a color- @xmath line. One therefore obtains two groups of
nodes connected by two color- @xmath lines and a single color- @xmath
line, which cannot form an elementary melon. See Figure 5.9 .

∎

One immediately notices that this proposition also holds for any forest
@xmath , that is any set of lines without loops, be it a spanning tree
or not. Indeed, any such @xmath is included in a spanning tree @xmath .
The contraction of @xmath on the one hand can only increase the number
of face-connected components, and on the other hand the full contraction
of @xmath leads to a single face-connected components, hence the
contraction of @xmath also leads to a single face-connected component.

We provide an illustration of this result in Figure 5.10 , representing
a melonic graph and one of its rosettes, which is face-connected.

A more important consequence of this statement is a restriction on the
number of external faces of the rosettes:

###### Corollary 6.

Let @xmath be a non-vacuum melonic subgraph. For any spanning tree
@xmath in @xmath , @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let us prove that any face-connected melopole @xmath has a single
external face. @xmath being itself face-connected thanks to the previous
proposition, the result will immediately follow. We proceed by induction
on @xmath . The elementary melon has @xmath internal faces and @xmath
external face, hence the property holds when @xmath . If @xmath , we can
contract an elementary @xmath -dipole line @xmath in @xmath . The
subgraph @xmath has @xmath external face, but it is internal in @xmath ,
otherwise the latter would not be face-connected. Hence @xmath and
@xmath have the same number of external faces. By the induction
hypothesis, @xmath (which is a face-connected melopole) has a single
external face, and so do @xmath . ∎

We illustrate again this result in Figure 5.10 . Such restrictions on
the rosettes constrain the face structure of the initial melonic graphs
themselves.

###### Proposition 15.

Let @xmath be a non-vacuum melonic subgraph. All the external faces of
@xmath have the same color.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath . Let us choose two distinct external faces @xmath and
@xmath , and show that they are of the same color. We furthermore select
a line @xmath , and a spanning tree @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath .
This is possible thanks to lemma , and this guarantees that the unique
external face of @xmath is @xmath . This also means that in @xmath ,
@xmath only runs through @xmath , otherwise it would constitute a second
face in @xmath . We can in particular pick a line @xmath . See Figure
5.11 for an example, in which we use the same simplified representation
as before, except that the external faces we are interested in have open
ends.

Similarly to the strategy followed in the proof of Proposition 14 ,
define @xmath . As was already explained, @xmath consists of two
vertices, connected by @xmath and at most one extra line (see Figure 5.8
, with @xmath ). There cannot be just @xmath connecting these two
vertices, because @xmath is @xmath -particle irreducible, hence there
are exactly two such lines. Call @xmath the second of these lines (it is
not necessarily possible to choose @xmath , see Figure 5.11 ). They must
have at least @xmath internal faces in common, otherwise @xmath would
not be a melopole. They moreoever cannot have @xmath internal faces in
common, otherwise @xmath would be vacuum. This means that both appear in
external faces of the same color. One of them is of course @xmath (which
goes through @xmath ), and the second (which goes through @xmath ) is
either @xmath , again @xmath , or yet another external face. @xmath is
excluded because by construction it had no support on @xmath . Moreover,
@xmath must have exactly two external faces, since only one is deleted
when contracting @xmath and the resulting rosette @xmath has itself a
single external face (by Corollary 6 ). Hence the external face running
through @xmath can only be @xmath , and we conclude that it has the same
color than @xmath . ∎

This property is quite useful in practice because it implies a
restrictive bound on the number of external faces of a melonic subgraph
in terms of its number of external legs.

###### Corollary 7.

A melonic subgraph with @xmath external legs has at most @xmath external
faces.

###### Proof.

In any vertex-connected graph with @xmath external legs, the number of
external faces of a given color is bounded by @xmath . ∎

Figure 5.10 provides a good example of a melonic graph having more
external faces that its rosettes: while the rosette on the right side
has a single external face (in agreement with Corollary 6 ), the graph
on the left side hase two external faces, and they both have the same
color @xmath (in agreement with Proposition 15 ).

Finally one would like to understand the inclusion and connectivity
relations between all divergent subgraphs of a given non-vacuum graph.
This is a very important point to address in view of the perturbative
renormalization of such models, in which divergent subgraphs are
inductively integrated out. As usual, the central notion in this respect
is that of a "Zimmermann" forest, which we will generalize to our
situation (where face-connectedness replaces vertex-connectedness) in
the next chapters. At this stage, we just elaborate on some properties
of melonic subgraphs which will later on help simplifying the analysis
of "Zimmermann" forests of divergent subgraphs.

###### Proposition 16.

Let @xmath be a non-vacuum vertex-connected graph. If @xmath are two
melonic subgraphs, then:

1.  @xmath and @xmath are line-disjoint, or one is included into the
    other.

2.  If @xmath is melonic, then: @xmath or @xmath .

Moreover, any @xmath melonic are necessarily face-disjoint if their
union @xmath is also melonic.

###### Proof.

Let us first focus on (i) and (ii). To this effect, we assume that: (i)
@xmath (and in particular @xmath and @xmath are face-connected in their
union); (ii) @xmath and @xmath are face-connected in @xmath , and the
latter is also melonic. We need to prove that in these two situations,
@xmath or @xmath . In order to achieve this, we suppose that both @xmath
and @xmath are non-empty, and look for a contradiction.

Let @xmath be an arbitrary external face of @xmath . Choose a line
@xmath , and a spanning tree @xmath in @xmath , such that @xmath . Then
the unique face of @xmath is @xmath . We want to argue that @xmath is
face-connected. In situation (ii), this is guaranteed by Proposition 14
(applied to @xmath ). In situation (i) on the other hand, one can
decompose it as a disjoint union of subgraphs as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

The key thing to remark is that through each line of @xmath run at least
@xmath faces from @xmath , and at least @xmath from @xmath . Since at
most a total of @xmath faces run through each line (and @xmath ), we
conclude that each line of @xmath appears in at least one face of @xmath
. Therefore @xmath has at least one face, and is in particular
non-empty. We also know that @xmath is face-connected, as well as @xmath
. Therefore @xmath is itself face-connected. Finally, since @xmath ,
this is only possible if an external face of @xmath is internal in
@xmath . We conclude that @xmath is internal to @xmath , hence to @xmath
.

We have just shown that all the external faces of @xmath are internal to
@xmath . Likewise, all the external faces of @xmath are internal to
@xmath . Therefore @xmath , which implies that @xmath is vacuum, and
contradicts our hypotheses.

We can proceed in a similar way than for (ii) to prove the last
statement. Assume @xmath to be melonic, line-disjoint, and
face-connected in their union. The connectedness of @xmath and any of
its reduction by a forest implies that all the external faces of @xmath
are internal in @xmath , for any @xmath . Therefore the latter is
vacuum, and this again contradicts the fact that @xmath is not. ∎

Example. Figure 7.4 represents two non-trivial melonic graphs @xmath and
@xmath which are line-disjoint but face-connected in their union.
Accordingly, their union is not melonic, as can be checked explicitly.

## Chapter 6 Super-renormalizable @xmath models in four dimensions

In this chapter, we illustrate the general TGFT formalism introduced
previously, specializing to @xmath and @xmath . We will use angle
coordinates @xmath for the group elements @xmath , parameterizing the
field @xmath . We do not make any additional hypothesis on the set of
bubble interactions @xmath other than assuming it finite.

This specific set of models was introduced in [ u1 ] in order to explore
how gauge invariance affects renormalizability in TGFT. It should be
stressed that it is not expected to have physical relevance, but it
allows to understand the general structures gauge invariance requires.
The situation is simplified in two respects as compared to the more
interesting model we will report on in the next chapter: the gauge group
is Abelian, which eases the understanding of the divergences; and as we
will see, this model is super-renormalizable, therefore the
renormalization procedure itself is more straightforward. Finally, on
the mathematical side, we will explain how the Wick ordering procedure
can be generalized to the tensorial case, which is non-trivial and
interesting in itself.

### 6.1 Divergent subgraphs and Wick ordering

Since @xmath , the divergence degree of a face-connected subgraph @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.1)
              @xmath   @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We see in particular that the @xmath contribution from formula ( 5.54 )
vanishes. Since @xmath is bounded by @xmath , it immediately follows
that only tadpoles can be divergent, and therefore we are in presence of
a super-renormalizable model (if renormalizable at all). If we were to
focus on non-vacuum divergences only, we could already conclude that
they all come from melopoles, thanks to proposition 13 . However, we
will see that vacuum divergences are not all melonic, and therefore
classifying them from such a perspective would require a refined
understanding of @xmath . Moreover, when this model was studied in [ u1
] , the expression of the divergence degree in terms of @xmath was not
available yet, and a different route was therefore explored, relying on
a bound on @xmath rather than an identity. Since we will dispense
ourselves from analyzing the vacuum divergences of the @xmath model [
su2 ] in the next chapter, we feel that those of the present Abelian
case provide an interesting example. For this reason we need in any case
the bound on @xmath derived in [ u1 ] , and therefore decide to follow
the original classification of divergences, which does not rely on the
second line of equation ( 6.1 ).

#### 6.1.1 A bound on the divergence degree

We need to determine the set of divergent subgraphs, that is those
@xmath such that @xmath . In order to prove the model to be
renormalizable, it will also be necessary to find a uniform decay of the
amplitude associated to convergent graphs ( @xmath ), with respect to
their external legs. In this respect, a suitable bound on @xmath in
terms of simple combinatorial quantities is sufficient. We can for
instance decompose the number of faces with respect to the number of
lines they consist of. We call @xmath the number of internal faces with
@xmath lines, and @xmath the number of external faces with @xmath lines,
so that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can also express the number of lines in terms of these quantities.
Since @xmath different faces run through each line of @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in this formula both sums start with @xmath . We can therefore
rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We remark that the only positive contribution in this sum is given by
@xmath , to which only @xmath -dipoles with @xmath contribute. More
precisely,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of @xmath -dipole lines in @xmath . We are
thus lead to find a bound on @xmath in terms of these numbers of
dipoles, which is the purpose of the following lemma.

###### Lemma 12.

The rank of the incidence matrix associated to a face-connected graph
@xmath verifies:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

Each @xmath -dipole with @xmath contains at least one internal face,
which is independent of all the faces appearing in other lines. ∎

Plugging this inequality into the expression of @xmath yields the
following bound:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note also that @xmath is always @xmath , unless @xmath is the unique
vacuum graph with a single line (sometimes called supermelon ). So the
only non-trivial positive contribution comes from the @xmath -dipoles.
This way we already guess that melopoles are responsible for most of the
divergences, which we confirm below.

#### 6.1.2 Classification of divergences

To control the contribution of @xmath in ( 6.8 ), we take a step back
and analyze the (exact) effect on @xmath of a @xmath -dipole contraction
in a face-connected graph @xmath .

###### Proposition 17.

Let @xmath be a face-connected subgraph, and @xmath a @xmath -dipole
line. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

We have immediately @xmath and @xmath . As for the rank of the incidence
matrix, it was already pointed out that: @xmath . Therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

This property can be used to recursively reduce the analysis to that of
graphs with a few melonic lines. For such graphs, ( 6.8 ) is
constraining enough, and we can obtain the following classification.

###### Proposition 18.

Let @xmath be a face-connected subgraph.

-   If @xmath , then @xmath is a vacuum melopole.

-   If @xmath , then @xmath is either a non-vacuum melopole, or a
    submelonic vacuum graph (see Figure 6.2 ).

-   Otherwise, @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let us first assume that @xmath is a vacuum graph. We can perform a
maximal set of successive @xmath -dipole contractions, so as to obtain a
graph @xmath with @xmath and same power-counting as @xmath . If @xmath ,
then @xmath is the supermelon graph, which means that @xmath is a
melopole, and @xmath . On the other hand, when @xmath , equation ( 6.8 )
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we infer that @xmath unless perhaps when @xmath for any
@xmath . But it is easy to see that these conditions immediately imply
that @xmath has one of the structures shown in Figure 6.1 . A direct
calculation then confirms that @xmath for the left drawing, but @xmath
for the drawing on the right. This finally shows that @xmath graphs are
exactly the minimal graph on the left side of Figure 6.1 dressed with
additional melopoles, as shown in Figure 6.2 . We propose to call them
submelonic vacuum graphs .

Let us now consider the case of a non-vacuum graph @xmath . We can again
perform a maximal set of @xmath -dipole contractions and construct a new
graph @xmath verifying either: a) @xmath ; or b) @xmath . In situation
a), @xmath reduces to a single @xmath -dipole line, @xmath itself is a
melopole, and @xmath . In situation b), the bound on @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which shows that @xmath . We can finally prove a decay in terms of the
number of external lines. For instance, we remark that the connectedness
of @xmath implies that at least one face going through a given external
leg is of the type @xmath with @xmath . And because each of these faces
contains two external legs, we have @xmath . So we finally obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

All possible situations have been scanned, which ends the proof. ∎

This classification allows to identify melopoles as the only source of
divergences in the scale decomposition of non-vacuum (vertex-)connected
amplitudes. Any model with a finite set of @xmath -bubble interactions
comes with a finite number of melopoles, and is therefore expected to be
super-renormalizable. The purpose of the next sections is to prove that
this is indeed the case.

#### 6.1.3 Localization operators

Combinatorial contractions of graphs can be represented as localization
operators acting on the amplitudes. They are the technical tools
allowing to erase high energy information and reabsorb it into effective
local counter-terms. To define them, let us consider a graph @xmath ,
and a face-connected subgraph @xmath . We define an operator @xmath by
its action on the integrand of @xmath . The amplitude @xmath is of the
form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath only depends on @xmath variables appearing in the external
faces of @xmath . We then define @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is by moving all target variables of the external faces of @xmath
to the sources. This definition is motivated by the fact that when the
parallel transports inside @xmath are negligible, holonomies along
external faces can be well approximated by directly connecting the two
points at the boundary of @xmath .

###### Proposition 19.

Let @xmath be a face-connected subgraph. The action of @xmath on @xmath
factorizes as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a numerical coefficient depending on the cut-off @xmath
, and given by the following integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Applying @xmath in equation ( 6.1.3 ), one remarks that heat kernels
associated to external amplitudes can readily be integrated with respect
to the variables @xmath . These integrals give trivial contributions,
thanks to the normalization of the heat kernel. We are therefore left
with an integral over the internal faces of @xmath , giving @xmath ,
times an amplitude which is immediately identified to be that of the
contracted graph @xmath . ∎

Remark. One can also use the same kind of factorization for the action
of @xmath on @xmath , in which case we will use the notation @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

An illustration of the factorizability property is given in Figure 5.6 .
This definition of the localization operators will be sufficient for the
renormalization of logarithmic divergences, hence for all the cases we
will have to tackle in this chapter. As usual, the renormalization of
power-like divergences in more complicated models will require to push
to a higher order the Taylor expansion around localized terms. An
example will be provided by the model of Chapter 7 , where not only the
contraction operators will take higher order terms into account, but
also in a non-commutative context.

#### 6.1.4 Melordering

In the usual super-renormalizable @xmath field theory [ Simon ] , the
finite set of counter-terms that are needed to tame divergences is
simply provided by Wick ordering. It consists in a simple change of
basis of interaction invariants, the coupling constants in this new
basis being the renormalized ones. The net effect of Wick ordering at
the level of the Feynman expansion is to simply cancel the contributions
of graphs with tadpoles. This suggests a similar strategy to remove the
special kind of tadpoles that are responsible for the divergences of our
tensorial models, that is the melopoles. We will call this particular
version of Wick ordering the melordering .

Before going to the details of melordering, a few preliminary remarks
are in order, as we have to face a few subtleties introduced by the
refined notion of connectedness on which TGFT relies. In scalar
theories, tadpole lines are exactly local objects, in the sense that
their contributions can be factorized exactly. This is the reason why
Wick ordering can be defined as a choice of a family of orthogonal
polynomials with respect to the regularized covariance [ salmhofer ] .
When such invariants are used as a basis to express the interaction part
of the action, their expectation values in the vacuum is zero, and more
generally all tadpole contributions cancel out exactly. In tensorial
theories however, we have seen that tadpoles can only be approximately
local, at the condition of them being tracial (which melopoles are). We
therefore cannot hope to cancel them exactly, but only to eliminate
their local divergent part. An important consequence is for example that
melordered invariants will not necessarily have a zero expectation value
in the vacuum, but only a finite one (at the additional condition that
submelonic vacuum counter-terms are added when needed, see section 6.1.5
).

We now proceed with the definition of melordering. Let us call @xmath
the vector space of connected tensor invariants, generated by the @xmath
-bubbles. Associated to the regularized covariance @xmath , we want to
define a linear and bijective map @xmath that maps any @xmath -bubble to
a suitably weighted sum of lower order @xmath -bubbles. Getting
inspiration from the scalar case, one should define @xmath as a sum over
pairings of the external legs of @xmath . The relevant pairings will be
those resulting in melopoles. As we will see in an explicit example (see
section 6.3 ), a single connected invariant can give rise to several
face-disjoint melopoles. For this reason, and despite the
super-renormalizable nature of the model, the counter-terms have already
a rich structure, only captured by the full machinery of Zimmermann
forests. In such an approach, the renormalized amplitudes are given by
sums over inclusion forests of divergent subgraphs @xmath , of
contractions of the bare amplitudes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

In our case, the relevant structure is given by inclusion forests of
face-connected melopoles, which we call meloforests and define with
respect to both subgraphs and bubble invariants.

###### Definition 12.

1.  Let @xmath be a subgraph. A meloforest @xmath of @xmath is a set of
    non-empty and face-connected melopoles of @xmath , such that: for
    any @xmath , either @xmath and @xmath are line-disjoint and
    face-disjoint, or @xmath or @xmath . We note @xmath the set of
    meloforests of @xmath .

2.  Let @xmath be a @xmath -bubble. A meloforest @xmath of @xmath is a
    meloforest for a graph made of a single vertex @xmath . We call
    @xmath the observable associated to the smallest such graph, namely
    @xmath . We note @xmath the set of meloforests of @xmath .

Meloforests have a relatively simple structure, due to a uniqueness
property [ uncoloring , universality ] .

###### Lemma 13.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -bubble. There exists a unique graph @xmath such
that any meloforest of @xmath is a meloforest of @xmath .

###### Proof.

As remarked in [ uncoloring , universality ] , only melonic @xmath
-point subgraphs (in the sense of colored graphs) of @xmath can be
closed in face-connected melopoles, and there is a unique way of doing
so. Closing the maximal @xmath -point subgraphs of @xmath in such a way
results therefore in the unique graph @xmath . ∎

We can now proceed with the definition of the melordering map.

###### Definition 13.

For any @xmath -bubble @xmath , associated to the invariant @xmath , and
a cut-off @xmath , we define the melordered invariant @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

By convention, the sum over meloforests includes the empty one, so that
@xmath has same order as @xmath . Products of contraction operators are
commutative, the definition is therefore unambiguous. These
(non-trivial) products of contractions ensure that each term in the sum
is a weighted @xmath -bubble invariant, making @xmath a well-defined
linear map from @xmath to itself. An example is worked out explicitly in
section 6.3 .

Consider now the theory defined in terms of melordered interactions at
cut-off @xmath , with partition function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We shall then consider the perturbative expansion in the renormalized
couplings @xmath and prove that the corresponding Feynman amplitudes are
finite. Let us call @xmath the @xmath -point Schwinger function of the
melordered model. The next proposition shows that renormalized
amplitudes have the expected form.

###### Proposition 20.

The @xmath -point Schwinger function @xmath expands as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the renormalized amplitudes can be expressed in terms of the bare
ones as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

We first remark that the set @xmath of meloforests of @xmath can be
described according to meloforests of bubble vertices @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath as defined above can therefore be written

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.26)
              @xmath   @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Each element of the product over @xmath is a contraction operator taking
all melopoles associated to @xmath into account. Let us fix a graph
@xmath and a bubble @xmath . Among the set of Wick contractions
appearing in @xmath , the operator @xmath encodes all the terms due to
the interaction @xmath that are compatible with the combinatorics of the
external legs of @xmath in @xmath and the structure of the rest of the
graph. We therefore understand that @xmath as written above is a valid
repackaging of all the Wick contractions generated by the melordered
interaction. ∎

We will devote the whole section 6.2 to proving that the renormalized
amplitudes are indeed finite. Before that, we return to submelonic
vacuum divergences.

#### 6.1.5 Vacuum submelonic counter-terms

The melordering we just introduced is designed to remove melopole
divergences, including logarithmic divergences of non-vacuum graphs and
linear divergences resulting from vacuum melopoles. However, we have
seen that a third source of divergences is given by submelonic vacuum
graphs. They again concern tadpole graphs, so they can also be removed
by adding extra counter-terms to the melordering of some of the bubbles.
As long as we are concerned with computations of transition amplitudes,
they are irrelevant since they will only affect @xmath and none of the
connected Schwinger functions. But we include them here for
completeness.

We can define an extended melordering @xmath that coincides with @xmath
for bubbles which cannot be closed in a submelonic vacuum graph, and
adds additional counter-terms to those which can. We can call the latter
submelonic bubbles . They are exactly the bubbles that reduce to a
four-point graph as in Figure 6.3 once all the melonic parts have been
closed into melopoles and contracted. Such bubbles generate additional
divergent forests, which we can call submelonic forests :

###### Definition 14.

Let @xmath be a submelonic bubble. A submelonic forest of @xmath is a
forest @xmath , where @xmath is a meloforest and @xmath is a vacuum
graph with a single vertex @xmath . We call @xmath the amplitude
associated to the graph @xmath . We call @xmath the set of submelonic
forests of @xmath .

Remark. Given a submelonic bubble, there are exactly two possible
choices for @xmath , which correspond to the two possible ways of
closing the melopole-free graph of Figure 6.3 .

The extended melordering is finally defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath is submelonic. This implies similar formulas for
renormalized amplitudes in the extended melordered model, which in
particular do not affect the expression for melordered connected
Schwinger functions. The only difference will be that the partition
function of the extended melordered model will be well-defined as a
formal series, contrary to the simple melordering for which @xmath will
have some logarithmically divergent coefficients.

### 6.2 Finiteness of the renormalized series

In this section, we prove that melordered models with maximal
interaction order @xmath are perturbatively finite at any order. To
avoid dealing with submelonic vacuum graphs, we will only focus on the
connected Schwinger functions, which are the physically meaningful
quantities after all. They are well-defined formal series in the
renormalized couplings if all non-vacuum and connected renormalized
amplitudes @xmath are finite.

We will again rely on the multi-scale analysis, following the usual
procedure of [ vincent_book ] , which consists in two steps. We first
need to show that renormalized amplitudes associated to bare divergent
graphs verify multi-scale convergent bounds. This is most conveniently
done through a classification of divergent forests (in our case
meloforests), which for a given scale attribution @xmath , splits these
in two families: the dangerous ones, associated to high subgraphs, that
cancel genuine divergences; and on the other hand inoffensive divergent
forests that do not have any quasi-locality property, henceforth do not
serve any purpose. The inoffensive forests bring finite contributions
that do not ruin the power-counting, and can rather be interpreted as a
drawback of the renormalized series: they have no physically meaningful
consequence, and in addition (in just renormalizable models, but not for
super-renormalizable models like the ones treated here) results in
"renormalon effects" that typically prevents from constructing a
convergent series. In a second step, we will prove that the sum over
scale attributions can be performed, and the cut-off @xmath sent to
infinity while keeping the amplitudes finite.

#### 6.2.1 Classification of forests

We follow the general classification procedure of [ vincent_book ] ,
which at each scale attribution allows to factorize the contraction
operators defining the renormalized amplitude. Let @xmath be a
vertex-connected (non-vacuum) graph. We can decompose the renormalized
amplitude @xmath in terms of its scale attributions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The classification of forests is a reshuffling of the sum over
meloforests that allows to permute the two sums. We know that for a
given scale attribution @xmath , the forests that contribute to the
divergences are those containing high melopoles. We therefore need to
define the notion of high meloforest, and reorganize the sum in terms of
these quantities. We follow the standard procedure [ vincent_book ] ,
and start with the following set of definitions.

###### Definition 15.

Let @xmath be a vertex-connected graph, @xmath a scale attribution, and
@xmath a meloforest of @xmath .

1.  We say that a subgraph @xmath is compatible with a meloforest @xmath
    if @xmath is a forest.

2.  If @xmath is compatible with a meloforest @xmath , we note @xmath
    the ancestor of @xmath in @xmath , and we similarly call @xmath the
    descendants .

3.   Internal and external scales of a compatible graph @xmath in a
    meloforest @xmath are defined by:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.30)
      -- -------- -- --------

4.  The dangerous part of a meloforest @xmath with respect to @xmath is:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.31)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and the inoffensive part is the complement @xmath . Finally @xmath
    is the set of all inoffensive forests in @xmath .

Remarks. The notions of internal and external scales with respect to a
meloforest are consistent with the previous definitions, since @xmath
and @xmath . Moreover, (non-vacuum) melopoles have exactly two external
legs, which makes the situation relatively simple.

The following important lemma leads to the partition of forests.

###### Lemma 14.

Given a meloforest @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Similar to [ vincent_book ] , but simpler. ∎

This implies that the set of meloforests @xmath of a vertex-connected
graph @xmath can be partitioned, according to the inoffensive forests
associated to any scale attribution @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can finally characterize the equivalence class of a meloforest @xmath
by introducing its maximal forest @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can indeed show that:

###### Proposition 21.

For any @xmath , @xmath is a meloforest, and moreover:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Similar to [ vincent_book ] , but simpler. ∎

This finally allows to reorganize the operator defining the renormalized
amplitude as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which decomposes the product of contraction operators into inoffensive
parts and high parts. And since it holds for any @xmath , we can use
this formula to invert the two sums in ( 6.29 ) and obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The factorization ( 6.37 ) is key to the proof of finiteness. We shall
first show that, with respect to the bare theory, the power-counting of
@xmath for a given scale attribution is improved, and is always
convergent. We will then explain why the sum over scales is finite given
such convergent multiscale bounds. The final sum over meloforests will
not bring more divergences, since their cardinal is finite (and even
bounded by @xmath for some @xmath ).

#### 6.2.2 Power-counting of renormalized amplitudes

Let us fix a meloforest @xmath and a scale attribution @xmath such that
@xmath . The product of operators acting on @xmath in ( 6.37 ) can be
computed explicitly. We can for example first act with @xmath which
evaluates as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the graph obtained from @xmath once all the subgraphs of
@xmath have been contracted. This graph is nothing but @xmath . @xmath
is a generalized notion of amplitude associated to subgraphs @xmath ,
that just discards the contributions of external faces. In this sense,
it is analogue to an amputated amplitude in usual field theories. In
particular, we can assume that @xmath is an amputated amplitude and
write:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The power-counting, which only depends on internal faces, is unaffected
by the fact that we are working with such amputated amplitudes, and we
conclude that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a generalization of the power-counting ( 5.47 ), and reduces to
it when @xmath . This proves that the sum over inoffensive forests does
not improve nor worsen the power-counting, as was expected. Finiteness
is entirely implemented by the useful part of the contraction operators,
namely @xmath . To make this apparent, we first write it as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and act on ( 6.40 ) to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the effect of each @xmath is to interpolate one of the variables of
(at most two) external propagators in @xmath . For example, assuming the
fourth variable is concerned (that is @xmath is a melopole that has been
inserted on an colored line of color @xmath ), we have something of the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath is high in @xmath , @xmath is at
most of order @xmath . So using the bound ( 5.43 ) on derivatives of the
propagator, we conclude that @xmath improves the bare power-counting by
a factor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

This additional decay allows to prove the following proposition.

###### Proposition 22.

There exists a constant @xmath such that for any graph @xmath and
meloforest @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

except if @xmath and @xmath , in which case @xmath .

###### Proof.

From ( 6.43 ), and using the additional decays from operators @xmath ,
one improves the degree by a factor @xmath for most of the high
subgraphs. More precisely, this is possible for any high subgraph that
has external legs in a contraction @xmath , that is any high subgraph
@xmath different from a root @xmath . ∎

#### 6.2.3 Sum over scale attributions

Equipped with this improved power-counting, we can finally prove that
the renormalized amplitudes are finite. For clarity of the presentation,
let us first show it for a fully convergent graph @xmath , that is a
graph with no melopole. In this case, we know that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we need to extract enough decay in @xmath to sum over the
scale attributions. Let @xmath be the set of vertices (i.e. @xmath
-bubbles) of @xmath , and for @xmath let us call @xmath the set of lines
that are hooked to it. We can define notions of internal and external
scales associated to a bubble @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then remark that for any @xmath and @xmath , @xmath touches a high
subgraph @xmath if and only if @xmath . Moreover when it does, the
number of high subgraphs @xmath that touch @xmath is certainly bounded
by its number of external legs, and therefore by @xmath . Hence we can
assign a fraction @xmath of the decay of a bubble to every high subgraph
with respect to which it is external. This yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

by using the fact that @xmath is an external vertex of @xmath exactly
when @xmath . We can then invert the two products and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, since the number of pairs of legs hooked to a given vertex
@xmath is bounded by @xmath , we can finally conclude that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this decay at hand, the sum over scales can be performed by picking
a ’tree of scales’, very similarly to the choice of a tree adapted to
the GN tree that establishes the power-counting. We refer to [
vincent_book ] or to Section 7.3.3 for more details about this
procedure, and just state the resulting proposition.

###### Proposition 23.

There exists a constant @xmath such that the amplitude of any fully
convergent graph @xmath is absolutely convergent with respect to @xmath
, and moreover

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now explain why similarly, when @xmath contains melopoles, the sum
over @xmath in ( 6.37 ) can be performed without cut-off. From the
power-counting of Proposition 22 , and given that melopoles have at most
two external legs, one notices that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

So the decay that was proven for convergent graphs ( 18 ) generalizes to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The strategy used for proving convergence of fully convergent graphs is
therefore applicable. We conclude that @xmath is an absolutely
convergent series in @xmath , and even bounded by @xmath for some
constant @xmath . The final sum over meloforests is not problematic, as
the number of melopoles associated to a bubble @xmath is clearly bounded
by a constant (for example @xmath ). This means that the number of
meloforests associated to a vertex @xmath is also bounded by a constant
@xmath , and since meloforests of graphs are by definition unions of
meloforests associated to single vertices, the number of meloforests of
@xmath is itself bounded by @xmath . Overall, we conclude that:

###### Proposition 24.

There exists a constant @xmath , such that the renormalized amplitude of
any (non-vacuum) graph @xmath verifies:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

This not only proves renormalizability of the model, but also that there
is no renormalon effect. The latter is a specific feature of our
super-renormalizable model, that would not hold for more complicated
just-renormalizable models, as will be confirmed in the next chapter. In
such situations, it will be preferable to resort to the effective series
, because it is the unphysical sum over inoffensive forests
automatically generated in the renormalized series that is responsible
for this undesirable effect (see [ vincent_book ] ).

We finally state the main theorem of this chapter.

###### Theorem 1.

The melordered @xmath model in @xmath , with an arbitrary finite set of
@xmath -bubble interactions, is perturbatively finite at any order.

### 6.3 Example: Wick-ordering of a @xmath interaction

To illustrate the results of this chapter, we provide here some more
details about a particular simple model, with a single @xmath
interaction:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.58)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is an invariant, represented by the @xmath -colored graph of Figure
(a)a . It is moreover melonic, and its external legs can be paired so as
to form the vacuum melopole shown in Figure (b)b . This melopole
strictly contains four non-empty melopoles: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . On the other hand, @xmath and @xmath are not melopoles.

We can construct @xmath meloforests out of these melopoles. Half of
them, hence 8 do not contain the full graph @xmath . They are listed
below according to the number of subgraphs:

-   the empty forest @xmath ;

-   4 forests with @xmath subgraph: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ;

-   3 forests with @xmath subgraphs: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The other half is simply obtained by adding @xmath to all of these
forests.

The melordering generates three kinds of counter-terms: vacuum terms,
@xmath -point function terms, and two types of @xmath -point function
terms. We call @xmath the @xmath -point effective bubble, @xmath and
@xmath the two @xmath -point effective bubbles, as shown in Figure 6.5 .
The melordered interaction will take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are sums of products of coefficients @xmath . To determine
them, we need to analyze the contraction operators they correspond to.

The @xmath -point interaction terms are simple, since they are generated
by forests @xmath and @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are therefore both
given by the evaluation of @xmath on a single-line melopole (noted
@xmath )

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.60)
  -- -- -- --------

which is proportional to @xmath in the large @xmath limit. As expected,
these are log-divergent terms.

The @xmath -point interaction is generated by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . @xmath and @xmath contribute with a minus sign, and
with an absolute value given by the evaluation of a two-line melopole,
that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

each. The three other terms come with a plus sign, and factorize as the
square of a single line melopole. Therefore:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

All the other forests contribute to the vacuum counter-term. There are
eight of them. It is then easy to see that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are the logarithmically divergent previous integrals
and the @xmath are full vacuum melopoles amplitudes (with respectively 1
2 and 3 lines), each diverging linearly in @xmath . One can check that
the integral over the Gaussian measure of the full melordered
combination is then finite as all divergent contributions cancel out.

## Chapter 7 Just-renormalizable @xmath model in three dimensions

In this chapter, we focus on the @xmath rank- @xmath model based on the
group @xmath , of type A in Table 5.1 . A detailed proof of its
renormalizability, based on [ su2 ] , is provided. We then present
preliminary calculations of the renormalization group flow [ beta_su2 ]
.

### 7.1 The model and its divergences

#### 7.1.1 Regularization and counter-terms

From now on, @xmath and @xmath is the corresponding heat kernel at time
@xmath , which we recall explicitly writes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of the characters @xmath . The cut-off covariance is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

defined for any @xmath . This allows to define a UV regularized theory,
with partition function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

According to our analysis of the Abelian divergence degree, @xmath can
contain only up to @xmath @xmath -bubbles. This gives exactly @xmath
possible patterns of contractions (up to color permutations): one @xmath
interaction, one @xmath interaction, and three @xmath interactions. They
are represented in Figure 7.1 .

Among the three types of interactions of order @xmath , only the first
two can constitute melonic subgraphs. Indeed, an interaction of the type
@xmath cannot be part of a melonic subgraph, therefore cannot give any
contribution to the renormalization of coupling constants. Reciprocally,
the contraction of a melonic subgraph in a graph built from vertices of
the type @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath cannot create an effective
@xmath -vertex. This is due to the fact that a @xmath -bubble is dual to
the triangulation of a torus, while the other four interactions
represent spheres, and the topology of @xmath -bubbles is conserved
under contraction of melonic subgraphs [ FerriGagliardi , Vince_gene ] .

Therefore, we can and we shall exclude interactions of the type @xmath
from @xmath from now on. This is a very nice feature of the model, for
essentially two reasons. First, from a discrete geometric perspective,
@xmath interactions would introduce topological singularities that would
be difficult to interpret in a quantum gravity context, so it is good
that they are not needed for renormalization. Second, contrary to the
other interactions, they are not positive and could therefore induce
non-perturbative quantum instabilities.

The @xmath -point interaction is identical to a mass term, and will
therefore be used to implement the mass renormalization counter-terms.
Since the model will also generate quadratically divergent @xmath -point
functions, we also need to include wave function counter-terms in @xmath
. Finally, we require color permutation invariance of the @xmath - and
@xmath -point interactions. All in all, this gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.5)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.6)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.7)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Two types of symmetries have to be kept in mind. In equations ( 7.5 -
7.9 ), we just averaged over color permutations. This gives a priori
@xmath terms for each bubble type, but some of them are identical. It
turns out that for each type of interaction, we have exactly @xmath
distinct bubbles. Similarly, @xmath is a sum of three term, which we can
consider as new bubbles. With the mass term, we therefore have a total
number of @xmath different bubbles in the theory. From now on, @xmath
has to be understood in this extended sense. We could as well work with
independent couplings for each bubble @xmath , but we decide to consider
the symmetric model only, which seems to us the most relevant situation.
However, it is convenient to work with notations adapted to the more
general situations, because this allows to write most of the equations
in a more condensed fashion. In the following, we will work with
coupling constants @xmath for any @xmath , which has to be understood as
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath depending on the nature of
@xmath .

In ( 7.4 ), we divided each coupling constant by a certain number of
permutations of labels on the external legs of a bubble associated to
this coupling. More precisely, it is the order of the subgroup of the
permutations of these labels leaving the labeled colored graph
invariant. Note that a first look at @xmath interactions suggests an
order @xmath symmetry, but it is incompatible with any coloring. The
role of such rescalings of the coupling constants is, as usual, to make
the symmetry factors appearing in the perturbative expansions more
transparent. The symmetry factor @xmath associated to a Feynman graph
@xmath becomes the number of its automorphisms. All these conventions
will be useful when discussing in details how divergences can be
absorbed into new effective coupling constants.

Finally, the reader might wonder whether it is appropriate to include
the @xmath -point function counter-terms in the interaction part of the
action, rather than associating flowing parameters to the covariance
itself. This question is particularly pressing for wave-function
counter-terms, since they break the tensorial invariance of the
interaction action. One might worry that the degenerate nature of the
covariance could prevent a Laplacian interaction with no projector from
being reabsorbed in a modification of the wave-function parameter of the
covariance. However, it is not difficult to understand that the
situation is identical to that of a non-degenerate covariance. At fixed
cut-off, modifying the covariance is not exactly the same as adding
@xmath -point function counter-terms in the action, but the two
prescriptions coincide in the @xmath limit, as will be commented on in
Section 7.4 . Thus, it is perfectly safe to work in the second setting.
Moreover, this has the main advantage of being compatible with a fixed
slicing of the covariance according to scales, which is the central
technical tool of the work presented in this thesis.

#### 7.1.2 List of divergent subgraphs

From the previous sections, and as we will confirm later on, the Abelian
divergence degree of a subgraph @xmath will allow to classify the
divergences. When @xmath does not contain any wave-function
counter-terms, one has ¹ ¹ 1 One also assumes @xmath , as in 5.5.1 . :

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.10)
  -- -- -- --------

We will moreover see in the next section that wave-function
counter-terms are neutral with respect to power-counting arguments. We
can therefore extend the definition ( 7.10 ) of @xmath to arbitrary
subgraphs if @xmath is understood as the number of @xmath -valent
bubbles which are not of the wave-function counter-term type , and the
contraction of a tree is also understood in a general sense: @xmath is
the subgraph obtained by first collapsing all chains of wave-function
counter-terms , and then contracting a tree @xmath in the collapsed
graph. Alternatively, @xmath takes the generalized form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of wave-function counter-terms in @xmath .
This formula holds also when @xmath .

Let us focus on non-vacuum connected subgraphs with @xmath , which are
the physically relevant ones. In this case @xmath for melonic subgraphs
and @xmath otherwise. Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath is not melonic. As a result, divergences are entirely due to
melonic subgraphs. They are in particular tracial, which means their
Abelian power-counting is optimal. We therefore obtain an exact
classification of divergent subgraphs, provided in table 7.1 . It tells
us that @xmath -point functions have logarithmic divergences, @xmath
-point functions linear divergences as well as possible logarithmic
ones, that will have to be absorbed in the constants @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . The full @xmath -point function will be quadratically
divergent, generating the constants @xmath and @xmath .

Remark. There are a lot more cases to consider for vacuum divergences,
including non-melonic contributions. However, they are irrelevant to
perturbative renormalization, and since the previous chapter provides an
example of how these can be analyzed, we discard them here.

In light of Corollary 7 , we also notice that @xmath -point divergent
subgraphs, hence all degree @xmath subgraphs, have a single external
face. This is a useful point to keep in mind as far as wave-function
renormalization is concerned. As for @xmath - and @xmath -point
divergent subgraphs, they have at most @xmath and @xmath external faces
respectively. It is also not difficult to find examples saturating these
two bounds, as shown in Figures (a)a and (b)b .

### 7.2 Non-Abelian multiscale expansion

In this section, we extend the multiscale tools already encountered to
the present non-commutative and just-renormalizable model. This includes
a proof of the Abelian bound ( 5.47 ), and a definition of suitable
localization operators. We again set the cut-off to @xmath and slice the
propagators in such a way as to express the amplitudes as in equation (
5.36 ).

#### 7.2.1 Power-counting theorem

The results we need to extend to our @xmath context are the propagator
bounds, which themselves rely on peakedness properties of the heat
kernel. Let us denote @xmath the norm of a Lie algebra element @xmath ,
and @xmath the geodesic distance between a Lie group element @xmath and
the identity . We can prove the following bounds on @xmath and its Lie
derivatives ² ² 2 We define the Lie derivative of a function @xmath as:

@xmath (7.12)

.

###### Lemma 15.

There exists a set of constants @xmath and @xmath , such that for any
@xmath the following holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

See the Appendix. ∎

As a consequence, the divergences associated to the propagators and
their derivatives can be captured in the following bounds.

###### Proposition 25.

There exist constants @xmath and @xmath , such that for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, for any integer @xmath , there exists a constant @xmath , such
that for any @xmath , any choices of colors @xmath and Lie algebra
elements @xmath of unit norms ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Lie derivative with respect to the variable @xmath
in direction @xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath , the previous lemma immediately shows that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.16)
              @xmath   @xmath      (7.17)
              @xmath   @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for some strictly positive constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. And similarly for Lie derivatives of @xmath .

When @xmath , equations ( A.10 ), ( A.25 ) and ( A.31 ), together with
the fact that @xmath allow to bound the integrand of @xmath by an
integrable function of @xmath . @xmath is therefore bounded from above
by a constant, and due to the compact nature of @xmath we can
immediately deduce a bound of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, the same idea applies to the bound on the Lie derivatives of
@xmath , which concludes the proof. ∎

We can now extend the multiscale power-counting of Proposition 12 to our
non-Abelian model.

###### Proposition 26.

There exists a constant @xmath , such that for any connected graph
@xmath with scale attribution @xmath , the following bound holds:

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.20)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the Abelian degree of divergence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Let us first assume @xmath . In this case, we follow and adapt the proof
of Abelian power-counting of Proposition 12 . We first integrate the
@xmath variables in an optimal way, as was done with the @xmath
variables for Abelian models. In each face @xmath , a maximal tree of
lines @xmath is chosen to perform the @xmath integrations. Optimality is
ensured by requiring the trees @xmath to be compatible with the abstract
GN tree. This yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath .

The main difference with Proposition 12 is that now the holonomy
variables are non-commuting, which prevents us from easily integrating
them out. We can however rely on the methods developed in [ vm1 , vm2 ,
vm3 ] , which provide an exact power-counting theorem for @xmath spin
foam models. In particular, one can show that for any @xmath -complex
with @xmath edges and @xmath faces, the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

scales as @xmath when @xmath . @xmath is the twisted boundary map
associated to a (non-singular) flat connection @xmath ³ ³ 3 The explicit
construction of this map can be found in [ vm3 ] . With the notations of
the present thesis, it is defined as

@xmath @xmath @xmath (7.25) @xmath @xmath @xmath (7.26)

where @xmath is a path from a reference vertex @xmath in the edge @xmath
to a reference vertex @xmath in the face @xmath . The adjoint action
encodes parallel transport with respect to @xmath , and is full rank. ,
which takes the non-commutativity of the group into account. Remarkably,
this boundary map verifies:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a result, the contribution of the closed faces of a @xmath can be
bounded by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The power-counting ( 7.20 ) is recovered by recursively applying this
bound, from the leaves to the root of the GN tree.

The @xmath case is an immediate consequence of the @xmath one. Indeed,
one just needs to understand how the insertion of a wave-function
counter-term in a graph @xmath affects its amplitude @xmath . While it
adds one line to @xmath , it does not change its number of faces, nor
their connectivity structure, hence the rank @xmath is not modified
either. The line being created is responsible for an additional @xmath
factor in the power-counting, with @xmath its scale. On the other hand,
it is acted upon by a Laplace operator, that is two derivatives, which
according to ( 7.15 ) generate an extra @xmath . The two contributions
cancel out, which shows that wave-function counter-terms are neutral to
power-counting. The @xmath contribution to @xmath has therefore to be
compensated by a @xmath term with the opposite sign. ∎

Notice that all the steps in the derivation of the bound are optimal,
except for the last integrations of face contributions. In this last
step we discarded the fine effects of the non-commutative nature of
@xmath , encoded in the rank of @xmath . Remark however that no such
effect is present for a contractible @xmath , since the @xmath -complex
formed by its internal faces is simply connected [ vm3 ] . Indeed, such
a subgraph supports a unique flat connection (the trivial one), which
means that the integrand in equation ( 7.23 ) can be linearized around
@xmath , showing the equivalence between Abelian and non-Abelian
power-countings in this case. Since melonic subgraphs are contractible,
this confirms our previous claim: the Abelian power-counting exactly
captures the divergences of the model presented in this chapter.

#### 7.2.2 Contraction of high melonic subgraphs

We close this section with a discussion of the key ingredients entering
the renormalization of this model, by explaining how local
approximations to high melonic subgraphs are extracted from high slices
to lower slices of the amplitudes. A full account of the renormalization
procedure, including rigorous finiteness results, will be detailed in
the next and final section.

Let us consider a non-vacuum graph with scale attribution @xmath ,
containing a melonic high subgraph @xmath at scale @xmath . For the
convenience of the reader, we first focus on the case @xmath , which
encompasses all the @xmath -point divergent subgraphs, therefore all the
degree @xmath subgraphs. We also first assume that no wave-function
counter-term is present in @xmath .

##### Divergent subgraphs with a single external face, and no
wave-function counter-terms

Since @xmath , @xmath contains two external propagators, labeled by
external variables @xmath and @xmath , and scales @xmath and @xmath
respectively. We can assume (without loss of generality) that the
melonic subgraph @xmath is inserted on a color line of color @xmath .
The amplitude of @xmath , pictured in Figure 7.3 , takes the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The idea is then to approximate the value of @xmath by an amplitude
associated to the contracted graph @xmath . This can be realized by
"moving" one of the two external propagators towards the other. In
practice, we can use the interpolation ⁴ ⁴ 4 @xmath denotes the Lie
algebra element with the smallest norm such that @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and define:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This formula together with a Taylor expansion allows to approximate
@xmath by @xmath and its derivatives. The order at which the
approximation should be pushed is determined by the degree of divergence
@xmath of @xmath and the power-counting theorem: we should use the
lowest order ensuring that the remainder in the Taylor expansion has a
convergent power-counting. Roughly speaking each derivative in @xmath
decreases the degree of divergence by @xmath , therefore the Taylor
expansion needs to be performed up to order @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before analyzing further the form of each of these terms, we point out a
few interesting properties verified by the function @xmath . First,
since by definition the variables @xmath and @xmath are boundary
variables for a same face (and because the heat kernel is a central
function), @xmath can only depend on @xmath . From now on, we therefore
use the notation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then prove the following lemma.

###### Lemma 16.

1.  @xmath is invariant under inversion:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.34)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.  @xmath is central:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

We can proceed by induction on the number of lines @xmath of a rosette
of @xmath .

When @xmath , @xmath can be cast as an integral over a single Schwinger
parameter @xmath of an integrand of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

By invariance of the heat kernels and the Haar measure under inversion
and conjugation, the invariance of @xmath immediately follows.

Suppose now that @xmath . A rosette of @xmath can be thought of as an
elementary melon decorated with two melonic insertions of size strictly
smaller than @xmath (at least one of them being non-empty). We therefore
have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

in which we did not specify the integration domain of @xmath , since it
does not play any role here. @xmath and @xmath are associated to melonic
subgraphs of size strictly smaller than @xmath , we can therefore assume
that they are invariant under conjugation and inversion ⁵ ⁵ 5 If one
@xmath is an empty melon, then @xmath , and is trivially invariant. .
Using again the invariance of the heat kernels and the Haar measure, we
immediately conclude that @xmath itself is invariant.

∎

We now come back to ( 7.32 ). The degree of divergence being bounded by
@xmath , it contains terms @xmath with @xmath . We now show that @xmath
gives mass counter-terms, @xmath is identically zero, and @xmath implies
wave-function counter-terms. This is stated in the following
proposition.

###### Proposition 27.

1.  @xmath is proportional to the amplitude of the contracted graph
    @xmath , with the same scale attribution:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.  Due to the symmetries of @xmath , @xmath vanishes:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

3.  @xmath is proportional to an amplitude in which a Laplace operator
    has been inserted in place of @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                           @xmath   
                           @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

1.  One immediately has:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.41)
                                    @xmath   
                           @xmath   @xmath   
                                    @xmath   
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

    where from the first to the second line we made the change of
    variable @xmath .

2.  For @xmath , a similar change of variables yields:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.42)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

    But by invariance of @xmath under inversion, one also has

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.43)
      -- -------- -- --------

    hence @xmath .

3.  Finally, @xmath can be expressed as:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.44)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

    We can decompose the operator @xmath into its diagonal and
    off-diagonal parts with respect to an orthonormal basis @xmath in
    @xmath . The off-diagonal part writes

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.45)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and can be shown to vanish. Indeed, let us fix @xmath , and @xmath
    such that:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.46)
      -- -------- -- --------

    It follows from the invariance of @xmath under conjugation that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.47)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Hence all off-diagonal terms vanish. One is therefore left with the
    diagonal ones, which contribute in the following way:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.48)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Again, by invariance under conjugation, @xmath does not depend on
    @xmath . This implies:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.49)
                  @xmath   @xmath      (7.50)
                  @xmath   @xmath      (7.51)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

∎

##### Additional external faces and wave-function counter-terms

Let us first say a word about how the previous results generalize to
more external faces, still assuming the absence of wave-function
counter-terms. According to Corollary 7 , the only two possibilities are
@xmath or @xmath , and in both cases @xmath . Incidentally, @xmath or
@xmath . Moreover, since all the faces have the same color, we always
have @xmath . One defines @xmath by interpolating between the end
variables of the external faces, which consist of @xmath pairs of
variables, with one variable per propagator in @xmath . Assuming their
color to be @xmath , for instance, the amplitude @xmath can be written
as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, we know that under a spanning tree contraction, the external
faces of @xmath get disconnected. This means that the function @xmath
can be factorized as a product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that each @xmath verifies all the invariances discussed in the
previous paragraph. Thus, the part of the integrand of @xmath relevant
to @xmath is factorized into @xmath terms similar to the integrand
appearing in the @xmath case. It is then immediate to conclude that all
the properties which were proven in the previous paragraph hold in
general. Indeed, the Taylor expansions to check are up to order @xmath
or @xmath at most. The zeroth order of a product is trivially the
product of the zeroth orders. As for the first order, it cancels out
since the derivative of each one of the @xmath terms is @xmath at @xmath
.

The effect of wave-function counter-terms is even easier to understand.
Indeed, they essentially amount to insertions of Laplace operators. But
the heat kernel at time @xmath verifies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

therefore all the invariances of @xmath on which the previous
demonstrations rely also apply to @xmath .

All in all, the conclusions drawn in the previous paragraph hold for all
non-vacuum high divergent subgraphs @xmath .

##### Notations and finiteness of the remainders

In the remainder of this chapter, it will be convenient to use the
following notations for the local part of the Taylor expansions above:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath projects the full amplitude @xmath onto effectively local
contributions which take into account the relevant contributions of the
subgraph @xmath . To confirm that this is indeed the case, one needs to
prove that in the remainder

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

the (non-local) part associated to @xmath is power-counting convergent.
According to ( 7.2.2 ), we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.58)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and therefore:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.59)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the unit vector of direction @xmath . We can now analyze
how the power-counting of expression ( 7.59 ) differs from that of the
amplitude @xmath . There are two competing effects. The first is a loss
of convergence due to the @xmath derivatives acting on @xmath .
According to ( 7.15 ), these contributions can be bounded by an
additional @xmath term. This competes with the second effect, according
to which the non-zero contributions of the integrand are concentrated in
the region in which @xmath is close to the identity. More precisely, the
fact that @xmath contains only scales higher than @xmath imposes that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integrand is relevant. The first line of ( 7.59 ) therefore
contributes to the power-counting with a term bounded by @xmath . And
since by definition @xmath , one concludes that the degree of divergence
of the remainder is bounded by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 7.3 Perturbative renormalizability

We now establish a BPHZ theorem for the renormalized series. As in other
kinds of field theories, this proof relies on forest formulas, and a
careful separation between its high, divergent, and quasi-local parts
from additional useless finite contributions.

We begin with a (standard) discussion about the compared merits of the
renormalized expansion on the one hand, and the effective expansion on
the other hand.

So far we have discussed the renormalization of our model in the spirit
of the latter, where each renormalization step (one for each slice)
generates effective local couplings at lower scales. It perfectly fits
Wilson’s conception of renormalization: in this setting, one starts with
a theory with UV cut-off @xmath , and tries to understand the physics in
the IR, whose independence from UV physics is ensured by the separation
of scales with respect to the cut-off. In order to compute physical
processes involving external scales @xmath , one can integrate out all
the fluctuations in the shell @xmath , resulting in an effective theory
at scale @xmath .

Because our model is renormalizable, we know that the main contributions
in this integration are associated to quasi-local divergent subgraphs,
therefore the effective theory can be approximated by a local theory of
the same form as the bare one. According to Wilson’s renormalization
group treatment, in order to better handle the fact that only the high
parts of divergent subgraphs contribute to this approximation, one
should proceed in individual and iterated steps @xmath instead of
integrating out the whole shell @xmath at once. At each step one can
absorb the ultimately divergent contributions (when the cut-off will be
subsequently removed) into new effective coupling constants. This
procedure, then, naturally generates one effective coupling constant per
renormalizable interaction and per scale, as opposed to a single
renormalized coupling per interaction in the renormalized expansion.
This might look like a severe drawback, but on the other hand a main
advantage is that the finiteness of the effective amplitudes becomes
clear: the Taylor expansions of the previous section together with the
finiteness of the remainders guarantee that all divergences are tamed.
In particular, there is no problem of overlapping divergences since high
subgraphs at a given scale cannot overlap.

If one wants to be able to work with single renormalized couplings in
the Lagrangian, one has to resort to a cruder picture in which the whole
renormalization trajectory is approximated by a unique integration step
from @xmath to @xmath . The price to pay is that one has no way anymore
to isolate the high (truly divergent) contributions of divergent
subgraphs, which will result in additional finite contributions to the
renormalized amplitudes. These contributions can build up over scales,
explaining the appearance of renormalons, i.e. amplitudes which grow
super exponentially, that is to say as a factorial of the number of
vertices. This should be contrasted with the effective approach, in
which amplitudes grow at most exponentially in the number of vertices.

While they are not a big issue in perturbative expansions at low orders,
renormalons are very problematic in non-perturbative approaches to
quantum field theory such as the constructive program [ vincent_book ] .
They may be all the more problematic in TGFTs, if one expects continuum
space-time physics to show up in a regime dominated by large graphs, and
thus to depend on non-perturbative effects ⁶ ⁶ 6 Here, we only mean
non-perturbative in the sense of the perturbative expansion for small
coupling constants that we considered in this thesis. . And this seems
in turn unavoidable if one interprets the perturbative expansion we deal
with here as an expansion around the ’no space-time’ vacuum.

A second related drawback of the renormalized expansion is the problem
of overlapping divergences. Here again, the effective expansion appears
to be very helpful. Not only overlapping divergences do not show up in
this framework, but this also elucidates their treatment in the
renormalized expansion. Indeed, at each step in the trajectory of the
renormalization group, divergences are indexed by disconnected
subgraphs. When one iterates the process, from high to lower scales, one
finds that the divergent subgraphs of a given amplitude @xmath which
contribute organize themselves into a forest. This is obvious once we
understood that these graphs are high, and therefore correspond to nodes
of the Gallavotti-Nicolò tree of @xmath . In order to pack all these
contributions into renormalized couplings for the whole trajectory of
the renormalized group, it is therefore necessary to index the
counter-terms by all the possible forests of divergent subgraphs
(irrespectively of them being high or not), called Zimmermann’s forests.
Seen from this perspective, it is only when unpacking the renormalized
amplitudes by appropriately decomposing them over scale attributions
that one makes transparent why and how the Zimmermann’s forest formula
cures all divergences. Here again, the situation in TGFTs with respect
to usual QFTs would suggest to resort to the effective expansion: due to
the finer notion of connectedness which indexes the divergent subgraphs
(face-connectedness), overlapping divergences are enhanced, the internal
structure of the vertices being an additional source of difficulties.
This is for instance manifest in super-renormalizable examples of the
type studied in the previous chapter, in which overlapping contributions
already enter the renormalization of tadpoles.

Despite the two generic drawbacks of the renormalized series, we choose
a conservative approach in the following, and decide to outline in some
details the proof of finiteness of the usual renormalized amplitudes. We
will however start with a sketch of the recursive definition of the
effective coupling constants. Since vertex-connectedness lies at the
core of the Wilsonian effective expansion, we cannot take full advantage
of face-connectedness in this context. This is similar to ordinary
quantum field theories, where @xmath -particle reducible graphs need to
be taken into account in the effective expansion but can be dispensed
with in the renormalized expansion. This is the main motivation for
resorting to the renormalized expansion, where counter-terms are indexed
by forests of divergent subgraphs. We will then decompose the amplitudes
over scales and check that all contributions from high divergent
subgraphs are correctly cured by the appropriate counter-terms. We will
finally perform the sum over scale attributions, showing why the result
is finite, and how useless counter-terms can build up to form
renormalons.

#### 7.3.1 Effective and renormalized expansions

As briefly explained before, the effective expansion is a reshuffling of
the bare theory (with cut-off @xmath ), in terms of recursively defined
effective coupling constants. We therefore start from the connected
Schwinger functions decomposed over scale attributions compatible with
the cut-off:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this formula, the sum runs over connected graphs, and @xmath spans
all possible interactions, including mass and wave-function
counter-terms. Starting from the highest scale @xmath , we want to
construct a set of @xmath effective coupling constants per interaction
@xmath , called @xmath with @xmath . They will be formal power series in
the bare coupling constants @xmath , such that @xmath is obtained from
@xmath by adding to it all the counter-terms associated to high
subgraphs at scale @xmath . In order to make this statement more
precise, it is useful to define @xmath as the scale of a vertex @xmath
in a graph @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the set of lines of @xmath which are hooked to @xmath .
We aim at a re-writing of ( 7.62 ) of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which the bare coupling constants have been substituted by effective
ones at the scale of the bubbles making a graph @xmath , and the new
effective amplitudes are free of divergences. Thanks to the multiscale
analysis, we know exactly which face-connected subgraphs are responsible
for the divergences of a bare amplitude @xmath : they are the high
divergent subgraphs, which is a subset of all the quasi-local subgraphs.
Unfortunately, they cannot play the leading role in the effective
expansion: the divergences in a slice @xmath must be packaged into
vertex-connected components, and reabsorbed in effective vertices with
external propagators at scales lower or equal to @xmath . This condition
on the external scales makes it impossible to act on a face-connected
divergent subgraph independently of what it is vertex-connected to. Our
language is therefore not adapted to the effective expansion. In order
to make this point clearer, let us assume for the moment that the
divergent subgraphs, the GN tree and the @xmath contraction operators
are defined on the basis of vertex-connectedness . In this provisional
acceptation of the terms, let us moreover call @xmath , the forest of
high divergent subgraphs of @xmath . The effective amplitudes are then
deduced from the bare ones by subtracting the local part of each high
divergent subgraph [ vincent_book ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finiteness of @xmath in the limit of infinite cut-off is then
guaranteed. In order to make this prescription consistent, we need to
reabsorb contributions of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

into the effective coupling constants. This can be made more precise by
defining an inductive version of ( 7.64 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now proceed to prove ( 7.67 ), by induction on @xmath , which at the
same time will provide the recursive relation for the effective coupling
constants. For @xmath , ( 7.67 ) coincides with the bare expansion (
7.62 ), and therefore holds true. Assuming that it holds at rank @xmath
, let us then see how to prove it at rank @xmath . The difference
between @xmath and @xmath amounts to counter-terms in @xmath , hence:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Adding and subtracting this quantity to @xmath in the equation ( 7.67 )
at rank @xmath , one obtains a new equation which now involves @xmath
(thanks to the term added), together with a sum over subsets @xmath (due
to the term subtracted). In condensed notations, this can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath and @xmath . The elements in a set @xmath being
vertex-disjoint, we can contract them independently, and absorb the
terms associated to @xmath into effective coupling constants at scale
@xmath .

However, in order to correctly take wave function counter-terms into
account, one needs to slightly generalize the notion of contraction
previously defined for strictly tensorial interactions. While @xmath
extracts amplitudes of contracted graphs times a pre-factor when @xmath
or @xmath , it is rather a sum of two terms when @xmath : a zeroth order
term proportional to a contracted amplitude, and a second order term
proportional to a contracted amplitude supplemented with a Laplacian
insertion as in ( iii ). In the latter case, one shall therefore
decompose the operators as sums of two operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to the two types of counter-terms ⁷ ⁷ 7 Similarly, one
defines @xmath if @xmath or @xmath . . Developing these products, one
ends up with a formula akin to ( 7.71 ), provided that sets @xmath are
generalized to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and that @xmath operators are replaced by @xmath for @xmath . Taking the
scale attributions into account, we are lead to define the collapse
@xmath , which sends triplets @xmath with @xmath to its contracted
version @xmath . @xmath is the graph obtained after the elements of
@xmath have been contracted, understood in a generalized sense: @xmath
is equivalent to @xmath when @xmath or @xmath , and is a graph in which
the @xmath -point divergent subgraph @xmath has been replace by a
Laplace operator if @xmath . As for @xmath , it is simply the
restriction of @xmath to lines of @xmath . The bubbles of @xmath are
thought of as new effective interactions, obtained from contractions of
vertex-connected graphs . We can therefore factorize the sum in ( 7.71 )
as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath . In this last equation, one can act first with @xmath on
@xmath . After reorganizing all the terms in ( 7.75 ), it is easy to
understand how the coupling constants at scale @xmath must be defined.
For instance, assuming that @xmath has no quadratic divergences to avoid
overloaded notations, one notices that ( 7.75 ) reduces to ( 7.67 )
provided that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.77)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thanks to usual properties of symmetry factors in quantum field theory,
which allow to factorize the symmetry factors of vertex-connected
subgraphs, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can therefore readily extract a solution for ( 7.77 ), in the form of
a definition of the effective coupling constants at rank @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.79)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This concludes the proof of the existence of the effective expansion
when vertex-connectedness is used to organize the counter-terms. Had we
relied on face-connectedness instead, equation ( 7.77 ) would have had
coupling constants at scale @xmath also on the left-hand side, which
would have made the whole scheme inconsistent with definition ( 7.63 ).

By construction, @xmath are interpreted as the bare coupling constants.
Accordingly, the renormalized constants are to be found at the other end
of the scale ladder, namely in the last infrared slice, which
corresponds to external legs. This is compatible with a renormalized
coupling being defined as the full amputated function corresponding to
the type of interaction considered. It can be checked that the latter
amounts to set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we could look for yet another reshuffling of the Schwinger
functions, this time as multi-series in @xmath .

However, we follow a different strategy for the renormalized expansion,
and close the vertex-connected parenthesis. Divergent graphs and
contraction operators are now again understood in the face-connected
sense we advocate in this thesis. The natural induction with respect to
scales ( 7.79 ) is not available anymore, but can be partially
encapsulated into the definition of counter-terms according to an
induction with respect to the number of vertices in a diagram. This is
nothing but the well-known Bogoliubov induction, which provides the
infinite set of counter-terms to be added to the bare Lagrangian. In our
case, the induction takes the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a vertex-connected graph with all its face-connected
components @xmath divergent, @xmath its associated counter-term, and
@xmath runs over all possible families of disjoint vertex-connected
divergent subgraphs of @xmath , for which counter-terms @xmath have been
defined at an earlier stage of the induction. Note also that @xmath is a
short-hand notation for the part of the amplitude associated to @xmath ,
once the @xmath ’s it contains have been contracted. Each of these
counter-terms will contribute to the renormalization of a coupling
constant (or several when quadratically divergent subgraphs are
present). A key point to notice is that, because our classification of
divergent subgraphs (Table 7.1 ) also applies to vertex-connected
components, we are ensured that any vertex-connected union of
face-connected divergent subgraphs will have the same boundary as one of
the bare interactions. More precisely, one has:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the sum of all the counter-terms @xmath at order @xmath
of the type @xmath ⁸ ⁸ 8 The same subtlety as in the previous discussion
occurs for quadratically divergent contributions: one has to split the
counter-terms @xmath into mass and wave-function contributions. We kept
this step implicit here in order to lighten the notations. .

It is then a well-known fact that a (formal) perturbative expansion in
these new variables generates renormalized amplitudes expressed by
Zimmermann’s forest formula. The forests appearing in this formula can
be called inclusion forests , since they are sets of subgraphs @xmath
with specific inclusion properties: for any @xmath , either @xmath and
@xmath are line-disjoint, or one is included into the other. In this
model, the relevant forests are inclusion forests of vertex-connected
subgraphs with all their face-connected components divergent. Since each
of the graphs in the forests is acted upon by a product of contraction
operators @xmath , one for each face-connected component, and since in
addition face-connectedness is a finer notion than vertex-connectedness,
one can actually work with inclusion forests of face-connected
subgraphs. Moreover, one needs to strengthen their definition by
emphasizing face-disjointness rather than line-disjointness. To avoid
any terminology confusion with the usual notion of inclusion forest, we
call this new type of forests strong inclusion forests .

###### Definition 16.

Let @xmath be a subgraph. A strong inclusion forest @xmath of @xmath is
a set of non-empty and face-connected subgraphs of @xmath , such that:

1.  for any @xmath , either @xmath and @xmath are line-disjoint, or one
    is included into the other;

2.  any line-disjoint @xmath are also face-disjoint.

A few remarks are in order. First, a strong inclusion forest @xmath is
always an inclusion forest (condition (i)), hence the nomenclature.
Second, it is important to understand that the Zimmermann forests
relevant to our model are strong inclusion forests. To this effect,
notice for instance that if @xmath appear in a same term of the
Bogoliubov recursion ( 7.81 ) for some intermediate subgraph @xmath ,
then they form @xmath distinct face-connected components in @xmath . The
existence of such a subgraph is equivalent to the face-disjointness of
@xmath . Third, we point out that the meloforests introduced before are
strong inclusion forests. In the wider context of the present chapter,
we modify slightly this terminology, and call meloforest any strong
inclusion forest of melonic subgraphs. Finally, we simply call divergent
forest a strong inclusion forest of divergent subgraphs, and note @xmath
the set of divergent forests of a graph @xmath (including the empty
forest). In the @xmath , @xmath model, divergent forests are also
meloforests, but the converse is not true.

In this language, the renormalized amplitudes are related to the bare
ones through:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to prove the finiteness of the renormalized amplitudes, one
should rely on the refined understanding of the divergences provided by
the multiscale expansion. To this effect, we will expand equation ( 7.83
) over scales. For fixed scale attribution, contraction operators acting
on high divergent subgraphs will provide a convergent power-counting.
The sum over scales will finally be achieved thanks to an adapted
classification of divergent forests, which is the purpose of the next
section.

#### 7.3.2 Classification of forests

Before discussing the classification in details, we point out an
intriguing property of this model. In light of Proposition 16 , we
notice that the melonic subgraphs of a given non-vacuum graph @xmath
organize themselves into an inclusion forest. It would be therefore
tempting to conjecture that they also form a strong inclusion forest
(i.e. a meloforest). However, we can actually find examples of
overlapping melonic subgraphs, showing that this is incorrect (see
Figure 7.4 ). Still, and again by Proposition 16 , we notice that the
union of two melonic subgraphs cannot be itself melonic, hence cannot be
divergent. Therefore, if we restrict our attention to divergent forests,
we can actually prove that the previous conjecture hold.

###### Proposition 28.

Let @xmath be a non-vacuum graph. The set of divergent subgraphs of
@xmath is a strong inclusion forest. We denote it @xmath .

###### Proof.

Thanks to proposition 16 , we already know that @xmath is an inclusion
forest. To conclude, we need to show that there exists no subset of
line-disjoint subgraphs in @xmath which are not also face-disjoint. If
this would not be the case, we could certainly find line-disjoint
subgraphs @xmath which are face-connected in their union. This
face-connectedness is necessarily ensured by external faces of the
@xmath which arrange together into internal faces of @xmath . Because
their intersection is empty, this can only be achieved if some vertices
of @xmath are shared by several subgraphs @xmath . Let us call @xmath (
@xmath , @xmath ) the number of vertices of valency @xmath which are
shared by exactly @xmath subgraphs @xmath . They can be related to the
valency of @xmath and @xmath by the formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

This just says that when summing all the individual valencies, one needs
to subtract all the contributions of external legs of the connecting
vertices, which have been over counted, in order to find the valency of
the full subgraph. If a connecting vertex @xmath is connected to exactly
@xmath subgraphs @xmath , its external legs have been counted exactly
@xmath too many times. Furthermore, the conditions @xmath can be summed
to yield ⁹ ⁹ 9 The @xmath contributions are all @xmath since @xmath are
non-vacuum and melonic :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Remarking that @xmath for all @xmath , we can finally deduce from the
two previous inequalities that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

We immediately notice that whenever

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is vacuum, which contradicts the hypothesis that @xmath is not.
If the previous inequality is not verified, one has instead

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to understand the meaning of this inequality, let us introduced
an abstract graph @xmath : its nodes are the subgraphs @xmath and all
the vertices shared by more than one subgraph; two nodes are linked by
one line in @xmath if and only if one of them is a subgraph, and the
other a vertex contained in this subgraph. In equation ( 7.88 ), on the
left-hand side one finds the number of links in @xmath , and on the
right side its number of nodes minus @xmath . Therefore, when the
inequality is saturated @xmath is a tree, and when the inequality is
strict it is not connected. The latter case is contradictory with our
hypotheses. As for when @xmath is a tree, one can find spanning trees
@xmath such that there union @xmath is a spanning tree of @xmath . But
in such a situation, @xmath would be a melopole, contradicting the fact
that @xmath cannot be melonic (see proposition 16 ). ∎

At this stage, we tend to see this result as a curiosity of the specific
model we are considering, and only a detailed study of other
just-renormalizable models of this type could determine whether it has a
wider validity. What is sure is that it is by no means essential to the
classification of forests. Still, it allows significant simplifications,
which we will take advantage of in the following, in the notations and
proofs, since the divergent forests of @xmath are exactly the subsets of
@xmath .

Recall that @xmath denotes the set of truly divergent subgraphs in
@xmath for the scale attribution @xmath . It is a divergent forest, as
we already knew from the fact that, modulo @xmath itself, it consists
exactly in the subgraphs appearing in the GN tree of @xmath .
Furthermore, we now know it to be a subforest of @xmath . We call its
complementary part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

the innofensive part of @xmath at scale @xmath , since it is the set of
divergent subgraphs of @xmath which do not appear in the GN tree of
@xmath , and therefore do not contribute to divergences at this scale.

In this model, where the disjoint decomposition @xmath involves three
sets which are themselves divergent forests, the classification of
forest is as trivial as saying that choosing a forest in @xmath amounts
to choosing a forest in @xmath and a forest in @xmath , namely:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can use this simple fact in the decomposition of equation ( 7.83 )
over scale attributions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.91)
              @xmath   @xmath      (7.92)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We then exchange the first two sums:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can finally reorganize the contraction operators associated to graphs
of @xmath to obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.94)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.95)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This way of splitting the contributions of the different forests
according to the scales is in phase with the multi-scale analysis. We
shall explain in the next two paragraphs why @xmath is convergent. To
this effect, we first use the contraction operators indexed by elements
of @xmath to show that the renormalized power-counting is improved with
respect to the bare one, in such a way that all divergent subgraphs
become power-counting convergent. In a second step, we will explain how
these decays can actually be used to perform the sum over scale
attributions.

#### 7.3.3 Convergent power-counting for renormalized amplitudes

We fix a divergent forest @xmath and a scale attribution @xmath such
that @xmath . We want to find a multi-scale power-counting bound for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since contraction operators commute, we are free to first act on @xmath
. In order to properly encode the two possible Taylor orders in @xmath
-point divergences, we should reintroduce the generalized notations
@xmath and @xmath , together with a generalized notion of divergent
forest @xmath . Since the argument we are about to make is insensitive
to such subtleties, and its clarity would be somewhat affected by the
heavy notations, we decide instead to assume that @xmath does not
contain any quadratically divergent subgraph. It is easily understood
that the action of the product of contraction operators disconnects
parts of the amplitudes, yielding a product of pieces of the integrand
integrated on their internal variables. The exact formula is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the set of descendants of @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath
is the amputated amplitude ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We mean by that that the
contributions of external faces are discarded. of @xmath contracted by
its descendants. The power-counting of each subgraph appearing on the
right-hand side of this formula is known, yielding:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

As expected, we see that the contraction operators associated to
inoffensive forests does not improve the power-counting, and are in a
sense useless.

On the other hand, we have also seen in section 7.2.2 , that @xmath
operators effectively render subgraphs @xmath power-counting convergent.
We can use this improved power-counting in each @xmath to prove the
following proposition:

###### Proposition 29.

There exists a constant @xmath , such that for any divergent forest
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

except when @xmath and @xmath , in which case @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath is compatible with @xmath (i.e. @xmath is also a strong
inclusion forest), we denote by @xmath the ancestor of @xmath in @xmath
. This notion allows to decompose the product of useful contraction
operators as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When multiplying this expression by @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We recognize in this formula all the useful contractions associated to
high divergent subgraphs in each @xmath , for which the new degree is at
most @xmath , except possibly for the roots @xmath ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 This root
can indeed itself be divergent. when @xmath . But because the
corresponding amplitudes are amputated, they contribute to the
power-counting with a degree @xmath . ∎

#### 7.3.4 Sum over scale attributions

The improved power-counting ( 7.99 ) allows to decompose renormalized
amplitudes into fully convergent ¹² ¹² 12 Recall that a fully convergent
graph is a graphs whose face-connected subgraphs all have convergent
power-counting. pieces associated to the contracted subgraphs @xmath .
We therefore decompose the task of summing over scale attributions into
two steps: as in the super-renormalizable example of the previous
chapter, we will first recall how this can be performed maintaining a
bound in @xmath for a fully convergent graph @xmath ; we will then
explain how this generalizes to arbitrary renormalized amplitudes, the
price to pay being possible factorial growths in @xmath due to
contraction operators associated to the inoffensive forests @xmath .

Let @xmath be a fully convergent, vertex-connected, and non-vacuum
graph. For any face-connected subgraph @xmath such that @xmath , we have
seen that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, @xmath and @xmath when @xmath , therefore one can use a slower
decay in @xmath and write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for any scale attribution @xmath . In order to extract a sufficient
decay in @xmath from ( 7.104 ), it is crucial to focus on the scales
associated to the vertices of @xmath . Let us therefore introduce @xmath
the set of external lines of a bubble @xmath , and define:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The main interest of these two scales lies in the two following facts:
a) @xmath touches a high subgraph @xmath if and only if @xmath ; b)
moreover, @xmath is an external vertex of @xmath if and only if @xmath .
Accordingly, and because @xmath touches at most @xmath high subgraphs,
one can distribute a fraction of the decay in the number of lines of
high subgraphs to the vertices of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Exchanging the two products yields the interesting bound:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (7.107)
  -- -- -- ---------

Finally, we can distribute the decays among all possible pairs of
external legs of each vertex. Since there are at most @xmath such pairs,
we get:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (7.108)
  -- -- -- ---------

This bound implies the finiteness of @xmath . To see this, we can choose
a total ordering of the lines @xmath such that @xmath is hooked to an
external vertex of @xmath , and @xmath is connected for any @xmath .
This allows to construct a map @xmath on the indices @xmath , such that
@xmath , and ¹³ ¹³ 13 By convention, one also defines @xmath . :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The sum over @xmath of such a product is uniformly bounded by a constant
to the power @xmath , which proves the following theorem:

###### Theorem 2.

There exists a constant @xmath such that, for any fully convergent,
vertex-connected, and non-vacuum graph @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can apply the same reasoning to the general power-counting ( 7.99 ).
Let us fix @xmath a divergent forest. The only difference is that graphs
@xmath do not have any decay associated to their external legs. One
therefore gets one additional scale index to sum over per element of
@xmath . But we can bound them by the maximal scale @xmath in @xmath and
write:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.111)
              @xmath   @xmath      (7.112)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are some constants, and @xmath is the cardinal
of @xmath . The last sum over @xmath can finally be bounded by @xmath
for some constant @xmath . The final sum on @xmath can be absorbed into
a redefinition of the constants, since the number of divergent forests
is simply bounded by @xmath . This concludes the proof of the BPHZ
theorem.

###### Theorem 3.

For any vertex-connected and non-vacuum graph @xmath , the renormalized
amplitude @xmath has a finite limit when the cut-off @xmath is sent to
@xmath . More precisely, there exists a constant @xmath such that the
following uniform bound holds:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

While this theorem proves the renormalizability of the model, it does
not preclude the existence of renormalons, since the uniform bound we
could find is only factorial. However, we notice that such an
unreasonable growth can only exist because of the contraction operators
associated to subforest of @xmath . On the contrary, if we were to focus
on the effective expansion, in which only counter-terms associated to
high graphs contribute, one would find instead a uniform bound like the
one for fully convergent graphs.

### 7.4 Renormalization group flow

We conclude this chapter with a preliminary analysis of the
renormalization group flow of this TGFT in the deep UV. When it comes to
concrete calculations, face-connectedness would bring important
practical simplifications. Quite a few graphs which need to be computed
in a renormalization scheme based on vertex-connectedness would be
absent, for only vertex-connected unions of face-connected divergent
graphs would contribute to the flow of the coupling constants in this
case. Having localization operators acting on face-connected components
would also be advantageous, because their combinatorics is relatively
simple.

However, the renormalization group flow relies primarily on
vertex-connectedness. In order to determine its properties, we therefore
need to compute counter-terms associated to vertex-connected divergent
graphs, which significantly complicates the task. On the other hand,
from the point of view of the renormalization scheme based on
face-connectedness developed in this thesis, we might expect the
vertex-connected unions of face-connected divergent graphs to generate
the most relevant contributions. We therefore outline the general
formalism, but only compute the terms associated to this subclass of
graphs. The full analysis is in progress

#### 7.4.1 Approximation scheme

Being irrelevant to the question of renormalizability, normalization
factors were discarded so far. On the contrary, they are of primary
importance in concrete computations of physical coupling constants,
where the wave-function renormalization needs to be taken into account.

In order to correctly incorporate these factors into our scheme, we come
back to the general Wilsonian perspective outlined in equation ( 5.16 ).
Let us call @xmath the effective action at scale @xmath , with coupling
constants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . No mass nor wave-function
counter-terms are incorporated in @xmath , i.e. @xmath . The covariance
at this scale is therefore parametrized by the physical mass @xmath ,
and we denote it @xmath . In order to determine the effective action at
scale @xmath , we proceed in two steps. We first define an auxiliary
effective action @xmath by integrating out the slice @xmath , with
respect to the measure of covariance @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Following the previous section, the auxiliary effective
action can be approximated by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be deduced from
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath thanks to an induction formula similar to (
7.79 ), only simpler. Indeed, since @xmath is the highest scale, there
is no effective coupling constant at higher scales to be taken into
account, and no nested contraction operators to be incorporated, which
yields:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (7.116)
  -- -- -- ---------

This is in a sense a Markovian truncation of the general equation ( 7.79
). @xmath contains the contributions of the vacuum divergent graphs,
which we did not analyze. But since it will only add a constant factor
@xmath in front of the effective partition function at scale @xmath , it
is irrelevant, and we set it to @xmath from now on.

We now turn to the second step of the procedure, which consists in
reabsorbing the @xmath -point counter-terms into the covariance. Let us
define the operator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

corresponding to the kernel of the @xmath -point function counter-terms
at scale @xmath . We also write the covariance at scale @xmath before
renormalization as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a covariance without integration on @xmath , and @xmath
is the group-averaging operator (restoring the integration on @xmath ).
Interestingly, one can prove that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, at scale @xmath the full effective covariance is that of the
measure:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us call @xmath this covariance. It can be computed by summing over
connected @xmath -point functions in the following way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.121)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

From the explicit expression of @xmath we can deduce the UV
approximation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.122)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

and hence:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.123)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.124)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.125)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

In order to determine the physical coupling constants, one normalizes
the wave-function parameter, thanks to the field redefinition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The powers of @xmath subsequently appearing in the interaction part of
the action must be reabsorbed into new physical coupling constants:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

They parametrize the effective action @xmath at scale @xmath , together
with @xmath , and the renormalized covariance is @xmath . This procedure
can be reiterated, hence defining flow equations for the physical
coupling constants and the mass.

#### 7.4.2 Truncated equations for the counter-terms

We first provide explicit equations for the auxiliary coupling constants
and counter-terms, truncated to their first non-vanishing corrections in
the physical parameters. We also restrict our attention to
vertex-connected unions of face-connected divergent subgraphs. We assume
that the flow equations can be given an analytic meaning when @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are small enough. We will use the generic notation
@xmath for neglected terms of order @xmath in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. Of primary importance as regards asymptotic freedom are the @xmath
-point coupling constants, and the wave-function counter-terms. Indeed,
according to Table 7.1 , the multi-series appearing in the equation for
@xmath ( 7.116 ) do not go beyond order @xmath in @xmath , which will
imply that the UV behavior of @xmath can be controlled by those of
@xmath .

Remark: In the following, we will compute the different combinatorial
factors by hand, that is by counting the number of graphs contributing
to a given term, together with the number of Wick contractions producing
each of them. It is also possible to use directly formula ( 7.116 ) ¹⁴
¹⁴ 14 Recall that @xmath can be explicitly computed: it is the number of
permutations of the external legs of the labeled graph @xmath leaving
its colored structure unchanged. . The latter can instead be used to
double-check our computations.

##### Mass counter-term

We first compute @xmath in terms of @xmath plus corrections at order one
in the small parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . There are four
types of graphs contributing at this order: one with a type @xmath
bubble, one with a @xmath bubble, and two with a @xmath bubble. They are
represented in Figure 7.5 .

Let us start with the graph @xmath . It has degree @xmath , and
therefore only its contraction at order @xmath in Taylor expansion
contributes. There are two ways of forming its unique line, yielding a
combinatorial weight of @xmath . @xmath is therefore responsible for a
linearly divergent correction:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.128)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath is the subgraph consisting in the unique line of @xmath .
Such a term arises three times, once for each @xmath .

The graph @xmath has two face-connected components, each with degree
@xmath . The combinatorial weight is @xmath , and the two face-connected
components must be contracted independently, yielding a quadratically
divergent correction:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again, this correction comes in three types, one per color.

The situation is very similar for the graph @xmath , which yields a
counter-term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

appearing three times.

Finally, we focus on @xmath . It is face-connected, has degree two, and
a weight @xmath . Let us call @xmath the Schwinger parameter associated
to the elementary melon of @xmath , and @xmath that of its second line.
The quadratically divergent counter-term associated to @xmath is then:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (7.131)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

This correction has to be counted @xmath times, once for each pair
@xmath .

All in all, we can write:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.133)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.134)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the dots indicate that we have not taken all the contributions into
account.

##### Wave-function counter-terms

At order @xmath , and given our truncation, the only type of graphs
contributing to the wave-function renormalization is @xmath . @xmath on
the other hand is to be left aside for now, since it is made of two
face-connected components, each of degree @xmath . More precisely, each
@xmath generates a term in @xmath , where @xmath . This induces a
contribution to @xmath of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the function @xmath is a kernel associated to the external leg of
color @xmath , and the minus sign comes from the fact that the operator
appearing in the action is @xmath . The kernel is moreover easily seen
to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.136)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Each counter-term @xmath will receive two such contributions,
corresponding to the two possible choices for @xmath , from which we
deduce that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.138)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

##### 6-point interactions

According to Table 7.1 , @xmath -point divergent subgraphs up to second
order in physical coupling constants necessarily consist of two @xmath
vertices. We can also understand that the vertex-connected unions of
face-connected divergent subgraphs actually need to be face-connected.
Indeed, if there were more than two face-connected components, at least
one would have more than eight external legs and would therefore be
convergent. More precisely, it turns out that there are only three
categories of graphs contributing in our truncation, as shown in Figure
7.6 : @xmath contributes to the renormalization of @xmath interactions,
while @xmath and @xmath renormalize @xmath interactions.

Let us first look at the flow equation for @xmath interactions. The
number of Wick contractions producing the graph @xmath is @xmath , since
the only freedom is in the choice of face @xmath in the upper @xmath
vertex which should be connected to the lower @xmath vertex. And because
@xmath and @xmath contribute to the renormalization of a same @xmath
bubble, there is an additional factor @xmath to take into account. The
truncated flow therefore takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

or equivalently

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is define as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We find a similar equation for @xmath interactions, except for
combinatorial weights. The number of Wick contractions producing a
@xmath is @xmath , and only @xmath for @xmath . However the first comes
with an additional @xmath contribution (since it consists of two
identical vertices). There are moreover two graphs @xmath contributing
to a same @xmath interaction (corresponding to two choices for @xmath ),
and likewise two graphs @xmath (choice of @xmath ). This gives therefore
an overall combinatorial factor @xmath , yielding:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### 4-point interactions

According to the classification of divergent graphs summarized in Table
7.1 , the multi-series defining @xmath stops at order @xmath in @xmath ,
and we can therefore write:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are multi-series in @xmath and @xmath .

Up to first order in the physical coupling constants, and within the
truncation to vertex-connected unions of face-connected divergent
subgraphs, @xmath and @xmath receive contributions from three types of
graphs: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , shown in Figure 7.7 . The
contraction of an @xmath or an @xmath brings a @xmath coefficient, with
combinatorial weights @xmath and @xmath respectively. @xmath and @xmath
contribute to the same effective bubble, which brings an additional
factor @xmath from this type of graphs. Each @xmath has a combinatorial
factor @xmath , due to the symmetry of the @xmath -valent vertex. Since
moreover @xmath and @xmath renormalize the same @xmath -valent
interaction, we have to take an additional factor @xmath into account.
The numerical coefficient resulting from the contraction operation is
@xmath , just like the @xmath -point graph previously computed. In the
approximation of @xmath and @xmath we use, we therefore have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and hence:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.145)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.146)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 7.4.3 Physical coupling constants: towards asymptotic freedom

We can now easily deduce flow equations for the physical coupling
constants, following ( 7.127 ). In order to simplify this analysis, we
will from now on make the assumption that the exponential factor in
equation ( 7.124 ) can be neglected. Hence we will work under the
following hypothesis, whose consistency must be checked at the end of
the analysis.

###### Working hypothesis 1.

The flow of the mass is such that in the asymptotic UV region:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can thus use the approximations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and immediately deduce the flow equations for the @xmath -point coupling
constants:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.149)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.150)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We define two @xmath -coefficients, which are the analogues of the
@xmath -functions in our discrete setting:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.151)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.152)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As far as asymptotic freedom is concerned, the crux of the matter is to
determine the signs of the @xmath -coefficients in the deep UV: if they
converge to a finite and strictly positive value when @xmath , then the
@xmath -point coupling constants run to @xmath in the UV direction.
These coefficient can be evaluated through a Laplace approximation [
beta_su2 ] , and in our approximation it turns out that @xmath is
strictly positive. Hence, if vertex-connected unions of face-connected
divergent subgraphs do determine the nature of the flow, the two @xmath
-point coupling constants necessarily converge to @xmath in the UV. This
encouraging indication needs to be confirmed by a complete analysis,
which will be reported on in a future publication [ beta_su2 ] .

We now turn to the @xmath -valent interactions. We have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

from which we deduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.154)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.155)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.156)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

According to Table 7.1 , @xmath can only contain @xmath terms, while
@xmath also has linearly divergent counter-terms. In order to correctly
deal with these divergences, we can therefore define a ’dimensionless’
coupling constant

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The flow equation then writes:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is to be understood in the sense of @xmath and @xmath only.
When the latter are both negligible, one simply has

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence, provided that the @xmath and @xmath decay to @xmath in the UV, so
do @xmath .

#### 7.4.4 Mass and consistency of the assumptions

We now have to check that, within the asymptotic freedom conjecture, the
hypothesis 1 is self-consistent. Equations ( 7.125 ) and ( 7.132 ) allow
to compute the physical mass flow up to second order in the coupling
constants:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.161)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The assumptions we made concerns the rescaled mass @xmath , so one
should divide this equation by @xmath . In the process, we can discard
the terms with vanishing coefficients in the UV and write:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can use the same idea as for the @xmath -point interactions and
conclude that, due to the @xmath factor, @xmath must go to @xmath in the
UV if the @xmath -point coupling constants do so. Therefore our
approximations are consistent with asymptotic freedom.

This partial analysis leads us to the following conjecture, currently
under investigation:

###### Conjecture 1.

The @xmath rank- @xmath TGFT studied in this chapter is asymptotically
free.

## Chapter 8 Conclusions and perspectives

We are finally reaching the conclusion of this manuscript. The results
we have been able to gather concern two closely related topics: the
@xmath expansion in colored GFTs, and renormalization theory for TGFTs.
We briefly recall what has been achieved in these two respects below,
and discuss some possible avenues to explore in the future.

### 8.1 The @xmath expansion in colored GFTs

As recalled in Chapter 3 , research in GFTs has been recently boosted by
the introduction of colored models, which drastically simplify the
combinatorial structure of the @xmath -complexes generated in
perturbative expansion. These modified models significantly gained
support after the discovery of the @xmath expansion, but are also
strongly motivated by independent topological considerations, and to a
lesser extent (i.e. in three dimensions only) by discrete gravity
symmetries. Particular attention has been given to even simpler
theories, colored tensor models, which can be considered as the back
bone of more involved GFTs. As far as the emergence of continuum gravity
is concerned, determining which ingredients of these refined models can
imprint the large @xmath behavior (if any) is of primary importance.
Tensor models provide us with universal tools to explore further the
consequences of GFTs, but can also be considered as purely combinatorial
challengers. Repeating the successes of the latter with the simplest
GFTs implementing additional discrete geometric data is a primary goal
in this respect: not only as a way to develop the GFT formalism itself
and bridge the gap with 4d quantum gravity models; but also to compare
the merits of the two approaches.

#### 8.1.1 Achievements

In this thesis, we focused on the simplest GFTs whose amplitudes can be
given a lattice gauge theory interpretation, namely the Boulatov and
Ooguri models. The existence of a @xmath expansion for their colored
versions has been established alongside that of colored tensor models by
new and powerful methods. In Chapter 4 , which is based on papers in
collaboration with Daniele Oriti [ vertex , edge ] , these results were
revisited and strengthened, thanks to representations better adapted to
the symmetries of discrete @xmath theory.

Taking advantage of the metric formulation of GFTs, in non-commutative
variables, we were able to analyze in details the vertex representation
of the colored Boulatov model, and the edge representation of the
colored Ooguri model. The idea, initially put forward in [ ef_poincare ]
and [ diffeos ] , is to take the generators of translation symmetries as
elementary variables. These translation symmetries are associated to the
vertices of the simplicial complexes in 3d, and to their edges in 4d.
They are deformed non-commutative symmetries, therefore they require
particular care: for instance, the change of variables we presented
relies on a non-commutative group Fourier transform.

We then put these two reformulations to good use, and derived scaling
bounds in the cut-off parameter. This cut-off, implemented with a heat
kernel, is what plays the role of large @xmath parameter, hence the
relevance of these scaling bounds to the @xmath expansion.

The first bounds we focused on, the bubble bounds, have no counterpart
in the colored tensor literature. It is only thanks to the vertex
formulation in @xmath and the edge formulation in @xmath that we could
access the topological information encoded in the @xmath -bubbles. The
@xmath -bubbles are particularly interesting, due to the occurrence of
topological singularities, even in colored GFTs. In this respect, we
could prove that all the contributions to the free energy are
topological manifolds in the first few orders of the @xmath expansion.
More precisely, for each color @xmath , we could define a positive
quantity which so to speak captures the "degree of manifoldness" of a
given configuration: it is @xmath when all the bubbles of color @xmath
are spherical, and gets bigger and bigger the more non-spherical bubbles
there are, or the more topologically (and combinatorially in 4d)
non-trivial they are. This quantity is what governs the decay in @xmath
of the bubble bounds. Interestingly, it is given by the sum of genera of
the bubbles in 3d, and the sum of their degrees (taken from the tensor
models) in 4d, hence supporting the idea that the degree is the
(non-topological) generalization of genus one should use in GFTs.

The other bounds we could derive are expressed in terms of the jackets,
which are particular discretized surfaces embedded in the simplicial
complexes. They notably enter the definition of the degree of a colored
graph: it is simply the sum of the genera of all the jackets. They are
therefore at the basis of the original derivation of the @xmath
expansion. The topological information about the jackets could also be
recovered with our methods, though in a less natural fashion than for
bubbles. What is very interesting however, is that our jacket bounds
improve the original ones: the decay we could obtain is governed by the
maximum of all the genera of the jackets, rather than their average.
This subtlety does not play any role at leading order, since again
degree @xmath graphs (hence melonic [ critical ] ) dominate the large
@xmath behavior of the colored Boulatov and Ooguri models, but is
suggestive of important deviations with respect to tensor models at
subleading orders.

#### 8.1.2 Discussion and outlook

The first piece of information we can take out from this study is that,
not very surprisingly, recasting GFT models in forms better adapted to
their symmetries gives easier access to their properties. In particular,
the bubble and improved jacket bounds could not be anticipated with the
usual formulation of the Boulatov-Ooguri models. They could not even be
deduced a posteriori from the power-counting of [ vm1 , vm2 , vm3 ]
which, though exact, does not easily give access to the topological
information we are primarily interested in. Second, our original
expectation was that it would be easier to pin-point differences between
colored tensor models and more complicated GFTs by focusing on the
properties only possessed by the latter. And we see indeed that, thanks
to a change of variable which is only possible in the presence of a
gauge invariance condition, bounds which are not satisfied by the
amplitudes of the tensor models could be derived. This analysis should
in our view be pursued further.

At present, only the melonic sector of colored tensor models has been
analyzed in detail, revealing the existence of a critical point at which
a branched-polymer continuum phase is reached. We know that, likewise,
the leading order sector of the Boulatov-Ooguri models is populated by
the melonic graphs, but we should not forget that they are weighted
differently. The key question to elucidate is whether these additional
weights are able to alter the critical regime obtained in the purely
combinatorial case. A first step in this direction has been taken in [
boulatov_phase ] , in collaboration with Aristide Baratin, Daniele
Oriti, James Ryan and Matteo Smerlak. An exact expression of the melonic
amplitudes in the large @xmath limit could be derived, including finite
pre-factors. These are evaluated thanks to a generalization of the
tree-matrix theorem, and reduce to a counting problem for @xmath -trees,
which are to @xmath -complexes what trees are to graphs. These formula,
associated with simple bounds, allow to prove that the free energy of
these models has a finite radius of analyticity, hence confirming the
existence of a melonic phase transition. A detailed account of its
properties remains challenging, but will hopefully be facilitated by the
exact formula proven in [ boulatov_phase ] , giving a new opportunity to
find key differences with tensor models.

But even if it turned out that the Boulatov-Ooguri models also describe
a crumpled phase after the melonic phase transition, deviations from the
tensor case could occur at higher orders. In particular, the recent
double-scaling results for colored tensor models [ wjd_double , Dartois
, schaeffer ] open the way to a similar achievement in GFTs. And
according to our refined jacket bounds, a double scaling for the
Boulatov-Ooguri might possibly retain different classes of graphs than
in the tensor case.

The scaling bounds presented in this thesis could and should be improved
in several respects. First, we only considered vacuum graphs, and the
question arises as to how the presence of boundaries would affect the
@xmath expansion. In the long run, the goal is to generalize the @xmath
expansion to 4d quantum gravity models. The scaling behavior of such
theories is only crudely understood, therefore adopting a similar
strategy as the one used in this thesis is an intriguing possibility. In
particular, we might want to investigate how the edge formulation of the
Ooguri model would be affected by the imposition of the simplicity
constraints. Heuristically, their role is to make the @xmath field of
@xmath theory geometrical, that is to turn it into a wedge product of
discrete triads. It is therefore tempting to conjecture that upon
imposition of the simplicity constraints, the Ooguri @xmath variables
associated to the edges would be turned into geometrical @xmath vectors.
If so, one should then determine whether a part of the broken symmetry
under (now geometric) edge translations survives. A possibility would be
the presence of a vertex translation invariance, expressed as
simultaneous translations of some of the edges. If so, we could look for
a further change of variables leading to a vertex formulation of 4d
quantum gravity models. It remains to be seen whether this very
optimistic scenario can be realized, but if so we could greatly benefit
from the experience gained in this thesis to develop a @xmath expansion
for these physically relevant theories.

Finally, a third idea one might want to explore further is the use of
geometric symmetries, such as the vertex translations of the Boulatov
model, as defining features of GFTs. Just like the Poincar symmetry
allows to classify the possible interactions in local relativistic field
theories, we could use the invariance under vertex translations as an
avenue towards a construction of the Boulatov model or a generalization
thereof from "first principles". A key obstacle however lies in the
deformed character of these symmetries, which suggest the implementation
of a non-trivial braiding. Despite several attempts, by several people,
such a braiding could not be found to date, precluding progress in this
direction. With insights from the second part of this thesis, we would
suggest to reconsider the same strategy in the TGFT context, where a
general locality principle is also available. What is the fate of the
translation symmetries in tensor invariant versions of the Boulatov and
Ooguri models? Can they be given a geometric interpretation in 3d?

### 8.2 Renormalization of TGFTs

Let us now turn to renormalization. Again, the main innovation of this
thesis has been to incorporate the gauge invariance condition of spin
foam models into the already existing renormalization scheme for tensor
fields, and is thought of as a first step towards 4d quantum gravity.
This part of the thesis is the outcome of a collaboration with Daniele
Oriti and Vincent Rivasseau.

#### 8.2.1 Achievements

In Chapter 5 , we introduced the particular class of tensorial group
field theories we focused on, which are characterized by: a) an infinite
set of interactions, labeled by colored bubbles, based on the tensorial
locality principle; b) non-trivial propagators implementing a gauge
invariance condition on the fields, supplemented with a Laplace operator
which softly breaks the tensorial invariance of the interaction. The
first ingredient is directly imported from the uncolored tensor models,
and can also arise from the integration of fields in specific colored
group field theories based on simplicial interactions. The gauge
invariance condition turns the Feynman amplitudes into lattice gauge
theories and is one of the two main ingredients of group field theories
for gravity (the other being, in 4d, the so-called simplicity
constraints). The Laplace operator launches the renormalization group
flow, and is also partially motivated by the analysis of the radiative
corrections of simpler GFTs, with ultra-local propagators. The rank
@xmath of the tensors, as well as the dimension @xmath of the compact
group indexing the tensors, were in a first stage kept arbitrary. A
detailed analysis of the power-counting of such models allowed to derive
stringent restrictions on @xmath and @xmath in order to achieve
renormalizability. In particular, it was shown that only five
combinations of such parameters can potentially support (interacting)
just-renormalizable models. Among these, only @xmath can be directly
related to a space-time theory, namely topological BF theory or 3d
quantum gravity, with @xmath the symmetry group for Lorentzian or
Riemannian spaces of dimension @xmath . In particular, the case @xmath ,
that would include a TGFT version of the Ooguri model, is found to be
non-renormalizable. The divergences of the renormalizable examples are
mostly due to melonic subgraphs, in a suitably generalized sense adapted
to TGFTs.

In Chapter 6 , we explored first examples in details, namely Abelian
@xmath models in @xmath . Even if they have no geometric interpretation,
they gave us the opportunity to understand better the general formalism.
In particular, we could define a generalization of the Wick ordering
procedure, called melordering, which fully renormalizes such
super-renormalizable theories. It correctly takes the nested structure
of the divergent melonic tadpoles (the melopoles) into account, and
contracts them to their local part. It should especially be noted that,
contrary to usual local field theories, tadpoles are not automatically
local, and not automatically quasi-local either. This is one instance of
the difficulties introduced by the new notion of quasi-locality, forced
upon us by tensor invariance, which we called traciality. With this tool
at hand, we could rigorously prove the finiteness of the renormalized
amplitudes.

In the last chapter, we went on to study in details the only
just-renormalizable model with a geometric interpretation, in the
Riemannian case @xmath . In order to classify the divergences, proven to
be all melonic, we generalized the multiscale techniques to the
non-Abelian case. The tensorial interactions were shown to be
renormalizable up to order @xmath , and to generate up to quadratically
divergent subgraphs. The same multiscale techniques could then be used
to reabsorb divergences into tensorial effective coupling constants, as
well as wave-function counter-terms, thus defining renormalized
amplitudes. Computed as sums over particular types of Zimmermann
forests, they could finally be proven finite at all orders of
perturbation, which is the main result of Chapter 7 . Additionally,
divergent forests were found to be unexpectedly rigid in their
structure, which helped simplifying some aspects of the proof of
renormalizability. We finally briefly sketched the Wilsonian effective
expansion, taking the wave-function renormalization into account. A
complete computation of the flow equations, truncated to their first
non-vanishing contributions, should allow to determine whether this
theory is asymptotically free, as is expected from other TGFT models.
The partial study we presented supports this conjecture.

#### 8.2.2 Discussion and outlook

The present study provides a few lessons which in our opinion will have
to be kept in mind in the construction and renormalization analysis of
more elaborate models, in particular models for 4d quantum gravity.
First, concerning TGFTs per se , the message we would like to convey is
that, in order to efficiently index the divergences, the most
appropriate notion of connectedness is face-connectedness rather than
vertex-connectedness. This is particularly true in models implementing
the gauge invariance condition, in which the amplitudes are functions of
holonomies around faces. The natural coarse-graining procedure in this
situation is indeed to erase "high energy" faces rather than internal
lines, and this can be consistently implemented in what we called
tracial subgraphs. Face-connectedness also crucially enters the
power-counting theorem of such models, through the rank of the incidence
matrix between faces and lines of a given graph. While a proof of
renormalizability can certainly be achieved with a notion of
vertex-connected high divergent subgraphs only, the face-connected high
divergent subgraphs we relied on in this thesis capture the fine
structure of the divergences, and henceforth avoid many redundancies in
the renormalization. This is exemplified by the fact that divergent
subgraphs in the sense of face-connectedness do not overlap (in
non-vacuum graphs), but rather organize themselves into a strong
inclusion forest. Had we worked in the coarser vertex-connectedness
picture, overlapping divergences would have been generic, and redundant
counter-terms would have been introduced. An intriguing question to ask,
in this respect, is whether face-connectedness might prove more
fundamental in simpler TGFTs as well, for example in the original model
[ tensor_4d ] , where no connection degrees of freedom are introduced.

We also pointed out clear limitations of face-connectedness, notably so
from the effective Wilsonian point of view. This prevented us from
settling down the question of asymptotic freedom in the @xmath model of
Chapter 7 , which will require more work. In order to make such studies
more tractable, it seems to us that the analogy between the
face-connectedness condition in TGFT and @xmath -particle irreducibility
in ordinary quantum field theory should be investigated further.

Let us now turn to the hard question of the renormalizability of quantum
gravity models in four dimensions. We do not have any definitive
statement to make on this issue, since, as we explained earlier, the
analysis presented here does not immediately generalizes to models
involving simplicity constraints. The latter GFTs, beside the fact that
they are not in the class of models considered in this thesis, are also
not based on group manifolds as such, but rather submanifolds of the
Lorentz group. Still, it seems to us that the three dimensional @xmath
model studied in this thesis suggests to reconsider and improve the
current spin foam models for quantum gravity in two essential ways,
before attempting any complete study of renormalizability. The first
concerns the much debated nature of scales in such models, and the
definition of non-trivial propagators which decay in the UV. In
particular, we think that the results of the present thesis suggest
that, in general, semi-classical reasoning interpreting the large-
@xmath limit of spin foam models (the Feynman amplitudes of GFTs) as the
IR general relativistic limit should be taken with care. Indeed,
perturbative divergences being associated to the same large- @xmath
sector (or equivalently small Schwinger parameter @xmath ), it actually
plays the role of the UV in our TGFT setting. In the Wilsonian point of
view, it is therefore only for boundary states with scales much lower
than the cut-off that the theory retains some predictive power. This
points in the direction of large boundary geometries having to be
constructed as collections of many small cells rather than a few big
ones. And in practice, this means that one will have to address the
question of approximate effective schemes, in order to control such
regimes with large numbers of particles. An intriguing possibility would
be the occurrence of one or several phase transitions along the
renormalization flow. This scenario might already start to be tested in
the three dimensional case, the first step being the computation of
@xmath -functions. In any case, we need to understand how to choose
non-trivial kernels for propagators in four dimensional models. While
there are some hints [ ValentinJoseph ] that the Laplace-Beltrami
operator is naturally generated by the quantum dynamics, when no
simplicity constraints are imposed, whether the same is true in the
presence of simplicity constraints is unclear at the present. We believe
that this is the first open question to address as far as the
renormalizability of TGFTs for four dimensional quantum gravity is
concerned. The second point, which deserves similar attention, is the
possible interplay between tensorial invariance and simplicity
constraints, as it is not immediately clear whether the geometric
meaning and motivations for such constraints, as well as the details of
their implementation, straightforwardly generalize to bubble
interactions. If these two important questions can be elucidated, one
might try to apply the techniques used in this thesis to determine
whether four dimensional TGFT models for quantum gravity with such
simplicity constraints are renormalizable or not, and up to which order
of interactions.

## Appendix A Technical appendix

### a.1 Heat Kernel

Consider the @xmath representation of @xmath , the identity being at the
north pole, @xmath being the equator and @xmath being the south pole.
The north and south open hemispheres are noted respectively as @xmath
and @xmath .

The heat kernel between two points @xmath and @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the class angle of @xmath , which is 0 at and @xmath at
@xmath . It is also the sum over Brownian paths in @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Wiener measure over Brownian paths @xmath going from
@xmath to @xmath in time @xmath .

The northern heat kernel with Dirichlet boundary conditions, called
@xmath is the same integral, but in which the Brownian paths are
constrained to lie entirely in @xmath , except possibly their end points
@xmath and @xmath , which are allowed to belong to the closed hemisphere
@xmath . Obviously:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

since there are less paths in the left hand side than in the right hand
side.

From the Markovian character of the heat kernel @xmath we have a
convolution equation for with @xmath , in terms of the first hitting
point @xmath where the path visits the equatorial boundary:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

### a.2 Proof of heat kernel bounds

In order to prove lemma 15 , we first re-express the heat kernel on
@xmath in terms of the third Jacobi @xmath -function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

defined for any @xmath . We note @xmath its derivative with respect to
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

From equation ( A.1 ), we deduce that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The main interest of this expression is that @xmath transforms nicely
under the modular group, and in particular ¹ ¹ 1 This is a consequence
of the Poisson summation formula, so one might as well directly use this
theorem instead of introducing @xmath . :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Differentiation with respect to @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and allows to express the heat kernel as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the explicit expressions of @xmath and @xmath , we finally obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This formula is suitable for investigating the behavior of @xmath away
from @xmath . In particular, simple integral bounds on @xmath allow to
prove that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

uniformly on any compact @xmath such that @xmath . We shall therefore
first study the behavior of @xmath and its derivatives on the fixed
compact @xmath . Relying on convolution properties of the heat kernel,
we will then extend these results to all of @xmath .

Bounds on @xmath

@xmath is easy to analyze, as it is nothing but the flat version of
@xmath . The function @xmath is analytic on @xmath , therefore its
contributions to @xmath and its derivatives will be uniformly bounded.
The non trivial point of the proof consists in proving that @xmath and
all its derivatives are also uniformly bounded, by constants independent
of @xmath . By expanding the hyperbolic functions, we can first write:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We can fix @xmath , and find a constant @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies the following bounds, for any @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

When @xmath , we can use the fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the exponential decay in @xmath to deduce bounds without
derivatives. All in all, we see that for any @xmath , we can find
constants @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Following [ tensor_4d ] , let us assume that @xmath , in order to ensure
that the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

decreases on @xmath for any @xmath . This provides us with the following
integral bound:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting the latter in Gaussian form yields an expression in terms of the
error function @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.23)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            (A.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The last expression is bounded by a constant independent of @xmath and
@xmath provided that @xmath , which is an admissible choice. This
concludes the proof of the existence of constants @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

on @xmath . Using equation ( A.10 ), it is then easy to prove that when
@xmath , @xmath verifies the same type of bounds as @xmath on @xmath ,
therefore concluding the proof of lemma 15 on this subset.

Extension to @xmath

Suppose that @xmath . We can use formula ( A.3 ) and ( A.2 ) to write:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This upper bound involves only heat kernels evaluated in @xmath .
Moreover, @xmath does not depend on the particular value of @xmath , the
squared distance to of the latter and of @xmath being bounded from below
by a constant @xmath .

From the discussion above, we know that there exists constants @xmath
and @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

To take care of the singularities in @xmath and @xmath , we can
decompose the integral over @xmath into two components: from @xmath to
@xmath , and from @xmath to @xmath . Each of these integrals can then be
bounded independently, for instance:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.29)
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We can bound the second integral in the same way, and therefore conclude
that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some constants @xmath and @xmath .

We can proceed in a similar way for the derivatives of @xmath . We fix
@xmath , and a normalized Lie algebra element @xmath . From ( A.3 ), we
deduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.32)
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.33)
              @xmath   @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

for some constants @xmath and @xmath . The same method as before allows
to show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some constants @xmath and @xmath .
