An investigation of the comparative efficiency of the different methods
in which @xmath is calculated”. This thesis will compare and contrast
five different methods in calculating @xmath by first deriving the
various proofs to each method and then creating graphical displays and
tables with percentage errors on each to allow a thorough comparison
between each method. It is important to realize that usually people
refer to @xmath as 3.142 and use this shortened value in everyday
calculations. However, most people in society do not know that in some
of NASA’s calculations, π must be calculated to ”15 decimal places
(3.141592653589793) for calculations involving the Space Station
Guidance Navigation and Control (GNC) code” [9]. Furthermore, some
people use the world renown constant everyday yet have no idea where it
comes from.
This thesis allows a thorough exploration of the different methods of
calculating pi by using Mathematica to provide the necessary iterations
needed and Microsoft excel to plot the various graphs for convergence
comparisons. Finally, the conclusions that have come from this thesis
demonstrate that methods in which oscillations between the positive and
negative region of the line y = @xmath slow down the rate of convergence
and out of the five methods investigated, The infinite series formulated
from @xmath proves to be one of the fastest infinite series today to
converge towards @xmath .
