This thesis is concerned with the energy efficiency of cellular
networks. It studies the dominant power consumer in future cellular
networks, the Long Term Evolution ( LTE ) radio Base Station ( BS ), and
proposes mechanisms that enhance the BS energy efficiency by reducing
its power consumption under target rate constraints. These mechanisms
trade spare capacity for power saving.

First, the thesis describes how much power individual components of a BS
consume and what parameters affect this consumption based on third party
experimental data. These individual models are joined into a component
power model for an entire BS . The component model is an essential step
in analysis but is too complex for many applications. It is therefore
abstracted into a much simpler parameterized model to reduce its
complexity. The parameterized model is further simplified into an affine
model which can be applied in power minimization.

Second, Power Control ( PC ) and Discontinuous Transmission ( DTX ) are
identified as promising power-saving Radio Resource Management ( RRM )
mechanisms and applied to multi-user downlink transmission. PC reduces
the power consumption of the Power Amplifier ( PA ) and is found to be
most effective at high traffic loads. DTX mostly reduces the power
consumption of the Baseband ( BB ) unit while interrupting transmission
and is better applied in low traffic loads. Joint optimization of these
two techniques is found to enable additional power-saving at medium
traffic loads and to be a convex problem which can be solved
efficiently. The convex problem is extended to provide a comprehensive
power-saving Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access ( OFDMA )
frame resource scheduler. The proposed scheduler is shown to reduce
power consumption by 25-40% in computer simulations, depending on the
traffic load.

Finally, the thesis investigates the influence of interference on power
consumption in a network of multiple power-saving BSs . It discusses
three popular alternative distributed uncoordinated methods which align
DTX mode between neighboring BSs . To address drawbacks of these three,
a fourth memory-based DTX alignment method is proposed. It decreases
power consumption by up to 40% and retransmission probability by around
20%, depending on the traffic load.
