##### Contents

-    0 Introduction
    -    0.1 Motivation
    -    0.2 The thesis overview
    -    0.3 Main definitions and notations
-    1 Application of fractal analyis in reading multiplicity of fixed
    points for diffeomorphisms on the real line
    -    1.1 Introduction and definitions
    -    1.2 Generators differentiable at a fixed point
    -    1.3 Non-differentiable generators at a fixed point
        -    1.3.1 Main results
        -    1.3.2 Proofs of the main results
    -    1.4 Application to cyclicity for planar vector fields using
        fractal analysis of Poincaré maps
        -    1.4.1 Limit cycle
        -    1.4.2 Weak focus
        -    1.4.3 Saddle loop
        -    1.4.4 Hamiltonian 2-saddle cycle with constant
            hyperbolicity ratios
    -    1.5 Application to number of zeros of Abelian integrals
-    2 Application of fractal analysis in formal classification of
    complex diffeomorphisms and saddles
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 Hyperbolic germs
    -    2.3 Formal classification of parabolic germs
        -    2.3.1 Asymptotic development for @xmath -neighborhoods of
            orbits
        -    2.3.2 Proof of the asymptotic development
        -    2.3.3 Bijective correspondence between formal invariants
            and fractal properties of orbits
        -    2.3.4 Proofs of auxiliary statements
        -    2.3.5 Perspectives
    -    2.4 Application of the formal classification result to formal
        orbital classification of complex saddles in @xmath
        -    2.4.1 Introduction to complex saddles
        -    2.4.2 Application via holonomy map
        -    2.4.3 A preliminary result: box dimension of a planar
            saddle loop
        -    2.4.4 A conjecture about the box dimension of leaves of a
            foliation of complex resonant saddles
-    3 About analytic classification of complex parabolic
    diffeomorphisms using @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits
    -    3.1 Ecalle-Voronin moduli of analytic classification
    -    3.2 Analyticity of solutions of generalized Abel equations
    -    3.3 Analyticity properties of complex measures of @xmath
        -neighborhoods of orbits of parabolic germs
        -    3.3.1 Analyticity of complex measures as functions of the
            parameter @xmath
        -    3.3.2 Analyticity of complex measures as functions of the
            initial point
        -    3.3.3 Analyticity of principal parts of complex measures
    -    3.4 Principal parts of complex measures of @xmath
        -neighborhoods of orbits and analytic classification
        -    3.4.1 Counterexamples for reading the analytic class from
            principal parts
        -    3.4.2 Higher-order moments and higher conjugacy classes.
        -    3.4.3 Relative position of the @xmath -conjugacy classes
            and the analytic classes.
        -    3.4.4 Reconstruction of the analytic classes from the
            @xmath -conjugacy classes
    -    3.5 Perspectives
        -    3.5.1 Can we read the analytic class from @xmath
            -neighborhoods of only one orbit?
        -    3.5.2 @xmath -Abel equation in analytic classification of
            two-dimensional diffeomorphisms
    -    3.6 Proofs of auxiliary results
-    4 Conclusions and perspectives

## Chapter 0 Introduction

### 0.1 Motivation

In this thesis, we use the methods of fractal analysis . Our main tool
is computing the box dimension and the Minkowski content of sets. The
box dimension of trajectories of a dynamical system is an appropriate
tool for measuring complexity of the system, and it reveals important
properties of the system itself. By their definition, box dimension and
Minkowski content of sets are related to the first term in the
asymptotic development of the Lebesgue measure of the @xmath
-neighborhood of the set, as @xmath tends to zero, see precise
definitions in Section 0.3 . In our considerations, we sometimes mean
@xmath -neighborhoods of sets, for small parameters @xmath , as their
fractal property in the broader sense. We mainly consider discrete
dynamical systems generated by diffeomorphisms in a neighborhood of a
fixed point and tending to the fixed point. We conclude intrinsic
properties of the generating diffeomorphism by fractal analysis of one
of its orbits . The properties we read are important in light of the
@xmath Hilbert problem for planar polynomial vector fields. The fractal
method for obtaining them used in this work is new. We investigate where
are its limits in recognizing the diffeomorphism. The applicability of
our method lies in the fact that fractal properties of one orbit are of
purely geometric nature and can be determined numerically.

After a few words about fractal analysis and its historical development,
we describe how it was exploited so far in the field of dynamical
systems. Fractal analysis has been rapidly evolving since the end of the
@xmath century. It was noted that many sets in the nature (for example,
coastline or a snow-flake) have fractal structure, meaning that at every
point they are of infinite length and have self-similarity property: any
part is similar to the whole. The need to measure their complexity led
to the introduction of new notion of fractal dimension, different from
topological dimension, which takes noninteger values, depending on the
complexity of the set. The motivation can be found in e.g. Mandelbrot’s
book [ 33 ] about fractals in nature. The famous fractal sets are Koch
curve, Cantor set, Sierpinski carpet or Julia set. Their fractal
dimensions can be found in e.g. [ 17 ] .

The oldest and most widely used fractal dimension is Hausdorff dimension
, introduced by Carathéodory. There are many works where Hausdorff
dimension was exploited in dynamical systems. For example, in papers of
Douady, Sentenac, Zinsmeister [ 59 ] and Zinsmeister [ 54 ] , the
discontinuity in Hausdorff dimension at a parabolic fixed point of Julia
set indicates the moment of change of local dynamics (the so-called
parabolic implosion phenomenon ). Many dynamical systems posess the
strange, chaotic attractors with fractal structure, for example Lorenz
attractor, Smale horseshoe, Hénon attractor. They are difficult to
describe and Hausdorff dimension shows the complexity of such
attractors. For their fractal dimension and its application in dynamical
systems, see for example the overview article of  Županović, Žubrinić [
58 ] and references therein.

The notion of box dimension was introduced later, at the beginning of
the @xmath century, by Minkowski and Bouligand. In literature, it is
also called the limit capacity or the box counting dimension . For the
overview and more information on fractal dimensions, see for example the
book of Falconer [ 17 ] or the book of Tricot [ 53 ] .

In this work we use the box dimension and the Minkowski content as
relevant fractal properties of sets. The extensive use of box dimension
in the study of dynamical systems and differential equations started
around the year 2000 by a group of authors in Zagreb: Pašić, Žubrinić,
Županović, Korkut et al., in papers e.g. [ 39 ] , [ 56 ] , [ 55 ] , [ 13
] . The use of box dimension in their work was motivated by the book of
Tricot [ 53 ] , which provides box dimension of two special sets: of the
graph of @xmath -chirp function: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and of
spiral accumulating at the origin: @xmath , @xmath . Also, in [ 30 ] ,
Lapidus and Pomerance computed the box dimension of one-dimensional
discrete sequences accumulating at zero with well-defined asymptotics
and connected it in their modified Weyl-Berry conjecture to the
asymptotics of eigenvalue counting function for fractal strings.

Box dimension of sets in @xmath takes values in the interval @xmath . It
takes also noninteger values, depending on how much of the ambient space
the set occupies (the density of the accumulation of the set). The
precise definitions are given in Section 0.3 . For most sets, it
coincides with Hausdorff dimension. Nevertheless, the Hausdorff
dimension, unlike the box dimension, posesses the countable stability
property, see e.g. [ 17 ] . This results in the fact that any countable
set of poins accumulating at some point, regardless of the density of
the accumulation, has Hausdorff dimension equal to @xmath . Similarly,
any countable set of smooth curves accumulating at some set has
Hausdorff dimension equal to @xmath . On the other hand, their box
dimension takes values between @xmath and @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath
respectively, depending on the density of the accumulation. To conclude,
Hausdorff dimension for the trajectories of continuous and discrete
dynamical systems is trivial and provides no information. The box
dimension is an appropriate tool.

This thesis is a natural continuation of the work of the above mentioned
group of professors in Zagreb. The considerations are extended to
systems where standard box dimension is not enough and we need natural
generalizations. Here we present shortly an overview of relevant former
results and explain what is done in the thesis.

In a broader sense, the results of Žubrinić and Županović are mostly
concerned with the @xmath Hilbert problem , from the viewpoint of
fractal geometry. Planar polynomial vector fields are considered. The
@xmath Hilbert problem asks for an upper bound @xmath , depending only
on the degree @xmath of the polynomial field, on the number of limit
cycles (isolated periodic orbits). The problem is so far completely
open. To approach this question, it is important to detect invariant
sets from which limit cycles are born in generic analytic unfoldings of
vector fields. They are called limit periodic sets . The question then
reduces to a simpler question, on the maximal number of limit cycles
that can be born from each limit periodic set in a generic analytic
unfolding. This is called the cyclicity of the limit periodic set. A
nice overview of the @xmath Hilbert problem and related problems can be
found in the book of Roussarie [ 46 ] .

We restrict ourselves to the simplest cases of monodromic limit periodic
sets: isolated singular elliptic points (singularities with eigenvalues
with nonzero imaginary part, i.e., strong or weak foci), limit cycles,
and homoclinic loops (with a hyperbolic saddle point at the origin).
Monodromic means that the set is accumulated on one side by spiral
trajectories. In these cases, the cyclicity is finite (Dulac problem
proven by Il’yashenko [ 24 ] and Ecalle [ 14 ] independently) and known,
as is also in some special cases of polycycles. See works of Mourtada,
El Morsalani, Il’yashenko, Yakovenko and others, as referenced in [ 46 ,
Chapter 5] .

The question arose if it was possible to read these bounds using this
new method: fractal analysis of spiral trajectories tending to the limit
periodic set. The idea was triggered by article [ 56 ] of Žubrinić and
Županović. In the article, the example of Hopf bifurcation was treated
from the viewpoint of fractal analysis. In Hopf bifurcation, a weak
focus of the first order bifurcates to strong focus and one limit cycle
is born at the moment of bifurcation. It was noted that the box
dimension of a spiral trajectory around the focus point jumps from the
value @xmath for weak focus to the smaller value @xmath at the very
moment of bifurcation, obviously signaling the birth of a limit cycle
from the weak focus point. To generalize the result to all focus points,
in the next article [ 57 ] by the same authors, the Takens normal form
for a generic unfolding of a vector field in a neighborhood of a focus
point from Takens [ 51 ] was related to the box dimension of spiral
trajectories tending to the focus point. Thus the box dimension of a
spiral trajectory accumulating at a focus point recognizes between
strong and weak foci and, further, between weak foci of different
orders. It thus signals the number of limit cycles that are born from
them in perturbations. In [ 57 ] , box dimension of spiral trajectories
was related to cyclicity also for limit cycles. In computing the box
dimension of a spiral trajectory, the box dimension of an orbit of the
Poincaré map on a transversal was computed, and related to the box
dimension of a spiral trajectory by the flow-sector (for focus points)
or the flow-box theorem from [ 11 ] (for limit cycles). The theorems
state a product structure of a trajectory locally around a transversal.
This suggested that the box dimension of a spiral trajectory around
limit periodic sets in fact carries the same information as the box
dimension of a discrete, one-dimensional orbit of its Poincaré map. The
box dimension of (relevant) one-dimensional discrete systems was
computed in Elezović, Županović, Žubrinić [ 13 ] . Later, in her thesis
[ 23 ] and in paper [ 22 ] , Horvat-Dmitrović considered bifurcations of
one-dimensional discrete dynamical systems, noting that a jump in the
box dimension of the system indicates the moment of bifurcation, while
its size reveals the complexity of bifurcation. The connection with
Poincaré maps for continuous planar systems was stressed as an
application, the birth of limit cycles in the unfolding corresponding to
the bifurcation of a fixed point of the Poincaré map into new fixed
points. Indeed, the cyclicity in generic unfoldings of weak foci and
limit cycles equals the multiplicity of zero as a fixed point of the
corresponding Poincaré map. Instead of considering the spiral
trajectories, one can equivalently perform fractal analysis of
one-dimensional orbits of the Poincare map on a transversal to get
information on cyclicity. In [ 13 ] , one-dimensional discrete systems
generated by functions sufficiently differentiable at a fixed point were
considered. The bijective correspondence was found between the box
dimension of such systems and the multiplicity of fixed points of the
generating functions.

In the first part of this thesis, we express an explicit bijective
correspondence between the cyclicity of elliptic points and limit cycles
in generic unfoldings and the behavior of the @xmath -neighborhood of
any orbit of their Poincaré maps, as @xmath . The behavior is expressed
by the box dimension. Then we generalize the results to homoclinic loops
and simple saddle polycycles. The results were published in 2012 in the
paper [ 35 ] by Mardešić, Resman, Županović. Unlike in focus or limit
cycle case, where Poincaré map was differentiable at fixed point and
could be expanded in power series, the first return map for homoclinic
loop is no more differentiable at fixed point. The theorem from [ 13 ]
connecting the multiplicity of differentiable generators with the box
dimension of their orbits cannot be applied. However, it is known that
the Poincaré maps for generic analytic unfoldings of a homoclinic loop
have nice structure: they decompose in a well-ordered (by flatness at
zero) scale of logarithmic monomials, which mimics in some way the power
scale. This result is given in book of Roussarie [ 46 , Chapter 5] .
Such scale is an easy example of the so-called Chebyshev scale . The
Chebyshev scales are discussed in detail in the book of Mardešić [ 34 ]
. We encounter two problems in generalizing the previous result to
non-differentiable generators belonging to a Chebyshev scale. First, the
multiplicity, to be well defined, should be exchanged with multiplicity
in a Chebyshev scale . A definition was introduced by Joyal, [ 27 ] .
Secondly, we show that for generators not belonging to the power scale,
box dimension of their discrete orbits is not precise enough to reveal
the exact multiplicity of the generator. By its very definition, box
dimension is adapted to the power scale: it compares the area of the
@xmath -neighborhood of sets with powers of @xmath . Even Tricot in his
book [ 53 , p. 121] warns about lack of precision of box dimension for
sets with logarithmic dependence on @xmath of the area of their @xmath
-neighborhood and emphasizes the need for appropriate, finer scale to
which this area should be compared. We introduce a new notion of
critical Minkowski order , which presents a generalization of box
dimension which is adapted to a Chebyshev scale. It compares the
behavior of the @xmath -neighborhoods with appropriate, finer scale for
a given problem. With this new notion, we manage to recover a bijective
correspondence as before. In cases of homoclinic loops, knowing the
critical Minkowski order of only one orbit of Poincaré map, together
with understanding the scale for a generic unfolding, are sufficient to
determine the cyclicity of the homoclinic loop. We stress that the
problem of our method for more complicated saddle polycycles lies in the
fact that the depth of the logarithmic scale for generic unfoldings is
not known in general. The scales have been investigated only in very
special cases of polycycles, by El Morsalani, Gavrilov, Mourtada and
many others.

Due to the deficiency of fractal analysis applied directly to planar
vector fields for more complicated limit periodic sets, in the second
part of the thesis (Chapters 2 and 3 ), we consider complexified systems
from the viewpoint of fractal analysis of orbits. By complexifying germs
of planar vector fields at both elliptic (weak focus) and hyperbolic
(saddle) singular points, we obtain germs of complex saddle vector
fields in @xmath , see [ 26 , Chapters 4 and 22] . It was noticed in [
56 ] or [ 57 ] that the box dimension of an orbit of the Poincaré map
or, equivalently, of a spiral trajectory around the elliptic point,
distinguishes between weak and strong foci, which are classified by the
order of the first non-zero term in their normal forms. However, planar
fractal analysis fails in distinguishing between weak and strong
resonant saddle points, since they are not monodromic points: there is
no recurring spiral trajectory accumulating at them and the Poincaré map
is not defined. In this case, we complexify the resonant saddles. The
leaves of resonant complex saddles are monodromic and an analogue of the
first return map, called the holonomy map , is well defined. In this
case, we expect the box dimension of leaves, or of orbits of their
holonomy maps, to distinguish between weak and strong saddles, which
difer by the order of the first non-zero resonant term in their formal
normal forms. Already Il’yashenko, in his proof of the Dulac problem
about nonaccumulation of limit periodic sets on elementary planar
polycycles, considered complexified systems in @xmath . Therefore, we
hope that the analysis of complexified dynamics may give some insight
into unsolved planar cases in the future.

An important way of classifying and recognizing germs of complex saddle
vector fields are their orbital formal and analytic normal forms. We are
here concerned only with orbital formal classification of complex
saddles , which can be found for example in the book of Il’yashenko and
Yakovenko [ 26 , Section 22] or in the book of Loray [ 32 , Chapter 5] .
The germs of vector fields with a complex saddle are either formally
orbitally linearizable or their formal normal form is described by two
parameters called formal invariants . Our first goal is to see if we can
read formal invariants of a complex saddle by fractal analysis of one
leaf of a foliation near the origin, or, equivalently, by fractal
analysis of one orbit of its holonomy map defined on a cross-section to
the saddle. In the complex case, one leaf of a foliation can be
understood as one trajectory of the system (in complex time), while
complex holonomy map is the complex equivalent of the Poincaré map.

As was the case with Poincaré maps of planar vector fields, in complex
saddle cases the analysis of holonomy maps is sufficient for classifying
complex saddles. It was stated by Mattei, Moussu [ 36 ] that formal
(analytic) orbital normal forms of germs of complex saddles can be read
from formal (analytic) classes of their holonomy maps, see [ 32 ,
Théorème 5.2.1] . Furthermore, by Lemma 22.2 in [ 26 ] , holonomy maps
of complex saddles are germs of complex diffeomorphisms fixing the
origin, @xmath . Their formal classification was given by Birkhoff,
Kimura, Szekeres and Ecalle in the mid @xmath century and can be found
in [ 26 , Section 22B] or [ 32 , Section 1.3] . We consider all germs of
diffeomorphisms except the most complicated cases of irrational
rotations in the linear part. Sections 2.2 and 2.3 of this thesis are
thus dedicated to establishing a bijective correspondence between the
formal classification of germs of diffeomorphisms of the complex plane
and the fractal properties of only one discrete orbit. The results from
this chapter are mostly published in 2013 in paper [ 44 ] by Resman.
Since the formal invariants are complex numbers, we had to generalize
fractal properties to become complex numbers, revealing not only the
density, but also the direction of the orbit. We call them the directed
fractal properties . By definition, they are related to the directed
area or the complex measure of the @xmath -neighborhood of the orbit
defined here. It incorporates not only the area, but also the center of
the mass of the @xmath -neighborhood.

The results are then directly applied to germs of complex saddle fields
in Chapter 2.4 . We read the orbital formal normal form of a saddle
field, using fractal properties of its holonomy map. Furthermore, we
compute the box dimension of a trajectory around a planar saddle loop,
and thus give the preliminary steps for computing the box dimension of a
leaf of a foliation for germs of resonant complex saddle fields. We
state the conjecture connecting the dimension of one leaf of a foliation
and the first formal invariant of a resonant nonlinearizable complex
saddle. For linearizable resonant saddles, box dimension of a leaf
should be trivial , that is, equal to 2. The conjecture has yet to be
proven.

The formal classification problem for complex germs of diffeomorphisms
being fully solved, in Chapter 3 we investigate how far methods of
fractal analyis can bring us in the problem of analytic classification .
We consider germs of parabolic diffeomorphisms. The analytic
classification problem for parabolic diffeomorphism was solved by Ecalle
[ 15 ] and Voronin [ 60 ] around the year 1980. From then on, many
authors have been working on understanding ideas and tools from [ 15 ]
and treating the problem from different viewpoints, for example Loray,
Sauzin, Dudko etc. For a good overview, we recommend the preprint of
Sauzin [ 48 ] , the book of Loray [ 32 ] or recent thesis of Dudko [ 10
] . Most of the authors restrict to the simplest, model formal class of
diffeomorphisms. We also follow this fashion. The complexity of the
problem lies in the fact that the analytic class of a parabolic
diffeomorphism is given by finitely many pairs of germs of
diffeomorphisms in @xmath , the so-called Ecalle-Voronin moduli of
analytic classification . The same can be expressed in terms of infinite
sequences of numbers. The complexity of the space of analytic invariants
is not unexpected. Indeed, it was shown by Ecalle that, for determining
the analytic class, we need information on the whole diffeomorphism. No
finite jet of a diffeomorphism is sufficient. More precisely, each
parabolic diffeomorphism is formally equivalent to its formal normal
form, but the formal change of variables converges only sectorially to
analytic functions. The neighboring sectors overlap, resembling the
petals of a flower. The analytic conjugacies on sectors are obtained as
sectorial solutions of the Abel (trivialisation) difference equation for
a diffeomorphism. The difference between them on the intersections of
sectors is exponentially small. This is an ocurrence of the famous
Stokes phenomenon , which can be overviewed in book [ 25 ] . The
Ecalle-Voronin moduli are obtained comparing the analytic solutions on
intersections of sectors, and incorporate information on exponentially
small differences. The moduli are not computable nor operable even in
the simplest cases. Therefore, some authors restrict themselves to
considering only the computable tangential derivative to the moduli, for
example Elizarov in [ 16 ] .

The approach to the problem of analytic classification using fractal
properties of orbits in this thesis is new. It is still not clear
whether it is possible to read the analytic moduli using @xmath
-neighborhoods of orbits. The problem seems to be very difficult. In
Chapter 3 of the thesis, we investigate the analyticity properties of
the complex measure of @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits, as function of
parameter @xmath and of initial point @xmath . We show the lack of
analyticity in each variable. Nevertheless, we note that the first
coefficient dependent on the initial point @xmath in the asymptotic
development in @xmath of the complex measure of the @xmath
-neighborhood, regarded as function of @xmath , has sectorial
analyticity property. We call this coefficient the principal part of the
complex measure. It satisfies the difference equation similar to the
Abel (trivialisation) equation, which we call the @xmath -Abel equation
. We generalize both equations introducing the generalized Abel
equations , and give the necessary and sufficient conditions on a
diffeomorphisms for the global analyticity of solutions of their
generalized Abel equations. We apply the results to obtain examples
which show that the global analyticity of principal parts is not in
correlation with the analytic conjugacy of the diffeomorphism to the
model. To support this statement theoretically, in a similar way as
analytic classes were defined comparing sectorial solutions of Abel
equation, we define a new classification of diffeomorphisms comparing
the sectorial solutions of @xmath -Abel equation. Thus we obtain
equivalence classes which we call the @xmath -conjugacy classes . We
show that these new classes are ’far’ from the analytic classes. In
fact, they are in transversal position with respect to analytic classes.
This means, inside each analytic class we can find diffeomorphisms
belonging to any @xmath -class. We also define higher conjugacy classes,
with respect to generalized Abel equations with right-hand sides of
higher orders.

### 0.2 The thesis overview

Here we repeat shortly by chapters the main results presented in the
thesis.

Chapter 1 is dedicated to two main results published in Mardešić,
Resman, Županović [ 35 ] . They concern fractal analysis of discrete
systems generated by local diffeomorphisms of the real line at a fixed
point. In case of generators sufficiently differentiable at fixed point,
the bijective correspondence between the multiplicity of the fixed point
and the box dimension of any orbit is given in Theorem 1.1 . In case of
generators differentiable except at fixed point and belonging to a
Chebyshev scale, we show that the box dimension of orbits cannot
recognize the multiplicity precisely. Therefore we introduce the
critical Minkowski order, as a generalization of box dimension, which is
adapted to a given scale. In Theorem 1.3 , the bijective correspondence
is given between the multiplicity of a generator in a given scale and
the critical Minkowski order of one orbit. At the end of Chapter 1 , in
Section 1.4 , the results are applied to Poincaré maps for elliptic
points, limit cycles and homoclinic loops. The application is in reading
the cyclicity of these sets in generic unfoldings from the box dimension
or the critical Minkowski order of only one orbit of their Poincaré
maps.

Chapter 2 treats complex germs of diffeomorphisms @xmath , whose linear
part is not an irrational rotation, and germs of resonant complex
saddles in @xmath .

In Sections 2.2 and 2.3 , fractal analysis of orbits is brought to
relation with existing formal classification results. In Section 2.2 ,
box dimension of orbits of hyperbolic germs is computed in Proposition
2.2 to be equal to @xmath . Its triviality is consistent with analytic
linearizability of such germs. In Subsection 2.3 , formal classification
of parabolic diffeomorphisms is treated. The results were published in [
44 ] . The area of @xmath -neighborhood of orbit is generalized as the
directed area or the complex measure of the @xmath -neighborhood,
incorporating the area and the center of the mass of the @xmath
-neighborhood. Three coefficients in its asymptotic development: box
dimension, directed Minkowski content and directed residual content are
introduced in a natural way. Main Theorems 2.2 and 2.3 state the
bijective correspondence between the three fractal properties of any
discrete orbit near the origin and the elements of the formal normal
form of the generating diffeomorphism.

In Section 2.4 , the results are applied to the formal orbital
classification of resonant complex saddles in @xmath . In Subsection
2.4.2 , the direct application of the previous results to vector fields,
using their holonomy maps, in given in Proposition 2.14 . In Subsection
2.4.3 , in Theorem 2.4 , we compute the box dimension of the spiral
trajectory around the planar homoclinic loop. It is a preliminary result
containing expected techniques for computing the box dimension of leaves
of foliations given by vector fields in @xmath with complex saddle. In
Subsection 2.4.4 , we finally state a conjecture about the box dimension
of a leaf of a foliation for a resonant formally nonlinearizable saddle:
it is in a bijective correspondence with the first element of the formal
normal form. For formally linearizable resonant saddles, we conjecture
that the box dimension is 2.

In Chapter 3 , we consider analytic classification of parabolic
diffeomorphisms, from the viewpoint of @xmath -neighborhoods of their
orbits. In Section 3.1 , we make a rather long introduction about
analytic classification problem from the literature, with definitions
and techniques we will need. In Section 3.2 , we show that the function
of complex measure of @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits does not posses
the analyticity property in any variable. We define the principal part
of the complex measure as the first coefficient @xmath dependent on the
initial point @xmath in the development in @xmath of the complex measure
of the @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits. It is regarded as a function of
@xmath . Theorem 3.6 states sectorial analyticity properties of this
principal part and a difference equation it satisfies. We call such
equations the generalized Abel equations . In Section 3.3 , we consider
analyticity properties of solutions of generalized Abel equations and
state in Theorem 3.5 the necessary and sufficient conditions for the
existence of a globally analytic solution. Finally, in Theorem 3.7 , we
characterize the diffeomorphisms whose principal parts of orbits are
globally analytic. In Section 3.4 , we compare analyticity results
concerning principal parts with analytic classification results. We
first show some examples that suggest that the analytic classes cannot
be read from the principal parts of orbits. Then, to confirm the
anticipated, we introduce a new classification of diffeomorphisms using
the equation for the principal parts, called the @xmath -classification.
We show finally, in Theorem 3.8 and Proposition 3.8 , that the newly
defined classes are in transversal position with respect to the analytic
classes, meaning that inside each analytic class there exist
diffeomorphisms belonging to any @xmath -class.

### 0.3 Main definitions and notations

Here we state main definitions and notations used throughout the thesis.
The definitions and notations specific for each chapter, on the other
hand, are introduced at the beginning of each chapter.

First we define two fractal properties of sets, the box dimension and
the Minkowski content. For more details, see for example the book of
Falconer [ 17 ] or Tricot [ 53 ] .

Let @xmath be a bounded set. By @xmath , @xmath , we denote its @xmath
-neighborhood:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , @xmath , be Lebesgue measurable, and let @xmath denote its
Lebesgue measure. In the thesis, the Lebesgue measure in @xmath , the
length, will be denoted by @xmath , while the Lebesgue measure in @xmath
or @xmath , the area, will be denoted by @xmath . The fractal properties
of set @xmath are related to the asymptotic behavior of the Lebesgue
measure of its @xmath -neighborhood @xmath , as @xmath . The rate of
decrease of @xmath , as @xmath , reveals the density of accumulation of
the set in the ambient space. It is measured by the box dimension and
the Minkowski content of @xmath .

By lower and upper @xmath -dimensional Minkowski content of @xmath ,
@xmath , we mean

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively. Furthermore, lower and upper box dimension of @xmath are
defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As functions of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are step functions that jump
only once from @xmath to zero as @xmath grows, and upper or lower box
dimension are equal to the value of @xmath when jump in upper or lower
content appears, see Figure 1 .

If @xmath , then we put @xmath and call it the box dimension of @xmath .
In literature, the upper box dimension of @xmath is also referred to as
the limit capacity of @xmath , see for example [ 38 ] .

If @xmath and @xmath , we say that @xmath is Minkowski nondegenerate .
If moreover @xmath , we say that @xmath is Minkowski measurable . The
notion was introduced by Stachó [ 50 ] in 1976. In that case, we denote
the common value of the Minkowski contents simply by @xmath , and call
it the Minkowski content of @xmath .

In this thesis we deal only with nice sets, for which the upper and the
lower box dimension and also the upper and the lower Minkowski contents
coincide. Therefore, from now on, we speak only about the box dimension
@xmath and the Minkowski content @xmath .

In the next example, we show how box dimension and, additionally,
Minkowski content distinguish between the rates of growth of @xmath
-neighborhoods and thus between densities of sets in the ambient space.

###### Example 0.1 (Box dimension and asymptotic behavior of
@xmath-neighborhoods of sets).

-    If @xmath , as @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , in the sense that @xmath
    , then @xmath and @xmath .

-    If @xmath , as @xmath , @xmath , then @xmath , but @xmath ,
    signaling that the set fills more space than in the above example.

-    Similarly, if @xmath , as @xmath , @xmath , then @xmath , but
    @xmath , signaling lower density of accumulation.

-    If @xmath , as @xmath , in the sense that there exist @xmath such
    that @xmath , then @xmath , but the upper and the lower Minkowski
    content do not necessarily coincide.

The sets that we study have an accumulation set. For example, the sets
consist of points accumulating at the origin, of spiral trajectories
accumulating at singular points or polycycles, of hyperbolas
accumulating at saddles etc. Box dimension and Minkowski contents of
such sets measure the density of the accumulation. In these cases, for
computing the behavior of the Lebesgue measure of their @xmath
-neighborhoods, we always use the direct, simple procedure that was
described in book of Tricot [ 53 ] . We divide the @xmath -neighborhood
into tail @xmath and nucleus @xmath , different in geometry, and compute
their behavior separately. The tail denotes the disjoint finitely many
first parts of the @xmath -neighborhood, while the remaining connected
part is called the nucleus .

We state some important properties of box dimension that we will use in
this work, from Falconer [ 17 ] . Let @xmath , such that @xmath exist.

-   ( box dimension under lipschitz mappings ) Let @xmath be a lipschitz
    mapping ¹ ¹ 1 There exists a constant @xmath such that @xmath . Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    In particular, if @xmath is bilipschitz ² ² 2 There exists constants
    @xmath such that @xmath , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    In particular, any diffeomorphism is a bilipschitz mapping.

-   ( the finite stability property ) @xmath . On the contrary, the
    countable stability property does not hold.

-   ( monotonicity ) Let @xmath . Then, @xmath .

-   ( box dimension of the closure ) @xmath .

-   ( Cartesian product ) @xmath .

Furthermore, the lipschitz property and the monotonicity property hold
for the lower and the upper box dimension. The finite stability property
holds only for the upper box dimension.

In the end, let us mention that the box dimension and the Minkowski
content, as shown in Example 0.1 , address only the first term in the
asymptotic development of the Lebesque measure of the @xmath
-neighborhood of the set. Further development does not matter. In this
thesis, we sometimes need finer information. We sometimes refer to the
whole function of the Lebesgue measure of the @xmath -neighborhoods,
@xmath , as a fractal property of the set, or to its asymptotic
development in @xmath up to a finite number of terms.

To avoid any confusion, we state here the definition of formal series
and (formal) asymptotic development that we use many times throughout
Chapters 1 and 2 .

Let @xmath be a sequence of functions @xmath , ordered by increasing
flatness at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For example, the scale @xmath can be the power scale, @xmath , the
logarithmic scale @xmath , the exponential scale @xmath , or any other
scale satisfying ( 0.1 ).

The series of functions @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

without addressing the question of convergence of the series, is called
the formal series . Furthermore, we say that a function @xmath has
formal asymptotic development ( 0.2 ) or a formal asymptotic development
in the scale @xmath , as @xmath , if, for every @xmath , it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the series ( 0.2 ) may or may not converge in a neighborhood
of @xmath . We do not raise the question of convergence. The function
@xmath develops in a given scale, but it may not be true that the series
actually converges on any small neighborhood of @xmath .

In the same way, we define the asymptotic development at @xmath .

We use formal asymptotic developments and formal series many times in
the thesis: asymptotic developments in Chebyshev scales in Chapter 1 ,
formal asymptotic development of @xmath -neighborhoods, as @xmath , in
Chapter 2 , formal changes of variables for parabolic diffeomorphisms in
Chapter 2 , etc.

In complex plane @xmath , we sometimes consider a formal Taylor series
at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

without addressing the question of its convergence. Usually, it is used
in the context of germs ³ ³ 3 The notion of the germ refers to a
function defined on some small neighborhood of the origin, not
addressing the size of its domain. of formal diffeomorphisms fixing 0 or
formal changes of variables , with @xmath and @xmath in ( 0.3 ). They
represent a composition of countably many changes of variables of the
type @xmath or @xmath , @xmath The composition may not converge.

The set of all formal series at @xmath will be denoted by @xmath . The
set @xmath denotes all formal series with initial term of order @xmath
or higher, @xmath .

On the other hand, if the series ( 0.3 ) converges around the origin, we
call it an analytic germ . The set of all analytic germs is denoted by
@xmath .

We adapt the usual convention and denote formal series by hat sign,
@xmath , while convergent series are denoted simply by @xmath .

By @xmath , we denote the @xmath -jet , @xmath , of a formal series
@xmath from ( 0.3 ).

Similarly as in real case, we say that a germ @xmath has formal
development @xmath , as @xmath , on some open sector @xmath centered at
the origin if, for every @xmath and every closed subsector @xmath ,
there exists a constant @xmath , such that it holds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, for two real, positive germs of real variable @xmath , we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if @xmath , for some @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if there exist @xmath , and @xmath , such that @xmath , for all @xmath .
The same notation is used for germs at infinity.

For real or complex germs @xmath and @xmath , we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if it holds that @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if there exists a constant @xmath and a punctured neighborhood @xmath of
@xmath , such that it holds @xmath .

## Chapter 1 Application of fractal analyis in reading multiplicity of
fixed points for diffeomorphisms on the real line

### 1.1 Introduction and definitions

In this chapter, we consider one-dimensional discrete systems on the
real line, generated by diffeomorphisms around their fixed points.

Let @xmath , @xmath , be a function with fixed point @xmath , which is a
diffeomorphism on @xmath , but not necessarily at the fixed point. This
function is called a generator of a dynamical system. If @xmath is
(sufficiently) differentiable at the fixed point @xmath , we refer to it
as case of differentiable generator . If not, we call it
non-differentiable generator case.

Let @xmath . Suppose that the sequence of iterates @xmath , @xmath ,
remains in @xmath . This sequence is called an orbit generated by
diffeomorphism @xmath , with initial point @xmath , and denoted

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Changing the initial point @xmath we get a one-dimensional discrete
dynamical system generated by @xmath . In this work, we consider
generators whose orbits around the fixed point accumulate at the fixed
point.

Fractal properties of orbit @xmath , namely its box dimension and
Minkowski content, are, by definition in Chapter ‣ Chapter 0
Introduction , closely related to the asymptotic behavior of the length
of the @xmath -neighborhood of the orbit, denoted @xmath , as @xmath .
In this chapter, we study the relationship between the multiplicity of a
fixed point of a function @xmath , and the dependence on @xmath of the
length of @xmath -neighborhoods of any orbit of @xmath near the fixed
point.

In Section 1.2 , we consider the case of a differentiable generator. The
results were mostly given by Elezović, Županović, Žubrinić in [ 13 ] .
In Section 1.3 , we generalize these results to non-differentiable
cases. Finally, in Section 1.4 , we apply the results to Poincaré maps
around monodromic limit periodic sets and to Abelian integrals. The
fractal method that considers fractal properties of only one orbit of
the Poincaré map is a new method in estimating cyclicity of limit
periodic sets. All results of this chapter are published in Mardešić,
Resman, Županović [ 35 ] .

We recall here the basic definitions we will use in this chapter. They
are mainly taken from the book of P. Mardešić about Chebyshev systems, [
34 ] .

Recall the standard definition of multiplicity of a fixed point of a
function differentiable at the fixed point . Let @xmath , @xmath ,
denote the family of @xmath -diffeomorphisms on @xmath ( @xmath
included), @xmath . Let @xmath have a fixed point at @xmath .

Let @xmath on @xmath . Any fixed point of @xmath becomes a zero point of
@xmath .

###### Definition 1.1 (Multiplicity of a fixed point of a differentiable
function).

We say that @xmath is a fixed point of @xmath of multiplicity @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and denote @xmath , if it holds that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

That is, if @xmath is a zero point of @xmath of multiplicity @xmath in
the standard sense.

Equivalently, since @xmath , @xmath , condition ( 1.1 ) can be expressed
in terms of Taylor series for @xmath . It holds that @xmath if and only
if @xmath is the first monomial with non-zero coefficient in Taylor
expansion of @xmath at @xmath .

Note that this definition strongly depends on sufficient
differentiability of @xmath at @xmath . However, we can put the
definition of multiplicity of fixed point for differentiable functions
in more general context of multiplicity of fixed point within some
family of functions. This definition does not depend on
differentiability, and can therefore be generalized to functions
non-differentiable at the fixed point. In fact, multiplicity of a fixed
point of @xmath denotes the number of fixed points that bifurcate from
the fixed point in small bifurcations of @xmath within the
differentiable family @xmath . This motivates the following definition:

###### Definition 1.2 (Multiplicity of a fixed point within a family of
functions, Definition 1.1.1 in [34]).

Let @xmath . Let @xmath be a topological space of parameters and let
@xmath , @xmath , be a family of functions, such that @xmath , for some
@xmath . Let @xmath have an isolated fixed point at @xmath . We say that
@xmath is a fixed point of multiplicity @xmath of function @xmath in the
family of functions @xmath if @xmath is the largest possible integer,
such that there exists a sequence of parameters @xmath , as @xmath ,
such that, for every @xmath , @xmath has @xmath distinct fixed points
@xmath different from @xmath and @xmath , as @xmath , @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If such @xmath does not exist, we say that @xmath .

If we denote @xmath , @xmath , the above definition can also be
expressed as multipicity of zero point @xmath of function @xmath in the
family of functions @xmath .

Note that the multiplicity from Definition 1.2 depends on the family
within which we consider function @xmath . If @xmath , then obviously

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 1.1 ([34]).

1.   (differentiable case) Let @xmath , with fixed point @xmath . It
    holds that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Here, the metric space of parameters is @xmath , with the distance
    function @xmath .

2.   (non-differentiable case) Let @xmath denote the family of all
    functions @xmath with asymptotic development ¹ ¹ 1 See the
    definition of asymptotic development in Chapter ‣ Chapter 0
    Introduction . , as @xmath , in the scale

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , extended to zero continuously by
    @xmath , @xmath . Let the family @xmath be derived from family the
    @xmath in the usual manner, i.e. @xmath .

    Let @xmath , @xmath , be such that @xmath , as @xmath , for some
    @xmath @xmath the first monomial with nonzero coefficient in the
    asymptotic development of @xmath is @xmath . Then,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    For example, if @xmath , then @xmath . On the other hand, if we
    consider @xmath in the subfamily unfolding in the subscale @xmath ,
    we get smaller multiplicity @xmath

We dedicate a paragraph to the proof of the differentiable case @xmath
The proof is important and illustrative, since it shows how fixed points
bifurcate from a fixed point of multiplicity greater than zero.

Proof of case 1.( [ 34 , Example 1.1.1] )

First, let function @xmath have a zero point of multiplicity bigger than
or equal to @xmath in the family @xmath . By Definition 1.2 and by
Rolle’s theorem applied @xmath times, passing to limit we conclude that
@xmath , @xmath .

Conversely, suppose that @xmath , @xmath . The first monomial in
expansion of @xmath is then @xmath or of higher order. Let @xmath ,
@xmath , as @xmath . We construct a sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are chosen small enough that @xmath , and, moreover, that
each @xmath has @xmath different zeros in @xmath .

First, we construct @xmath in @xmath steps from @xmath , adding @xmath
and @xmath missing monomials one by one, with appropriately chosen
coefficients. Take @xmath , where @xmath is small enough such that
@xmath and @xmath . Then, take @xmath , with @xmath small enough, such
that @xmath , @xmath and that @xmath has one zero point in @xmath
different from zero (possible by inverse function theorem applied to
@xmath ). We continue in this fashion up to @xmath , adding the last
monomial @xmath . Obviously, @xmath and we constructed @xmath different
zeros in @xmath . The same can be repeated for @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath @xmath

We note in this construction that, for constructing @xmath zero points
bifurcating from zero point @xmath of @xmath , we need @xmath degrees of
freedom ( @xmath powers up to the first monomial @xmath in @xmath ,
whose coefficients we then choose freely). That is, we need to consider
@xmath -parameter bifurcations of @xmath (of codimension @xmath ).

Proof of @xmath is done following the same idea, but we have to
introduce generalized derivatives that act on nondifferentiable scale in
the same manner as standard derivatives act on power scale. We will
introduce generalized derivatives below.

Differentiable generators that belong to the class @xmath , @xmath
unfold by Taylor formula in the scale of powers, @xmath . In our study
of non-differentiable generators, we restrict ourselves to special
classes, which have the asymptotic development in Chebyshev scales . The
definition of the Chebyshev scale is based on the notion of extended
complete Chebyshev (or Tchebycheff) systems (ECT-s), see [ 27 ] and [ 34
] . The notion of asymptotic Chebyshev scale was introduced by
Dumortier, Roussarie in [ 12 ] .

###### Definition 1.3 (Chebyshev scale).

A finite or infinite sequence @xmath of functions of the class @xmath ,
@xmath , is called a Chebyshev scale if the following holds:

-    A system of differential operators @xmath , @xmath , is well
    defined on @xmath inductively by the following division and
    differentiation algorithm:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    for every @xmath , except possibly at @xmath , to which they are
    extended by continuity.

-    The functions @xmath are strictly increasing on @xmath , @xmath .

-   @xmath , for @xmath , @xmath .

We call @xmath the @xmath -th generalized derivative of @xmath in the
scale @xmath .

###### Example 1.2 (Examples of Chebyshev scales).

1.   differentiable case: @xmath ,

2.   non-differentiable cases:

    -   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

    -   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

    -   @xmath

    -    More generally, any scale of monomials of the type @xmath ,
        ordered by increasing flatness:

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

We say that a function @xmath has a development of order @xmath in
Chebyshev scale @xmath if there exist coefficients @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the generalized derivatives @xmath , @xmath , verify @xmath (in the
limit sense). Similarly, we say that @xmath has an asymptotic
development in Chebyshev scale @xmath if there exists a sequence @xmath
such that for every @xmath there exists @xmath such that ( 1.2 ) holds.
Note that this is just a reformulation of definition of asymptotic
development in a scale from Section 0.3 for Chebyshev scales.

The generalized derivatives @xmath act on Chebyshev scales in the same
way as standard derivatives act on the power scale: the @xmath -th
generalized derivative annulates the first @xmath monomials of the
Chebyshev scale. Therefore, in the asymptotic development ( 1.2 ) above,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, it is equivalent

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that a parametrized family @xmath has a uniform development of
order @xmath in a family of Chebyshev scales @xmath , if there exist
coefficients @xmath , @xmath , such that it holds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the generalized derivatives @xmath , @xmath , verify @xmath , in the
limit sense uniformly with respect to @xmath .

The following lemma is a generalization of the statement from Example
1.1 ,1., where differentiable case was considered. It is a combination
of results from Lemma 1.2.2 in [ 34 ] and Joyal’s Theorem 21. in [ 46 ]
.

###### Lemma 1.1 (Generalized derivatives and multiplicity).

Let @xmath be a family of functions having a uniform development of
order @xmath in a family of Chebyshev scales @xmath , @xmath . Let
@xmath . Let @xmath be derived from @xmath in the usual way, @xmath . If
the generalized derivatives of @xmath at @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

(that is, if @xmath is the first nonzero coefficient in the development
of @xmath ), then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, if @xmath , @xmath , and the matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

is of maximal rank @xmath , then ( 1.4 ) is equivalent to @xmath .

Idea of the proof. Proof is similar as in Example 1.1 , using
generalized derivatives instead of standard. The distance function on
@xmath is given analogously by @xmath , @xmath .

One direction follows as before by Rolle’s theorem. The contrary does
not hold without regularity assumption ( 1.5 ). The difficulty here is
that we are restricted by the family in the choice of small deformations
@xmath that, added to @xmath , need to generate @xmath small zeros.
Nevertheless, if condition ( 1.5 ) is satisfied, by the implicit
function theorem we get freedom in choice of small coefficients @xmath ,
by expressing parameters @xmath , @xmath as functions of independent
variables @xmath . @xmath

### 1.2 Generators differentiable at a fixed point

In this section, we consider generators sufficiently differentiable at a
fixed point and state a bijective correspondence between the
multiplicity of the fixed point and the box dimension of any orbit
tending to the fixed point. The results are just a reformulation of
results from Elezović, Županović, Žubrinić (see Theorems 1, 5 and Lemma
1 in [ 13 ] ).

###### Theorem 1.1 (Multiplicity of fixed points and box dimension of
orbits, differentiable case, Theorem 1 from [13] reformulated).

Let @xmath be sufficiently differentiable on @xmath , @xmath and
positive on @xmath . Let @xmath and let @xmath be any orbit with initial
point @xmath sufficiently close to 0.

If @xmath , then it holds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath and additionally @xmath on @xmath , then it holds that

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.7)
  -- -- -- -------

Moreover, for @xmath , a bijective correspondence holds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

By Taylor formula applied to a sufficiently differentiable function
@xmath , we get @xmath . Therefore we are under assumptions of
Theorems 1 and 5 from [ 13 ] and the dimension result ( 1.8 ) follows
from these theorems. However, the asymptotic development of @xmath was
not explicitely computed there, therefore we do it here.

We estimate the length @xmath directly, dividing the @xmath
-neighborhood of @xmath in two parts: the nucleus, @xmath , and the
tail, @xmath . This way of computing was suggested by Tricot [ 53 ] .
The tail is the union of all disjoint @xmath -intervals of the @xmath
-neighborhood, before they start to overlap. It holds that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath denote the critical index separating the tail and the
nucleus. It describes the moment when @xmath -intervals around the
points start to overlap. The critical index is well-defined since the
points of orbit @xmath tend to zero with strictly decreasing distances
between consecutive points. We have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Denote by @xmath the distances between consecutive points. To compute
asymptotic behavior of @xmath , as @xmath , we have to solve (to first
term only)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

By Theorem 1 in [ 13 ] , in case @xmath the points @xmath of orbit
@xmath and their distances @xmath have the following asymptotic
behavior:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In case @xmath and @xmath , it either holds

1.  @xmath , if @xmath , or

2.  @xmath , @xmath , if @xmath .

Directly iterating @xmath , and since @xmath @xmath , we get the
following estimates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and some positive constants @xmath and @xmath .

We illustrate further computations only in case @xmath , @xmath . Other
cases can be treated similary. Using ( 1.11 ) and ( 1.2 ), we conclude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , @xmath , from ( 1.13 ) and ( 1.10 ) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By ( 1.9 ), @xmath , as @xmath . ∎

In the case @xmath (equivalently, @xmath ), the fixed point zero of
@xmath is called a hyperbolic fixed point . The definition of a
hyperbolic fixed point of a diffeomorphism can be found in e.g. [ 40 ,
Definition 1] . We distinguish between two hyperbolic cases, @xmath or
@xmath . We call the latter case degenerate hyperbolic . If @xmath , the
fixed point zero is called a non-hyperbolic fixed point .

At hyperbolic fixed points, the convergence of orbits to the fixed point
is exponentially fast . Furthermore, at degenerate hyperbolic fixed
points the convergence is faster than at standard hyperbolic points. To
illustrate, Figure 1.1 below shows orbits accumulating at fixed point
zero of differentiable generators in degenerate hyperbolic, hyperbolic
and nonhyperbolic cases.

We see in Theorem 1.1 that trivial box dimension of orbits in hyperbolic
cases recognizes exponentially fast convergence. However, box dimension
of orbits cannot distinguish between hyperbolic and faster, degenerate
hyperbolic cases. On the other hand, we see in ( 1.7 ) in Theorem 1.1
that the first term in the asymptotic development in @xmath of the
length of the @xmath -neighborhood of orbit shows the difference.

Already on this hyperbolic fixed point example we have noticed that more
precise information is carried in the first asymptotic term of @xmath
-neighborhood than in box dimension. The idea of considering the
behavior of the length of the @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits instead of
only the box dimension of orbits will be important in non-differentiable
generator cases. By its very definition, box dimension compares the
length of the @xmath -neighborhood to power scale in @xmath . Therefore,
box dimension carries complete information on the asymptotic behavior of
the length only in special cases, when behavior is of power type. This
was the case for differentiable generators at non-hyperbolic fixed
points treated in Teorem 1.1 , see formula ( 1.6 ). In these cases, box
dimension turns out to be a sufficient tool for recognizing
multiplicity.

### 1.3 Non-differentiable generators at a fixed point

Note that in Theorem 1.1 in Section 1.2 we assumed the generator to be
differentiable at fixed point @xmath . In this section, we generalize
Theorem 1.1 to non-differentiable generators at @xmath , but with
asymptotic developments in Chebyshev scales. All the notation and
results from this section are published in Mardešić, Resman, Županović [
35 ] .

We first state definitions we introduced in [ 35 ] that compare the
asymptotic behavior of functions at @xmath with power functions.

###### Definition 1.4 (Weak comparability to powers and sublinearity).

A positive function @xmath , @xmath , is weakly comparable to powers if
there exist @xmath and constants @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We call the left-hand side of ( 1.14 ) the lower power condition and the
right-hand side the upper power condition . A function @xmath is
sublinear if it satisfies the lower power condition and @xmath .

A similar notion of comparability with power functions in Hardy fields
appears in literature, see Fliess, Rudolph [ 19 ] and Rosenlicht [ 45 ]
. A Hardy field @xmath is a field of real-valued functions of the real
variable defined on @xmath , @xmath , closed under differentiation and
with valuation @xmath defined in an ordered Abelian group. Let @xmath be
positive on @xmath and let @xmath , @xmath . If there exist integers
@xmath and positive constants @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is said that @xmath and @xmath belong to the same comparability
class/are comparable in @xmath .
Let us state a sufficient condition for comparability from Rosenlicht [
45 ] , Proposition 4:

###### Proposition 1.1 (Proposition 4 in [45]).

Let @xmath be a Hardy field, @xmath nonzero positive elements of @xmath
such that @xmath , and @xmath . If

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath and @xmath are comparable.

The condition ( 1.16 ) is equivalent to (see Theorem 0 in [ 45 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Rosenlicht’s condition ( 1.16 ), i.e. ( 1.17 ) is stronger than our
condition ( 1.14 ) of weak comparability to powers. If @xmath (( 1.14 )
obviously follows), then @xmath is comparable to power functions in the
sense ( 1.15 ).

We explain the conditions from Definition 1.4 on following Examples 1.3
and 1.4 .

###### Example 1.3 (Weak comparability to powers and sublinearity).

1.   Functions of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    are weakly comparable to powers.
    This class obviously includes functions of the form @xmath and
    @xmath , for @xmath and @xmath . If additionally @xmath , they are
    also sublinear.

2.   Functions of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    do not satisfy the lower power condition in @xmath .

3.   Infinitely flat (at @xmath ) functions of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    do not satisfy the upper power condition in @xmath , but they are
    sublinear.

4.   More generally, functions infinitely flat at zero ² ² 2 @xmath is
    infinitely flat at zero if all the derivatives vanish at @xmath :
    @xmath , for all @xmath (in the limit sense). do not satisfy the
    upper power condition.

    Proof of 4. Suppose the contrary. The upper power condition can
    easily be reformulated as @xmath . This implies that @xmath is a
    nonincreasing positive function on @xmath . On the other hand, if
    @xmath is infinitely flat at @xmath , then, by L’Hospital rule,
    @xmath , for every @xmath . In particular, it is true for @xmath .
    This is a contradiction. ∎

The converse of 4. in Example 1.3 does not hold – the upper power
condition is not equivalent to not being infinitely flat at zero. There
exist functions that are not infinitely flat, but nevertheless do not
satisfy the upper power condition on any small interval. We construct an
example in Example 1.4 .

###### Example 1.4 (Function not infinitely flat at zero, upper power
condition not satisfied).

In the construction, the main idea is to bound the function by power
functions @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , therefore it cannot be infinitely
flat. Next we construct intervals, tending to zero, on which its
logarithmic growth is faster than the logarithmic growth of @xmath .
This violates the upper power condition. We construct function @xmath in
logarithmic chart. That is, we construct function @xmath on some
interval @xmath .

Let @xmath and let @xmath . Let us take @xmath close to @xmath . The
segment @xmath connects the points @xmath and @xmath . Now we choose
point @xmath such that @xmath (to ensure that @xmath is increasing). We
get segment @xmath by connecting @xmath and @xmath . We repeat the
procedure with @xmath instead of @xmath to get segment @xmath , etc.
Inductively, we get the sequence @xmath tending to @xmath , as @xmath ,
and the sequence of segments @xmath which are becoming steeper and
steeper very quickly, see Figure 1.2 .

The graph of our function @xmath is the union of the segments @xmath ,
smoothened on edges. Obviously @xmath is bounded by @xmath and @xmath .
Furthermore, if we take the sequence @xmath such that @xmath , we
compute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the sequence @xmath , tending to @xmath , it holds that @xmath , as
@xmath . Therefore, @xmath does not satisfy the upper power condition.

#### 1.3.1 Main results

We now state our first main theorem about the asymptotic behavior in
@xmath of the length of the @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits, which is
valid also for non-differentiable generators at a fixed point. Its proof
is in Subsection 1.3.2 .

###### Theorem 1.2 (Asymptotic behavior of lengths of
@xmath-neighborhoods of orbits, (non) differentiable case).

Let @xmath be positive on @xmath and let @xmath ³ ³ 3 @xmath is meant in
the limit sense, as @xmath . . Assume that @xmath is a sublinear
function. Let @xmath . For any initial point @xmath sufficiently close
to the origin, it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sublinearity condition @xmath in the lower power condition cannot be
omitted from Theorem 1.2 :

###### Remark 1.1 (Sublinearity in Theorem 1.2).

The condition @xmath in the lower power condition in Theorem 1.2 cannot
be weakened. If we take, for example, the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it obviously satisfies all assumptions of Theorem 1.2 , except
sublinearity: the lower power condition holds only for @xmath . If we
compute @xmath for this function directly (as it is computed in the
proof of Theorem 1.2 in Subsection 1.3.2 ), we get that @xmath tends to
infinity, as @xmath , and therefore the conclusion ( 1.18 ) is not true.

On the other hand, for functions of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are obviously sublinear with @xmath , the same computation shows
that @xmath , as @xmath .

In the sequel, we will consider generators which unfold in Chebyshev
scales. These classes of generators are important in applications, see
Section 1.4 . Our goal is to recover an analogue of Theorem 1.1 in
non-differentiable cases: to read multiplicity of fixed points of such
generators in appropriate families from asymptotic behavior of the
lengths of @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits. Theorem 1.2 shows that, for
non-differentiable generators, the behavior of length of @xmath
-neighborhoods of orbits in @xmath is not of power-type. On the other
hand, by its definition, box dimension compares lengths with power scale
and hides precise information on behavior. We illustrate it on the
following example. It is an example of generators distinct in growth,
that have equal box dimensions of orbits. The difference in density of
orbits is too small for box dimension to see it. It is not visible in
power scale.

###### Example 1.5 (Deficiency of box dimension for non-differentiable
generators).

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath and @xmath . For any two orbits generated by @xmath and
@xmath , with initial point close to the origin, it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Box dimension for @xmath follows from Theorem 1.1 . For @xmath , we have
that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By Theorem 1.2 , @xmath , @xmath , and the result follows by definition
of box dimension. ∎

To solve this problem, for a given class of Chebyshev generators, using
Theorem 1.2 , we find an appropriate scale to compare lengths of @xmath
-neighborhoods with. We were motivated by the notion of generalized
Minkowski content that exists in literature, see He, Lapidus [ 21 ] ,
and Žubrinić, Županović [ 56 ] . It was suitable (instead of standard
Minkowski content) in situations where the leading term of the Lebesgue
measure of the @xmath -neighborhood of a set is not a power function.
Then, the Lebesgue measure was compared to powers of @xmath multiplied
by an appropriate gauge function . Here, we define generalized Minkowski
content with respect to a family of gauge functions .

Let @xmath be a Chebyshev scale, such that monomials @xmath are positive
and strictly increasing on @xmath , for @xmath . Suppose that @xmath has
a development in scale @xmath of order @xmath and, moreover, that @xmath
satisfies assumptions from Theorem 1.2 and the upper power condition.
Let @xmath . By Theorem 1.2 , the @xmath -neighborhood @xmath should be
compared to the inverted scale @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.5.

By lower (upper) generalized Minkowski content of orbit @xmath with
respect to @xmath , @xmath , we denote the limits

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

respectively. Furthermore, the moments of jump in generalized lower
(upper) Minkowski contents,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

are called lower (upper) critical Minkowski order of @xmath with respect
to the scale @xmath . If @xmath , we call it critical Minkowski order
with respect to the scale @xmath and denote it simply by @xmath .

It is easy to see from Theorem 1.2 and Lemma 1.2 . @xmath that the upper
and lower generalized Minkowski contents @xmath , viewed as functions of
discrete parameter @xmath , @xmath , pass from the value @xmath ,
through a finite value and drop to @xmath as @xmath grows. Moreover, the
critical index @xmath is the same for upper and lower content and
therefore @xmath . This is a behavior analogous to the behavior of the
standard upper (lower) Minkowski contents as function of continuous
parameter @xmath , where box dimension denoted the moment of jump from
@xmath to @xmath . Generalized Minkowski content as function of @xmath
is shown in Figure 1.3 . Compare it to Figure 1 in the definition of
Minkowski content and box dimension.

Furthermore, by Theorem 1.2 , the behavior of the length of the @xmath
-neighborhood of orbits is independent of the choice of the initial
point @xmath from the attracting basin of @xmath . Therefore all orbits
of @xmath have the same critical Minkowski order .

###### Remark 1.2 (Box dimension and critical Minkowski order for
differentiable generators).

Let @xmath be a differentiable function. The box dimension of orbits of
@xmath is bijectively related to their critical Minkowski order with
respect to the Taylor scale, by the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If @xmath , then it has an asymptotic development of order @xmath in the
differentiable, Taylor scale, @xmath . Assume @xmath , @xmath . By
Theorem 1.1 , @xmath , @xmath . This gives @xmath and @xmath . In case
@xmath , by Theorem 1.1 , the asymptotic development of @xmath is given
in ( 1.6 ), and we can conclude directly by definitions that @xmath ,
@xmath . ∎

We saw in Remark 1.2 that box dimension and critical Minkowski order
carry the same information for differentiable generators. However, in
non-differentiable cases, critical Minkowski order with respect to an
appropriately chosen scale is a more precise measure for density of the
orbit than is the box dimension. An example follows.

###### Example 1.6 (Example 1.5 revisited).

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Example 1.5 . Their orbits share the same
box dimension. To get more precise information, we need to define a
scale in which @xmath and @xmath both have developments, for example

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The critical Minkowski orders of their orbits @xmath and @xmath with
respect to scale @xmath are distinct numbers:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

showing a difference in density of orbits.

Finally, we state the main theorem of Section 1.3 . Theorem 1.3 is a
generalization of Theorem 1.1 to non-differentiable cases. Derivatives
are replaced by generalized derivatives in an appropriate Chebyshev
scale, and box dimension by critical Minkowski order with respect to the
given scale. With this new notions, we recover a bijective
correspondence between the multiplicity of a fixed point and critical
Minkowski order of any orbit tending to the fixed point. The proof is in
Subsection 1.3.2 .

Let @xmath be a family of @xmath -functions on @xmath , admitting a
uniform asymptotic development ( 1.3 ) of order @xmath in a family of
Chebyshev scales @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . Let @xmath , where @xmath are positive and strictly
increasing on @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3 (Multiplicity of fixed points and critical Minkowski
order of orbits, (non) differentiable case).

Let @xmath be a function from the family @xmath above, satisfying all
assumptions of Theorem 1.2 and the upper power condition. Let @xmath .
Let @xmath . Then the following claims are equivalent:

1.  @xmath , for @xmath , and @xmath ,  for some @xmath ,
    @xmath that is, @xmath for some @xmath @xmath

2.  @xmath , @xmath ,

3.  @xmath .

If, moreover, @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath or @xmath is also equivalent to

1.  @xmath

Without this regularity assumption, @xmath , @xmath or @xmath implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The statement does not depend on the choice of the initial point @xmath
in the attracting basin of @xmath .

The upper power condition in Theorem 1.3 cannot be omitted:

###### Remark 1.3 (The upper power condition in Theorem 1.3).

The upper power condition assumption on @xmath is needed in Theorem 1.3
. As a counterexample, we take the following Chebyshev scale

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let e.g. @xmath , @xmath =id @xmath . Obviously, @xmath does not satisfy
the upper power condition. Since @xmath and @xmath , by Lemma 1.1 , it
holds that @xmath . On the other hand, @xmath , therefore critical
Minkowski order @xmath is infinite. In this case, we are not able to
read the multiplicity neither from the critical Minkowski order of
orbits nor from behavior of the length of the @xmath -neighborhoods of
orbits.

In the differentiable case, we see that differentiation diminishes
critical Minkowski order by 1. Let @xmath and suppose @xmath . Put
@xmath and @xmath . By Theorem 1.1 and Remark 1.2 , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a differentiable Chebyshev scale.

The same property is valid in non-differentiable cases when @xmath has
asymptotic development in a Chebyshev scale, if the derivatives are
substituted by generalized derivatives in the scale. The following
corollary is a direct consequence of Theorem 1.3 and definition of
generalized derivatives:

###### Corollary 1.1 (Behavior of the critical Minkowski order of orbits
under differentiation).

Let @xmath be a Chebyshev scale and let @xmath denote the Chebyshev
scale of the first generalized derivatives of @xmath , that is, @xmath .
Let @xmath have an asymptotic development of order @xmath in scale
@xmath and let @xmath and @xmath satisfy assumptions of Theorem 1.2 and
the upper power condition. Let @xmath id @xmath , @xmath id @xmath . It
holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary initial points sufficiently close
to 0.

#### 1.3.2 Proofs of the main results

In the proof of Theorem 1.2 and Theorem 1.3 we need the following lemma:

###### Lemma 1.2 (Inverse property).

Let @xmath and let @xmath be positive, strictly increasing functions on
@xmath .

1.   If there exists a positive constant @xmath such that the upper
    power condition holds,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

    then

      -- -- -------- -------- --
            @xmath   @xmath   
            @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -- -------- -------- --

2.   If there exists a positive constant @xmath such that the lower
    power condition holds,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.21)
      -- -------- -- --------

    then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

@xmath From @xmath we have that there exist constants @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Putting @xmath and applying @xmath (strictly increasing) on the above
inequality we get that there exists @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

For each constant @xmath we have, for small enough @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Combining @xmath and @xmath , we get that there exist constants @xmath
and @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, using property @xmath and inequality @xmath , for small enough
@xmath we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. @xmath , as @xmath .

@xmath Suppose @xmath . We prove that @xmath by proving that limit
superior and limit inferior are equal to zero. Suppose the contrary,
that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By definition of limit inferior, there exists a sequence @xmath , as
@xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 1.25 ) it follows that there exist @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, as in @xmath , by a change of variables @xmath , @xmath , and
applying @xmath (strictly increasing) on ( 1.26 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is obviously a contradiction with @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be proven in the same way that limit superior is equal to zero.

Now suppose @xmath . Same as above, we prove that @xmath .

@xmath It is easy to see by the change of variables @xmath that property
@xmath of @xmath is equivalent to property @xmath of @xmath . The
statement then follows from @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 1.4 (Counterexamples in Lemma 1.2).

In Lemma 1.2 . @xmath , upper power condition @xmath is important. We
take, for example, functions @xmath and @xmath . They do not satisfy
@xmath and, obviously,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can do the same for lower power condition @xmath in Lemma 1.2 .
@xmath , by considering, for example, @xmath and @xmath .

Proof of Theorem 1.2 .

From lower power condition together with @xmath , we get that @xmath and
that @xmath is strictly increasing on @xmath . It can easily be checked
that @xmath and @xmath , as @xmath . Denote by @xmath and @xmath the
nucleus and the tail of the @xmath -neighborhood of the sequence. That
are @xmath -neighborhoods of two subsets of the orbit satisfying the
inequality @xmath for the nucleus, and @xmath for the tail. Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the length of the nucleus, and @xmath the length of the
tail of the @xmath -neighborhood. The idea of division in the tail and
the nucleus stems from Tricot [ 53 ] . To compute the lengths, we have
to find the critical index @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, the smallest index @xmath such that @xmath -neighborhoods of
the points @xmath etc start to overlap. Then we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

First we estimate @xmath . From @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is strictly increasing, from @xmath we easily get @xmath .
Since @xmath satisfies the lower power condition, by Lemma 1.2 . @xmath
it follows @xmath . This, together with @xmath and @xmath , implies
@xmath .

Now let us estimate the length of the tail, @xmath , by estimating
@xmath .
Putting @xmath , from @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some fixed @xmath .

As in ( 1.38 ) below, we get that @xmath tends to @xmath , as @xmath
tends to infinity, and thus we can choose the integer @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some constants @xmath .

Since the function @xmath is strictly decreasing on @xmath and @xmath ,
the sum @xmath is equal to the sum of the areas of the rectangles in
Figure 1.4 . @xmath and, analogously, the sum @xmath is equal to the sum
of the areas of the rectangles in Figure 1.4 . @xmath . Therefore, we
have the following inequalities:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 1.32 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

so finally, putting ( 1.34 ) in ( 1.33 ) and using ( 1.31 ), we get the
following estimate for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting @xmath , from the lower power condition we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, consequently, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now substitution @xmath in the integral @xmath together with @xmath
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

It holds

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for some @xmath , so @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

From @xmath and @xmath , we now conclude that @xmath . Therefore @xmath
becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . From ( 1.29 ), we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath and @xmath small enough. This, together with @xmath
obtained above, by ( 1.27 ) implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Proof of Theorem 1.3 .

We first prove @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . That is, @xmath , as
@xmath . Theorem 1.2 applied to @xmath gives @xmath . Since @xmath , by
Lemma 1.2 . @xmath we get that @xmath . Therefore, @xmath . Since @xmath
satisfies the upper power condition, by Lemma 1.2 and by definition of
the critical Minkowski order, we get @xmath .

Now we prove @xmath . Suppose @xmath and @xmath , for some @xmath . As
above, we conclude that @xmath , which is a contradiction. Therefore
@xmath and, again as above, @xmath , @xmath .

By Lemma 1.1 , we conclude that @xmath implies @xmath . If, moreover,
regularity condition from theorem holds, by Lemma 1.1 , @xmath is
equivalent to @xmath . ∎

### 1.4 Application to cyclicity for planar vector fields using fractal
analysis of Poincaré maps

A problem closely related to the open @xmath Hilbert problem ⁴ ⁴ 4
@xmath Hilbert problem asks about the existence of an upper bound @xmath
, depending only on the degree @xmath of the field, on the number of
limit cycles in planar polynomial fields. is determining the cyclicity
of limit periodic sets of analytic planar vector fields. A good overview
of the problem and precise definitions are given in the book of
Roussarie [ 46 , Chapter 2] .

A limit periodic set @xmath of a vector field @xmath for the unfolding
@xmath , @xmath , topological space, is an invariant set for @xmath ,
from which limit periodic sets (isolated periodic orbits) bifurcate in
the unfolding @xmath . The maximal number of limit cycles that bifurcate
from @xmath in unfolding @xmath is called cyclicity of @xmath in the
unfolding @xmath , and denoted @xmath . We are interested in the
cyclicity of @xmath in the universal unfolding ⁵ ⁵ 5 an unfolding
topologically equivalent to any other unfolding, thus incorporating all
possible phase portraits in all possible unfoldings of @xmath . We refer
to it only as cyclicity of @xmath . Similarly, we can estimate cyclicity
in a generic unfolding of @xmath , that means, in a sufficiently general
unfolding.

We consider monodromic ⁶ ⁶ 6 accumulated on at least one side by spiral
trajectories limit periodic sets of finite codimension ⁷ ⁷ 7 i.e. not of
centre type . Elementary monodromic limit periodic sets are elliptic
singular points (strong and weak foci), limit cycles and saddle or
saddle-node polycycles.

Let @xmath , denote the family of first return maps or Poincaré maps for
the unfolding @xmath of @xmath , defined on a transversal to @xmath .
Let @xmath denote the displacement functions . Let @xmath and let @xmath
, @xmath denote the Poincaré map and the displacement function around
@xmath .

It is known that @xmath are diffeomorphisms @xmath , and that @xmath has
an isolated fixed point at @xmath corresponding to the intersection of
the transversal with @xmath . Moreover, @xmath have uniform asymptotic
developments in family of Chebyshev scales, as @xmath . The family
@xmath is differentiable at @xmath in case of elliptic points and limit
cycle cases. At saddle polycycles, the family is not differentiable at
fixed point zero. This can be found in e.g. [ 46 , Chapters 4,5] . On
the other hand, bifurcated limit cycles correspond to fixed points of
Poincaré maps @xmath . The number of limit cycles that bifurcate from a
monodromic limit periodic set in an unfolding is, directly by
definition, equal to the multiplicity of the fixed point zero of the
Poincaré map in the family of Poincaré maps for the given unfolding, see
e.g. Proposition 2 in [ 12 ] .

Our approach to cyclicity using fractal analysis of orbits is the
following. After establishing in which scale @xmath unfolds in a generic
unfolding @xmath , we apply results from Section 1.2 to Poincaré maps.
The behavior of the @xmath -neighborhood of any (only one) orbit of the
Poincaré map @xmath around limit periodic set @xmath , if compared to an
appropriate scale for generic unfolding, reveals cyclicity. The behavior
is measured by critical Minkowski order of the orbit with respect to the
appropriate scale. Thus, fractal properties of orbits contain
information on cyclicity.

The gain of this fractal method is that critical Minkowski order of only
one orbit can be determined numerically (after the scale is known). On
the other hand, the limits of the method lie in the fact that for saddle
polycycles more complicated than saddle loop, the Chebyshev scale for
@xmath , or even a reasonable superset of the scale, is in general not
known without some very strong assumptions on the saddle. In these
cases, we do not know with which scale we should compare the behavior of
@xmath -neighborhoods of orbits of @xmath , and our method cannot be
applied.

#### 1.4.1 Limit cycle

Let the field @xmath have a stable or semistable limit cycle @xmath and
let @xmath be an arbitrary analytic unfolding of @xmath . The asymptotic
development of displacement functions @xmath , as @xmath , can be found
in e.g. [ 46 , 4.1.1] . The functions @xmath are analytic on @xmath ,
for @xmath close to @xmath . Expanding in Taylor series, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, the family @xmath has a uniform asymptotic development of any
order @xmath in the Chebyshev scale

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be any orbit of @xmath at a transversal to the limit cycle
@xmath . By Theorem 1.2 , to obtain an upper bound on cyclicity of
@xmath , @xmath should be compared to the inverted scale, @xmath . By
Theorem 1.3 , it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath , as @xmath , is equivalent to @xmath . Moreover, under
regularity assumption ( 1.19 ) on the unfolding @xmath , we get the
equality in ( 1.39 ). The unfoldings satisfying ( 1.19 ) are generic
enough, and we get an upper bound on cyclicity of @xmath in generic
unfoldings.

#### 1.4.2 Weak focus

Let @xmath be a stable weak focus point of the field @xmath ( @xmath has
two strictly imaginary, conjugated complex eigenvalues). The asymptotic
development of displacement functions @xmath for an arbitrary analytic
unfolding @xmath of @xmath can be found in [ 46 , 4.1.2] . The
displacement functions are again analytic on @xmath , for @xmath close
to @xmath , but by symmetry argument for spiral trajectories around
@xmath , the leading monomials can only be the ones with odd exponents:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes some linear combination of monomials from Taylor
expansion of order strictly greater than @xmath and with coefficients
depending on @xmath . Moreover, the family @xmath has a uniform
asymptotic development in a family of Chebyshev scales @xmath of any
order @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To obtain an upper bound on the cyclicity of the focus, by Theorem 1.2 ,
@xmath should be compared to the inverted scale of @xmath , @xmath . We
proceed as in the example above.

#### 1.4.3 Saddle loop

Let @xmath have a stable saddle loop @xmath at @xmath , with ratio of
hyperbolicity of the saddle @xmath (i.e. both eigenvalues of @xmath are
real, with ratio @xmath ). Suppose @xmath is an analytic unfolding of
@xmath , such that each @xmath has a saddle point of ratio @xmath at
@xmath , with the same stable and unstable manifolds (the loop, on the
other hand, is broken in the unfolding).

The asymptotic development as @xmath of the family @xmath of
displacement functions on a transversal to the loop is by [ 46 , Chapter
5] given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath , and @xmath denote linear combinations of monomials of the
type @xmath of strictly greater order ⁸ ⁸ 8 order on monomials @xmath is
defined by increasing flatness, @xmath if ( @xmath ) or ( @xmath and
@xmath ) than @xmath , and @xmath is the Roussarie-Ecalle compensator
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The family @xmath cannot be extended analyticaly to @xmath , but has a
uniform asymptotic development in the non-differentiable family of
Chebyshev scales @xmath of any order:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Putting @xmath in ( 1.4.3 ), we get the following expansion for the
displacement function @xmath around the loop ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To obtain information on cyclicity of @xmath in the unfolding @xmath ,
@xmath should be compared to the inverted scale of the scale

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The critical Minkowski order signals the moment when the comparability
occurs. By Theorem 1.3 , if @xmath , as @xmath , @xmath , then @xmath .
If @xmath , @xmath , then @xmath . Consequently, the cyclicity of the
loop is less than or equal to @xmath , @xmath respectively. Equality can
be obtained if the unfolding @xmath is regular enough so that the
regularity condition ( 1.19 ) is satisfied. We can think of it again as
a generic unfolding.

#### 1.4.4 Hamiltonian 2-saddle cycle with constant hyperbolicity ratios

Suppose @xmath is an analytic unfolding of a Hamiltonian 2-saddle cycle
@xmath of the field @xmath , in which saddle points are preserved and at
least one separatrix remains unbroken. Such a situation appears for
polycycles having part of the line at infinity as the unbroken
separatrix. Suppose that the ratios of hyperbolicity of both saddles
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath are @xmath . This example is taken from [ 8
] .

The breaking parameter of the broken separatrix is denoted by @xmath ,
then @xmath . By @xmath , we parametrize the (inner side) of the
transversal to the stable manifold of one of the saddles, and we choose
the saddle whose stable manifold is on the unbroken separatrix, say
@xmath . In search of the scale for the asymptotic development of
displacement functions @xmath , for simplicity we can consider the
family of maps @xmath obtained from @xmath by composition with analytic
family:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath represent Dulac (transition) maps of the saddles
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath is the regular map along the broken
separatrix and @xmath the regular map along the unbroken separatrix.
Obviously, @xmath equals the breaking parameter of the separatrix,
@xmath , and @xmath for the unbroken separatrix. Using the developments
of Dulac maps from [ 46 ] and subtracting the developments @xmath and
@xmath , similarly as in the example of saddle loop, @xmath has a
uniform development in the monomials from two Chebyshev scales @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

For the development, see [ 8 ] . For each monomial @xmath , @xmath , it
necessarily holds that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath
are as defined in the section above. They are known as independent
compensators, since they are not comparable by flatness, and thus
disable the concatenation of @xmath and @xmath in one Chebyshev scale.

Therefore we additionally suppose that the ratios of hyperbolicity
@xmath and @xmath are preserved throughout the unfolding. Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case the Chebyshev scale in which all of @xmath (and then also
displacements @xmath ) for the unfolding @xmath have uniform development
is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Note that this scale is obtained as superset of the actual scale for the
unfolding @xmath . We do not have precise information on the actual
scale. To obtain an upper bound on cyclicity of 2-cycle @xmath in the
unfolding @xmath , by Theorem 1.2 , @xmath for any orbit of the Poincaré
map should be computed numerically and compared to the inverted scale of
@xmath . It holds that @xmath .

Let us note here that this upper bound is not optimal, since the family
of scales @xmath is taken to be the largest possible for a given
problem. It is too optimistic to hope that regularity condition ( 1.19 )
is satisfied with this family of scales: there may be terms in them that
do not actually appear in the unfolding. Better results on upper bound
are obtained in [ 12 ] , using asymptotic developments of Abelian
integrals, and in [ 20 ] . In [ 20 ] , the upper bound is given in terms
of characteristic numbers of holonomy maps, not using asymptotic
development of the Poincaré map.

### 1.5 Application to number of zeros of Abelian integrals

Abelian integrals are integrals of polynomial @xmath -form @xmath along
the continuous family of @xmath -cycles of the polynomial Hamiltonian
field, lying in the level sets of the Hamiltonian @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In @xmath , determining zero points of Abelian integrals has been used
as a tool for determining cyclicity of limit periodic sets of
Hamiltonian vector fields (for details and examples see e.g. Zoladek [
61 , Chapter 6] ).

Suppose that we have the following @xmath -perturbed family @xmath of a
Hamiltonian field @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are polynomials and @xmath . Let @xmath be the polynomial
@xmath -form defined by @xmath . Let @xmath be a critical value of the
Hamiltonian (the level set @xmath corresponding to limit periodic set
@xmath in whose cyclicity we are interested), such that there exists
@xmath and a continuous family of 1-cycles @xmath belonging to the level
sets @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be a transversal to the family of
cycles @xmath on a small neighborhood of @xmath , parametrized by @xmath
. Then (see e.g. Zoladek [ 61 , Chapter 6] ), the family of displacement
functions @xmath on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the Abelian integrals for Hamiltonian @xmath ,
along its cycles @xmath , of polynomial forms @xmath .

From ( 1.43 ), for @xmath small enough, the Abelian integral @xmath is
the first approximation of the displacement function @xmath . Here we
suppose that @xmath is not identically equal to zero, i.e. that @xmath
is not relatively exact. Therefore, it is natural that zeros of Abelian
integrals @xmath give information on multiplicity of zero points of
displacement functions @xmath , that is, on @xmath .

Indeed, on some segment @xmath away from critical value @xmath , it is
known that the number of zeros of Abelian integral gives an upper bound
on the number of zeros of the displacement function @xmath on @xmath of
the perturbed system ( 1.5 ), for @xmath small enough (both counted with
multiplicities), i.e. on the number of limit cycles born in perturbed
system ( 1.5 ) in the area @xmath , for @xmath small enough (for this
result, see e.g. [ 9 , Theorem 2.1.4] ).

However, a problem arises if we approach the critical value @xmath and
the result cannot be applied to the whole interval @xmath . In some
systems, some limit cycles (called alien cycles in [ 7 ] ) visible as
zeros of displacement function are not visible as zeros of corresponding
Abelian integral, because sometimes the approximation ( 1.43 ) is not
good enough. One of the examples is the perturbation of the Hamiltonian
field in the neighborhood of the saddle polycycle with 2 or more
vertices, see Dumortier, Roussarie [ 12 ] . Abelian integrals near
saddle polycycles have an expansion linear in @xmath , see expansion (
1.44 ) or [ 12 , Proposition 1] . On the other hand, see Roussarie [ 46
] , the asymptotic expansion of the displacement function near the
saddle polycyle with more than one vertex involves also powers of @xmath
greater than @xmath .

In a neighborhood of the center singular point and of the saddle loop (
@xmath -saddle polycycle) of the Hamiltonian field, however, the
multiplicity of corresponding Abelian integral gives correct information
about cyclicity, see e.g. Dumortier, Roussarie [ 12 , Theorem 4] .

On the other hand, we have the following asymptotic expansion of Abelian
integral ( 1.41 ) at critical point @xmath (see Arnold [ 3 , Chapter 10,
Theorem 3.12] and Zoladek [ 61 , Chapter 5] ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath runs over an increasing sequence of nonnegative rational
numbers depending only on Hamiltonian @xmath (such that @xmath are
eigenvalues of monodromy operator of the singular value) and @xmath
depend on @xmath . The Abelian integrals have thus an asymptotic
development in Chebyshev scale:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It makes sense, in the above example, to compute critical Minkowski
order of the orbit @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath ), with respect to family
@xmath , and obtain the multiplicity of a zero point @xmath of Abelian
integral @xmath in the family of integrals @xmath . From above comments,
it is related to cyclicity of @xmath , though not necessarily equal.

## Chapter 2 Application of fractal analysis in formal classification of
complex diffeomorphisms and saddles

### 2.1 Introduction

We consider germs of complex diffeomorphisms, @xmath , with fixed point
at the origin. Locally around the origin, they are of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Depending on the multiplier @xmath of the linear part, we distinguish
between three main types of local dynamics at the origin. The names are
not consistent in the literature, therefore we precise them here. If
@xmath , we will say that the origin is a hyperbolic fixed point or that
@xmath is a hyperbolic germ . If @xmath , the germ will be called
nonhyperbolic . Furthermore, in nonhyperbolic case, the multiplier can
be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We again distinguish between two cases:

-   (NH1) Linear part is an irrational rotation , @xmath .

-   (NH2) Linear part is a rational rotation , @xmath , @xmath .

    In case (NH2), without loss of generality, we can suppose that the
    germ is tangent to the identity , i.e. @xmath . Otherwise, instead
    of @xmath , we consider its @xmath -th iterate @xmath , which is
    tangent to the identity. The germs tangent to the identity are
    called parabolic , and the origin is called the parabolic fixed
    point .

We will describe the local dynamics for each case separately in the
following sections. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the orbit of a diffeomorphism @xmath , with initial point @xmath
. The problem that we deal with in this and the next chapter is:

Can we recognize formal or even analytic normal form of a diffeomorphism

using fractal properties of only one orbit?

We explain here shortly the well-known notions on formal and analytic
normal forms. A formal normal form @xmath of a germ @xmath is the
simplest germ that can be obtained from @xmath by formal changes of
variables. More precisely, @xmath is formally conjugated to @xmath if
and only if there exists a formal diffeomorphism @xmath , @xmath , such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is meant in the sense of formal inverse. In other words,
@xmath is obtained from @xmath by applying an infinite composition of
changes of variables of the form @xmath or @xmath , @xmath . The name
formal suggests that we do not address the question of convergence of
@xmath locally around the origin.

On the other hand, if @xmath converges, that is, if @xmath , we say that
@xmath and @xmath are analytically conjugated . Then, @xmath is the
analytic normal form for @xmath .

Finally, we say that the germ @xmath in ( 2.1 ) is formally
(analytically) linearizable if its formal (analytic) normal form is
linear, that is, if by formal (analytic) changes of variables it can be
reduced to its linear part @xmath .

At the end of this introductory chapter, we comment on the case (NH1) of
irrational rotation in the linear part. It is the only type of complex
germs that we do not treat in this thesis. The germs are formally
linearizable, see [ 32 , Proposition 1.3.1] . When analytic
linearizability is concerned, every holomorphic germ with a fixed point
of multiplier @xmath is locally analytically linearizable if and only if
@xmath is not almost rational . This rather complicated necessary and
sufficient condition for linearizability was proven by Brjuno and
Yoccoz. There is a dichotomy in telling whether for a generic @xmath the
germ is linearizable. Indeed, the set of almost rational @xmath -s is of
Lebesgue measure zero, but dense in @xmath and uncountably infinite, see
[ 37 , Corollaries 11.3, 11.5] . See for example [ 37 , Section 11] for
a short overview. Furthermore, analytic classification of
nonlinearizable germs of type (NH1) is not known. Fractal analysis of
orbits and connection with linearizability is a subject for future
research. The following proposition follows immediately. However, the
converse is not clear.

###### Proposition 2.1.

Suppose that the complex germ @xmath of the type (NH1) is analytically
linearizable. For any orbit @xmath of @xmath , with initial point @xmath
sufficiently close to the origin, it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The analytic conjugacy is a bilipschitz mapping. It sends the orbit
@xmath of @xmath to a corresponding orbit of irrational rotation on some
small circle. The orbit of irrational rotation is dense on the circle.
Since box dimension of the set equals the box dimension of its closure,
the orbit of irrational rotation has box dimension equal to @xmath .
Using bilipschitz property, the box dimension of @xmath is also equal to
1. ∎

### 2.2 Hyperbolic germs

Let @xmath be a hyperbolic germ ( 2.1 ), with multiplier @xmath . By [
37 , Section 8] , the origin is an attracting point for the local
dynamics if @xmath and repelling if @xmath . If @xmath , the orbit
@xmath with initial point @xmath sufficiently close to the origin
accumulates at the origin. If @xmath , the inverse diffeomorphism @xmath
has an attracting fixed point at the origin, and its orbit accumulates
at the origin. Figure 2.1 shows orbits of some hyperbolic germs with an
attracting fixed point at the origin.

We cite Koenigs theorem from 1884 about analytic linearizability of
hyperbolic germs:

###### Theorem (Koenigs linearization, Theorem 8.2[37]).

Let @xmath be a hyperbolic germ of a complex diffeomorphism. There
exists a local analytic change of coordinates conjugating @xmath with
its linear part @xmath .

We show how fractal analysis of only one orbit of a hyperbolic germ
recognizes the analytic linearizability stated in Koenigs linearization
theorem. The convergence of the orbit to the hyperbolic fixed point is
very fast (actually, exponentially fast) and we expect its box dimension
to be trivial. We prove in Proposition 2.2 that this is indeed the case.

###### Proposition 2.2 (Box dimension of orbits of hyperbolic germs).

Let the germ @xmath have an attracting hyperbolic fixed point at the
origin. Let @xmath be any orbit with initial point sufficiently close to
0. It holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the origin is repelling for @xmath , we consider the germ @xmath and
its orbits instead.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is analytically linearizable and since box dimension is
invariant under bilipschitz mappings, the box dimension is equal to the
box dimension of one orbit of the linear part @xmath . This orbit is
given explicitely by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The distances of the points from the origin decrease exponentially. We
can now estimate the asymptotic behavior of the area of the @xmath
-neighborhood directly, as was done many times in the previous chapter.

The quicker proof is to consider the complex diffeomorphism @xmath as a
planar diffeomorphism (in @xmath ), with hyperbolic fixed point at the
origin. We apply directly Theorem 3.17 from the thesis of
Horvat-Dmitrović [ 23 ] , which states the triviality of the box
dimension of any orbit of a hyperbolic germ in @xmath . ∎

### 2.3 Formal classification of parabolic germs

Let @xmath be a germ of the type (NH2):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We suppose in the sequel that the germ is parabolic , i.e., tangent to
the identity. Otherwise, the classification of @xmath is given by the
rotation angle @xmath , together with classification of its @xmath -th
iterate @xmath , which is a parabolic germ. Note that the rotation angle
@xmath is visible from one orbit @xmath of @xmath . The orbit consists
of @xmath disjoint orbits of the @xmath -th iterate @xmath , where the
next one is approximately the rotation of the former by angle @xmath .
Therefore, @xmath represents the number of disjoint orbits of @xmath in
@xmath , and @xmath the number of orbits (counted anticlockwise)
inbetween two consecutive points of the orbit. As an example, Figure 2.2
shows one orbit of a germ of the type (NH2), not tangent to the
identity.

Therefore, from now on, we suppose

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the multiplicity of the fixed point zero of @xmath in
the sense of Definition 1.1 .

We cite below the formal classification theorem for parabolic germs, as
well as the idea of the proof which shows the way of reducing the
diffeomorphism to its formal normal form. It is due to Birkhoff, Ecalle,
Kimura, Szekeres around the year 1950.

Let @xmath denote the time-one map of a vector field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By formula in e.g. [ 32 , Proposition 1.2.3] for computing the time-one
map of a germ of holomorphic vector field @xmath , @xmath we have the
following development:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 2.3 (Formal normal form for parabolic germs,
Proposition 1.3.1 in [32]).

Let @xmath be a parabolic germ ( 2.2 ), different from the identity map.
By formal changes of variables, it can be reduced to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the multiplicity of @xmath as in ( 2.2 ) and @xmath is a
complex number.

###### Proof.

First we apply the change of variables @xmath , where @xmath is chosen
such that the coefficient in front of @xmath after the change becomes
equal to @xmath . Then we eliminate each term in ( 2.2 ) successively,
by applying a sequence of changes of the form @xmath , @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The coefficient @xmath is chosen so that the change @xmath eliminates
the term @xmath , and at the same time leaves the previous terms intact.
In such way it is possible to eliminate all terms except @xmath and the
residual term @xmath . They therefore remain in the formal normal form.
∎

The simpler germ @xmath in ( 2.3 ) is called the standard formal normal
form . The elements @xmath of the formal normal form are called the
formal invariants of a parabolic germ. The coefficient @xmath in front
of @xmath in ( 2.3 ) equals to the residual fixed point index of the
diffeomorphism @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

see [ 37 ] or [ 26 ] for definition. The residual fixed point index of a
diffeomorphism is invariant under the formal changes of variables. We
may conclude that the formal invariants of a difeomorphism @xmath
consist of multiplicity of zero as a fixed point of @xmath and of the
residual fixed point index of @xmath at zero.

In the proof we see that, instead of @xmath in ( 2.3 ), as the standard
formal normal form of @xmath we can also assume the finite germ

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The terms after @xmath in ( 2.3 ) can be eliminated one by one by formal
composition of infinitely many changes of variables.

For convenience in our considerations, we introduce a slightly different
formal normal form. We admit only formal changes of variables tangent to
the identity, so that the first coefficient @xmath remains unchanged.
Thus we get a slightly restricted formal classes. We will see later in
Subsection 2.3.1 the reason for this: we want all the diffeomorphisms
inside one formal class to share the same fractal properties of orbits.

###### Proposition 2.4 (Extended formal normal form for parabolic
germs).

Let @xmath be as above. By formal changes of variables tangent to the
identity @xmath can be reduced to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To avoid confusion with the standard normal form @xmath , we call the
normal form @xmath the extended formal normal form of @xmath . In this
case, the formal invariants are given by the triple @xmath instead of
the pair @xmath .

###### Proof.

In reducing @xmath to @xmath , we repeat the same procedure as in the
proof of the standard formal normal form, except that we omit the first
change @xmath which is not tangent to the identity. Thus, the standard
formal normal form @xmath is obtained from @xmath simply by the
additional change @xmath . ∎

Let us just mention beforehand that the case @xmath mentioned in the
theorem is very simple. In this case, any trajectory @xmath for @xmath
near the origin is periodic and consists of only one point @xmath . Its
box dimension is thus equal to 0. We neglect this trivial case.

We now describe the local dynamics of discrete orbits generated by
parabolic germs. The description was given in the well-known Leau-Fatou
flower theorem , stated in Leau’s these at the end of @xmath century.
The theorem can be found in e.g. [ 37 , Theorem 10.5] or [ 32 , Theorem
2.3.1] . In short, for a diffeomorphism of multiplicity @xmath , there
exist @xmath attracting and @xmath repelling equidistant directions,
given by complex roots of the first coefficient @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Around them, invariant attracting and repelling open sets are formed in
the form of overlapping petals. The repelling petals for @xmath are in
fact attracting petals for the inverse diffeomorphism @xmath and the
other way round. The orbits are tangent to attracting and repelling
directions at the origin. The orbits (both positive and negative
iterations considered) with initial points in the intersection of
attracting and repelling petals are closed. For better insight, see
Figure 2.3 .

In this chapter we address the problem of bijective correspondence
between formal type of a parabolic diffeomorphism and fractal properties
of only one orbit. The problem is based on two questions:

1.  Can we recognize the type of a diffeomorphism from fractal
    properties of one orbit?

2.  If we know the type of a diffeomorphism, can we tell fractal
    properties of its orbits?

By fractal properties, we usually assumed the box dimension and the
Minkowski content of the orbit, which are by definition computed from
the rate of growth of the area of the @xmath -neighborhood of the orbit,
as @xmath . See Section 0.3 for precise definitions.

However, there is a deficiency of the standard fractal properties in our
problem. From the asymptotic development of the area of the @xmath
-neighborhood, only real information on complex formal invariants can be
obtained. In the next definition we therefore generalize the notion of
the area of the @xmath -neighborhood of a set. It becomes a complex
number whose modulus is the area and whose argument refers to the
direction of the set in the plane. We call it the directed area .

###### Definition 2.1 (The directed area of a measurable set).

Let @xmath be a measurable set, whose center of mass is not the origin.
We define the directed area of the set @xmath , denoted by @xmath , as
the complex number

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the area of @xmath , @xmath the center of mass of
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath , the normalized center of mass of @xmath .

Note that the directed area is not a (vector) measure, as defined in
e.g. [ 28 ] . It does not verify the countable stability property, that
is, it is not true in general that @xmath , for pairwise disjoint sets
@xmath , @xmath . Furthermore, this notion should not be confused with
the directional @xmath -neighborhood, also called the directional
Minkowski sausage, defined in [ 53 ] .

Sometimes, mostly in Chapter 3 , we will use a slightly different notion
of complex measure of a set . It can be easily verified that it is
indeed a vector measure in the standard sense.

###### Definition 2.2 (The complex measure of a measurable set).

Let @xmath be a measurable set. We define the complex measure of the set
@xmath , denoted by @xmath , as the complex number

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This definition differs from the directed area only by the fact that the
center of mass is not normalized.

In Subsection 2.3.1 we compute the asymptotic development in @xmath of
the directed areas of the @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits. Then, in
Subsection 2.3.3 , we connect the coefficients in the development with
fractal properies of orbits. Furthermore, we state our main results
about the bijective correspondence between formal invariants and fractal
properties of orbits of diffeomorphisms. The results were published in
2013 in Resman [ 44 ] .

#### 2.3.1 Asymptotic development for @xmath-neighborhoods of orbits

This section is dedicated to computing the asymptotic developments of
the directed areas of the @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits of parabolic
diffeomorphisms, as @xmath . To be able to read all formal invariants,
we need not only the first term, but the first @xmath terms in the
development. This is not surprising, since the formal invariants are
determined by the @xmath -jet of the diffeomorphism @xmath . On the
other hand, we show that the @xmath -th coefficient in the development
of the @xmath -neighborhood is determined by the @xmath -jet of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a parabolic diffeomorphism,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote an attracting orbit of @xmath , with initial point
@xmath in an attracting petal. We can analogously take a repelling orbit
and consider the inverse diffeomorphism @xmath instead. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be one of the @xmath attracting directions in whose attracting sectors
the initial condition @xmath lies. In other words, we chose the @xmath
-th complex root of @xmath whose argument is closest to @xmath . By
@xmath , we denote the normalized complex number @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.1 (Asymptotic development of the directed area of
@xmath-neighborhoods of orbits).

Let @xmath . The directed area of the @xmath -neighborhood of orbit
@xmath has the following asymptotic development, as @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

All coefficients @xmath , @xmath are complex-valued functions of @xmath
, @xmath and the first @xmath coefficients @xmath of the diffeomorphism.
For @xmath , if @xmath , it holds that @xmath . The coefficient @xmath
is a complex-valued function of the initial condition @xmath , which
depends on the whole diffeomorphism @xmath .

Furthermore, important coefficients @xmath and @xmath are of the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is a complex-valued function such that @xmath .

Note that the coefficients @xmath , @xmath do not depend on the initial
point @xmath , but only on the attracting sector of the initial point
(via @xmath ). We will see in the proof that the dependence of @xmath on
the initial point comes from the directed area of the tail of the @xmath
-neighborhood of the orbit. For obtaining formal invariants, we are not
interested in the properties of the remainder term @xmath . They will be
discussed in more detail in Section 2.4 , concerning the analytic
classification.

The proof of Theorem 2.1 is rather technical and given in Subsection
2.3.2 . We will see in the proof that in the special, boundary case
@xmath , we obtain a slightly different development:

###### Proposition 2.5 (Asymptotic developments in the boundary case
@xmath).

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a parabolic diffeomorphism of multiplicity @xmath . With the same
notations as above, the following development for the area and the
center of mass of the @xmath -neighborhood of an attracting orbit @xmath
holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

We comment on this case here only for the sake of completeness. The
development of @xmath can be computed using ( 2.6 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, due to a somewhat different structure of the developments in
the case @xmath , the coefficients @xmath and @xmath in the development
of the directed area above are deficient in reading the complete
coefficients @xmath and @xmath , as was case for @xmath . Note that the
extended formal normal form of @xmath is given by @xmath . To read
@xmath and @xmath , we need to consider the coefficients in the
developments of both the area and the complex measure. In the sequel, we
consider only the case @xmath . In the case @xmath , similar conclusions
can be drawn considering these two developments.

###### Example 2.1 (The development for formal normal forms).

Let @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the only coefficients different from zero are @xmath and @xmath ,
from Theorem 2.1 we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath and @xmath only.

#### 2.3.2 Proof of the asymptotic development

Here we prove the asymptotic developments from Theorem 2.1 and
Proposition 2.5 stated in Subsection 2.3.1 .

The proof of Theorem 2.1 is rather long and each step is contained in a
separate lemma below. Some auxiliary, purely technical propositions
needed in proofs of the lemmas are in Subsection 2.3.4 .

Overview of the proof of Theorem 2.1 . Suppose @xmath . By Definition
2.1 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, we need to compute the first @xmath terms in the development
of the area of the @xmath -neighborhood and the first @xmath terms in
the development of its normalized center of mass. Following the ideas
from [ 53 ] , @xmath -neighborhoods of the orbit, @xmath , can be
regarded as disjoint unions of the nucleus @xmath and the tail @xmath .
The tail @xmath is the union of disjoint discs @xmath . The nucleus
@xmath is the union of overlapping discs @xmath , @xmath . Here, @xmath
denotes the index when discs around the points start to overlap, see
Figure 2.4 . In our case, this ‘critical’ index @xmath is unique and
well-defined, since the distances between two consecutive points are
strictly decreasing, see Proposition 2.8 . @xmath in Subsection 2.3.4 .

Step 1. In Lemma 2.1 , we compute the first @xmath terms in the
asymptotic development of the index @xmath , as @xmath .

Step 2. Using the development for @xmath , we compute the first @xmath
terms in the development of the area of the @xmath -neighborhood of the
orbit, @xmath , as @xmath . This consists of two parts: first, in Lemma
2.2 , we compute the development of the area of the nucleus, @xmath .
Second, in Lemma 2.3 , we compute the development of the area of the
tail, @xmath . Finally,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Step 3. We need to find first @xmath terms in the development of the
normalized center of mass of the @xmath -neighborhood of the orbit,
@xmath , as @xmath . Obviously,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again, in Lemma 2.4 , we compute the first @xmath terms for the nucleus,
@xmath . In Lemma 2.5 , we do the same for the tail, @xmath .

Now, combining the obtained developments ( 2.7 ) and ( 2.8 ), the
development for @xmath follows.

We now prove the lemmas used in the proof. They provide asymptotic
developments up to the first @xmath terms of the expressions that are
neccessary for computing the first @xmath terms of asymptotic
development of the directed area. In all these developments, we provide
precise information only on the first and on the @xmath -st coefficient,
since they are the only ones that affect the first and the @xmath -st
coefficient in the development of the final directed area. The proofs
are rather direct and very technical. They rely on deducing the
asymptotic development of the points of the orbit @xmath , as @xmath ,
simply using the difference equation @xmath and deducing the development
term by term. It is given in Proposition 2.6 .

As before, let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , be a parabolic diffeomorphism.
Let the initial point @xmath belong to an attracting sector. We denote
by @xmath the attracting direction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we chose the one of @xmath complex roots for which @xmath is
closest to the direction @xmath . That is, @xmath lies in the attracting
petal around the attracting direction @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.6 (Asymptotic development of @xmath).

Let @xmath , @xmath , denote the points of the orbit @xmath . Let @xmath
. Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, coefficients @xmath , @xmath , are complex-valued functions of
@xmath and first @xmath coefficients of @xmath , with the property
@xmath . Furthermore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a complex-valued function satisfying @xmath .

###### Proof.

The following proof mimics the standard technique for obtaining the
asymptotic development of a real iterative sequence from e.g. [ 4 ,
Chapter 8.4] . In the complex case, we apply the whole technique
sectorially. Suppose as above that @xmath lies in an attracting sector
around attracting vector @xmath . By already explained dynamics, the
whole orbit @xmath lies in that attracting sector and is tangent to
@xmath at the origin. On this sector, the change of variables

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is well-defined, the complex root of @xmath being uniquely determined.
The trajectory @xmath is transformed to @xmath and obviously

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The recurrence relation for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

transforms to the following recurrence relation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviously, @xmath . By ( 2.12 ), it holds that @xmath , as @xmath ,
therefore @xmath . From ( 2.12 ) we then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By recursion and using integral approximation of the sum, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the standard technique of integral approximation of the sum, see
Proposition 2.7 in Subsection 2.3.4 . To compute the exact constant of
the second term, with this development, we return to ( 2.12 ) and get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By recursion and using integral approximation of the sum,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Repeating this procedure @xmath times, we get the first @xmath terms in
the development of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath are complex-valued functions and @xmath , @xmath . Note the
form of the coefficients and their dependence on coefficients of the
diffeomorphism. The development for @xmath now follows from the
development for @xmath , ( 2.10 ) and ( 2.11 ). ∎

###### Lemma 2.1 (Asymptotic development of @xmath).

Let @xmath . Suppose @xmath is the critical index separating the nucleus
and the tail. Then it has the following asymptotic development:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where coefficients @xmath , @xmath are real-valued functions of @xmath
and first @xmath coefficients of @xmath with the property @xmath .
Furthermore,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a real-valued function which satisfies @xmath .

###### Proof.

By @xmath , @xmath , we denote the distances between two consecutive
points of the orbit. The critical index @xmath is then determined by the
inequalities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain the asymptotic development of @xmath , we first compute
asymptotic development for @xmath , as @xmath . Using development ( 2.9
) for @xmath from Proposition 2.6 , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are complex-valued functions and @xmath
. Furthermore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real-valued functions and @xmath .

From ( 2.14 ) and ( 2.16 ) we deduce the asymptotic development of
@xmath as @xmath , iteratively, term by term. ∎

Note that the above proof provides developments ( 2.15 ) and ( 2.16 )
for @xmath and for the distances @xmath between two consecutive points,
which we also need later.

###### Lemma 2.2 (Asymptotic development of the area of the nucleus).

Let @xmath . The following asymptotic development for the area of the
nucleus of the @xmath -neighborhood of the orbit holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , @xmath , are real-valued functions of @xmath and first
@xmath coefficients of @xmath , such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 2.8 . @xmath in Subsection 2.3.4 , the area of the
nucleus can be computed by adding areas of infinitely many
crescent-shaped contributions. Furthermore, Proposition 2.9 provides the
formula for computing such areas. We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 2.10 in Subsection 2.3.4 , this sum can be replaced by
the following integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the strictly decreasing function from Proposition 2.10 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now compute the first @xmath terms in the asymptotic development of
the integral from ( 2.18 ), as @xmath . Applying the change of variables
@xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath . Note that, for a given @xmath , @xmath is bounded in
@xmath . Therefore it holds that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The development of @xmath , as @xmath , can be deduced using the already
computed development for @xmath in Lemma 2.1 . We have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , are real-valued functions.

Using Proposition 2.11 in Subsection 2.3.4 , we remove @xmath from the
boundary of @xmath . The integral in ( 2.19 ) is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, substituting the development ( 2.21 ) in ( 2.22 ) and using ( 2.20
) to evaluate the last term, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, functions @xmath are real-valued functions from the development (
2.21 ) and @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are the following finite
integrals:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

combining ( 2.18 ), ( 2.22 ) and ( 2.23 ), we get the development ( 2.17
) for @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 2.3 (Asymptotic development of the area of the tail).

Let @xmath . The area of the tail of the @xmath -neighborhood of the
orbit has the following asymptotic development:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are real-valued functions which depend
only on @xmath and the first @xmath coefficients of @xmath , with the
property @xmath

###### Proof.

Since the tail, by definition, consists of @xmath disjoint @xmath
-discs, we have that @xmath . The statement follows from ( 2.13 ). ∎

###### Lemma 2.4 (Asymptotic development of the center of mass of the
nucleus).

Let @xmath . Let @xmath denote the center of mass of the nucleus of the
@xmath -neighborhood. The following asymptotic development holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , @xmath are complex-valued functions which depend on
@xmath and on the first @xmath coefficients of @xmath with the property
@xmath . Furthermore,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a complex-valued function satisfying @xmath .

###### Proof.

By definition of the centre of mass and by Propositions 2.8 . @xmath and
2.9 in Subsection 2.3.4 , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath , @xmath , denote the contributions to the nucleus from
@xmath -discs of the points @xmath .

We first show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath . From ( 2.13 ) and ( 2.9 ), @xmath , as @xmath . On the other
hand, by ( 2.15 ), we have that @xmath , as @xmath . Therefore, using
boundedness of the term in parenthesis, integral approximation of the
sum and then ( 2.13 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath . This proves ( 2.25 ).

To compute the first @xmath terms in the asymptotic development of the
sum in ( 2.25 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath , we use the same idea as in Lemma 2.2 . Therefore we omit the
details. To make the integral approximation of the sum @xmath , we have
to cut off the formal developments @xmath and @xmath to finitely many
terms. Let @xmath be as in Proposition 2.10 , @xmath . By @xmath , we
denote the first @xmath terms in the asymptotic development of @xmath .
It can be shown similarly as before that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the real and the imaginary part of the function under the
summation sign are strictly decreasing, as @xmath , we can make the
integral approximation of the sum:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function @xmath is as defined in ( 2.47 ) in proof of Proposition
2.6 , and @xmath is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with coefficients @xmath from the development ( 2.9 ) of @xmath in
Proposition 2.6 .

By making the change of variables @xmath in the integral, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath .

Using ( 2.21 ), ( 2.26 ) and the development for @xmath from the proof
of Lemma 2.2 , after some computation we get the development for @xmath
, as @xmath . Again, let us note that @xmath uniformly in @xmath , as
@xmath , see ( 2.20 ) before. The coefficients of the development are
again obtained evaluating the integrals

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which are finite.

Substituting the development in ( 2.27 ) and proceeding in a similar way
as in Lemma 2.2 , we get the development ( 2.24 ). ∎

###### Lemma 2.5 (Development of the center of mass of the tail).

Let @xmath . The following development for the center of the mass of the
tail of the @xmath -neighborhood holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , @xmath , are complex-valued functions of @xmath and first
@xmath coefficients of @xmath , such that @xmath . The function @xmath
is a complex-valued function of the initial point @xmath which depends
on the whole diffeomorphism @xmath . The function @xmath is a
complex-valued function which satisfies @xmath .

###### Proof.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is chosen to be the first index, obviously depending on the
diffeomorphism @xmath and on the initial condition @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where complex numbers @xmath are as in the development of @xmath , see
Proposition 2.6 .

We now compute the first @xmath terms in the asymptotic developments of
( 2.30 ), as @xmath .

Firstly, we concentrate on the last sum in ( 2.30 ). We show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , as @xmath , and @xmath is a complex constant depending on
the diffeomorphism and on the initial condition. From the asymptotics of
@xmath , the sum @xmath is obviously convergent and equal to some
constant @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the second sum is evaluated as @xmath by integral approximation of
the sum.

Secondly, we estimate first three terms in the asymptotic developments
of the first @xmath sums in ( 2.30 ), as @xmath . We show the procedure
on the first sum. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Obviously, it satisfies the recurrence relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with initial condition @xmath . We determine the first term in its
development by integral approximation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath as @xmath . Using this development, from recurrence
relation for @xmath we get the recurrence relation for @xmath and the
initial condition @xmath . By recursion, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using ( 2.31 ), we conclude that @xmath , @xmath . The same procedure
can be repeated for other sums.

Thus we obtain the development of the sum @xmath , as @xmath .
Substituting @xmath with the development ( 2.13 ), we get the
development ( 2.29 ), as @xmath . ∎

Proof of Theorem 2.1 . The proof follows from Lemmas 2.1 to 2.5 , as
described at the beginning of the section.∎

Proof of Proposition 2.5 @xmath the case @xmath @xmath . Note that
Lemmas 2.2 and 2.3 are true also when @xmath and can be directly applied
to compute the coefficients. We get the development for the area @xmath
. In Lemma 2.4 , the formula for the first coefficient @xmath is
different. It is obtained from the integral @xmath , given by a
different formula than the other integrals in ( 2.3.2 ). We get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In Lemma 2.5 , repeating the procedure in the case @xmath , we see that
the development begins with a logarithmic term instead of a power term:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

#### 2.3.3 Bijective correspondence between formal invariants and
fractal properties of orbits

We now relate the relevant coefficients in the development of the
directed area of the @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits with fractal
properties of orbits (the box dimension, the Minkowski content) and
their generalizations defined here (the directed Minkowski content and
the residual content ). In this section we suppose that @xmath , so that
the developments from Theorem 2.1 hold.

The directed Minkowski content of a set is a complex generalization of
the standard Minkowski content. After introducing the directed area of
the @xmath -neighborhoods of sets in Definition 2.1 , the definition of
the directed Minkowski content follows in the natural manner. The
Minkowski content of a bounded set @xmath is by definition equal to the
the first coefficient in the asymptotic development of the area of the
@xmath -neighborhood of U, if such development exists. We define the
directed Minkowski content analogously, but using the directed area of
the @xmath -neighborhood instead.

###### Definition 2.3 (Directed Minkowski content of a measurable set).

Let @xmath be a bounded set with measurable @xmath -neighborhoods @xmath
. Let the centers of mass of @xmath -neighborhoods be different from the
origin. Let @xmath . If the limit exists, we call the complex number

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the directed Minkowski content of @xmath .

By definition, @xmath , where @xmath is the Minkowski content of @xmath
. Therefore, @xmath is a natural generalization of the Minkowski content
@xmath .

Let @xmath be an attracting orbit of a parabolic diffeomorphism. From
development ( 2.4 ), it holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, we have that any orbit @xmath is Minkowski measurable, with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Motivated by the fact that the first coefficient of ( 2.4 ) incorporates
the directed Minkowski content of the orbit, we define the directed
residual content of the orbit as the coefficient in front of the special
logarithmic term, @xmath .

###### Definition 2.4 (Directed residual content).

The directed residual content @xmath of the orbit @xmath is the complex
number

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the coefficient in front of the logarithmic term @xmath
in the development ( 2.4 ).

In Theorems 2.2 and 2.3 below, we state our two main results. First, the
standard formal invariants @xmath (see Proposition 2.3 ) of a given
parabolic diffeomorphism can be deduced from fractal properties of only
one of its orbits near the origin.

###### Theorem 2.2 (Standard formal normal form and fractal properties
of an orbit).

The standard formal type @xmath of a parabolic diffeomorphism @xmath is
uniquely determined by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of any attracting
orbit @xmath near the origin.

Moreover, the following explicit formulas hold:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the normalized directed Minkowski content and
@xmath is a function of @xmath , explicitly given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath denotes the gamma function.

The converse of Theorem 2.2 is not true. Formal changes of variables
reducing a diffeomorphism to its standard formal normal form may affect
Minkowski and residual content of the orbit. Aside from the box
dimension, the diffeomorphisms from the same standard formal class do
not necessarily share the same fractal properties . By ( 2.32 ) and (
2.33 ), the (directed) Minkowski content and the directed residual
content of orbits depend on the first coefficient @xmath of a
diffeomorphism. This coefficient changes in the changes of variables
which are not tangent to the identity.

Nevertheless, if we consider the extended formal normal form from
Proposition 2.4 instead of standard formal normal form, then Theorem 2.2
takes a form of the stronger equivalence statement.

###### Theorem 2.3 (Extended formal normal form and fractal properties
of an orbit).

There exists a bijective correspondence between the following triples:

-    the extended formal type of a diffeomorphism, @xmath

-   @xmath

where @xmath is any attracting orbit of a diffeomorphism. The bijective
correspondence is given by formulas ( 2.34 ) and the following formula
for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The converse in fact states that all the attracting orbits of all the
diffeomorphisms of the same extended formal type share the same fractal
properties . Actually, for the precise converse statement, we have to
make the following remark about the sectorial dependence of fractal
properties on the initial point of the orbit. Suppose that we know only
the extended formal type of a diffeomorphism and we want to compute the
directed Minkowski content and the directed residual content of any
attracting orbit @xmath of the diffeomorphism. The directed Minkowski
content is given by reformulation of the formula ( 2.35 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the attracting direction in whose attracting sector
@xmath lies. Therefore, the fractal properties do differ slightly in
argument for the orbits in @xmath different attracting sectors, but they
do not differ for the orbits inside one attracting sector. Their
modules, in particular the Minkowski content, are the same in all
sectors.

###### Remark 2.1.

By ( 2.32 ) and ( 2.33 ), we can as well express the correspondence in
Theorem 2.2 and Theorem 2.3 in terms of coefficients @xmath , @xmath and
the exponent @xmath in the asymptotic development of @xmath , instead in
terms of fractal properties of the orbit @xmath .

##### Proofs of Theorems 2.2 and 2.3

In the proofs of Theorems 2.2 and 2.3 , we need the following lemma. It
shows that the leading exponent and the relevant first and @xmath -st
coefficient in the development of the directed area remain unchanged by
a change of variables tangent to the identity, transforming the
diffeomorphism to its extended formal normal form.

###### Lemma 2.6 (Invariance of fractal properties in the extended
formal class).

Let @xmath and @xmath be two germs of parabolic diffeomorphisms which
belong to the same extended formal class @xmath . Then it holds:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath are any two initial points chosen from the
attracting sectors of @xmath and @xmath with the same attracting
direction.

In the proof of Lemma 2.6 we need the following auxiliary lemma:

###### Lemma 2.7.

Let @xmath be a parabolic diffeomorphism and let @xmath , where @xmath ,
@xmath . Let @xmath be an attracting orbit of @xmath and let @xmath be
the corresponding attracting orbit of @xmath . Then it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the first and the @xmath -st coefficients
in the asymptotic developments ( 2.4 ) of the directed areas of the
@xmath -neighborhoods of the corresponding orbits. Furthermore, the
equalities ( 2.36 ) hold also if @xmath and @xmath are any two orbits of
@xmath and @xmath respectively which converge to the same attracting
direction.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an attracting orbit of @xmath . We first take @xmath to be
the image of @xmath under @xmath . Using development ( 2.9 ) for @xmath
, we compute the development of @xmath . It is easy to see that, since
@xmath , the first coefficient and the @xmath -st coefficient remain the
same as in @xmath , while the other coefficients can change. In
particular, the attracting direction @xmath for @xmath remains the same
as for @xmath .

On the other hand, it can be seen in proofs in Section 2.3.2 that only
the first and the @xmath -st coefficient of the development of @xmath
participate in the first and the @xmath -st coefficient of the
developments of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Finally, the first and the
@xmath -st coefficient in the development of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, depend only on the first and the @xmath -st coefficient in the
development of @xmath , not on other coefficients. Therefore, the two
coefficients remain unchanged in the change of variables @xmath .
Finally, since @xmath and @xmath do not depend on the choice of initial
point @xmath and @xmath inside one sector, we can choose any two orbits
of the initial and of the transformed diffeomorphism converging to the
same attracting direction @xmath . ∎

Proof of Lemma 2.6 . For diffeomorphisms @xmath and @xmath , let @xmath
denote the changes of variables obtained by composition of @xmath
transformations of the above type, which present the first @xmath steps
in transforming @xmath and @xmath to their extended formal normal forms.
Let

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Obviously, by Lemma 2.7 , it holds that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the orbits corresponding to the same attracting direction. The
notation @xmath is a bit imprecise, since the value differs for orbits
in @xmath sectors, but we use it for simplicity and keep in mind that we
always consider orbits converging to the same attracting direction.

Let @xmath be the extended formal normal form, @xmath . By further
changes of variables, transforming @xmath and @xmath to the extended
formal normal form @xmath , the @xmath -jets from ( 2.37 ) remain the
same. Therefore we have, by the development ( 2.5 ) in Theorem 2.1 ,
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the orbits corresponding to the same attracting direction. By ( 2.38
) and ( 2.39 ), it follows that @xmath and @xmath , for the orbits of
@xmath and @xmath converging to the same attracting direction.

Finally, changes of variables do not change the multiplicity @xmath of
the diffeomorphism. Therefore the leading exponent of the directed areas
for all the orbits equals @xmath .

Relating the coefficients @xmath , @xmath and exponent @xmath with
fractal properties of orbits, by ( 2.32 ) and ( 2.33 ), the statement
follows. ∎

Note that the statement of the above Lemma is no longer true if we admit
changes of variables which are not tangent to the identity. Only the box
dimension is then preserved.

Proof of Theorem 2.3 . Let @xmath be a parabolic germ and let @xmath be
its extended formal normal form. Let @xmath be an attracting orbit of
@xmath and let @xmath be an attracting orbit of @xmath with the same
attracting direction.

The bijective correspondence between @xmath and @xmath is obvious by (
2.32 ). Let @xmath then be fixed. Applying formulas ( 2.5 ) from Theorem
2.1 to the orbit of the formal normal form @xmath , we get the following
formulas:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

By Lemma 2.6 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, by ( 2.32 ) and ( 2.33 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 2.41 ) and ( 2.42 ), we see that formulas ( 2.34 ) and ( 2.35 )
in Theorem 2.3 are just reformulations of ( 2.40 ). They give, for a
fixed @xmath , the bijective correspondence between the pairs @xmath and
@xmath . ∎

Proof of Theorem 2.2 . Let @xmath and @xmath be as in the above proof.
The standard formal normal form @xmath is given by @xmath , where @xmath
is the same as in the extended form @xmath . The normal form @xmath is
obtained from @xmath by making one extra change of variables of the type

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in order to make coefficient @xmath equal to @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath are the same as in @xmath , formulas ( 2.34 ) expressing @xmath
and @xmath from the fractal properties of the orbit @xmath have already
been obtained in the proof of Theorem 2.3 . Therefore, the standard
formal normal form of a diffeomorphism, described by the pair @xmath ,
can be deduced from fractal properties @xmath of just one orbit of the
diffeomorphism. ∎

#### 2.3.4 Proofs of auxiliary statements

Here we state auxiliary propositions that we need in the proof of
Theorem 2.1 . First let us recall (without proof) a standard, well-known
result about integral approximation of the sum that we use a few times.
The proof consists in bounding the integral by left Riemann sum from
below and by right Riemann sum from above.

###### Proposition 2.7 (Integral approximation of the sum).

Suppose @xmath is monotonically decreasing, continuous function on the
interval @xmath , @xmath . Then the following inequality holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The next two propositions give the tool for computing areas and centers
of mass of @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits. Let @xmath be a parabolic
diffeomorphism and @xmath its attracting orbit. Let @xmath denote the
@xmath -disc centered at @xmath . We represent the @xmath -neighborhood
of @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are contributions from @xmath -discs of
points @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.8 (Geometry of @xmath-neighborhoods of orbits).

-    Distances between two consecutive points of the orbit, @xmath ,
    are, starting from some @xmath , strictly decreasing as @xmath .

-    For small enough @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Proposition 2.8 . @xmath means that all contributions @xmath at point
@xmath are in crescent or full-disc form, determined only by the
distance to the previous point @xmath . The positions of the points
before the previous, @xmath , do not affect the shape of @xmath , see
Figure 2.5 .

###### Proof.

(i) Let us denote by @xmath . Using development ( 2.15 ), we compute:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Obviously, in the limit as @xmath , the arguments of @xmath and @xmath
are both equal to @xmath . For @xmath big enough, the value of the
nonordered angle between @xmath and @xmath is therefore less than @xmath
. Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath , for @xmath big enough.

(ii) Let @xmath denote the midpoint and @xmath the bisector of the
segment @xmath , @xmath . It will suffice to show that there exists
@xmath such that for every @xmath and for every @xmath , the distance
from the intersection of @xmath and @xmath , denoted @xmath , to the
midpoint @xmath is greater than @xmath . In this way we ensure that the
union of intersections of @xmath -disc of each new point of the orbit
with the @xmath -discs of all the previous points is a subset of the
intersection with the @xmath -disc of the previous point only.

We first show that the two consecutive bisectors @xmath and @xmath
intersect at the distance from @xmath which is bounded from below by a
positive constant, as @xmath .
The bisector @xmath can obviously be parametrized as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We denote by @xmath the parameter of the intersection @xmath of @xmath
and @xmath . The complex number

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is perpendicular to @xmath . Therefore their scalar product, denoted by
@xmath , is equal to @xmath , and we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using development ( 2.15 ), after some computation, we get that the
denominator is @xmath , while the numerator is @xmath . Therefore,
@xmath , for some positive constant @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath ,
the distance

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is bounded from below by some positive constant for @xmath , say by
@xmath .

It is left to show that the same lower bound holds not only for
consecutive, but for any two bisectors @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . We can see from the development ( 2.15 ) that the points of the
orbit approach the origin in the direction @xmath . We draw the stripe
of width @xmath on both sides of that tangent direction. Obviously, for
@xmath big enough, no two bisectors can intersect inside the stripe
without two consecutive bisectors being intersected inside the stripe,
which is a contradiction with the first part. Therefore, the distances
from the midpoints to the intersections of corresponding bisectors when
@xmath are uniformly bounded from below by e.g. @xmath .

Taking @xmath , we have proven the statement. ∎

###### Proposition 2.9.

Let @xmath @xmath or @xmath @xmath , @xmath . Suppose @xmath . Let
@xmath denote the crescent @xmath . Then its area is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and its center of mass is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proposition is proved by integration,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

For simplicity, we put @xmath .

@xmath The area. We choose the coordinate system such that @xmath is the
origin and @xmath -line is the real line, oriented so that @xmath is on
the positive half-line. The area is equal to @xmath , which is computed
as follows:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The second integral is computed making the change of variables @xmath ,
and the result follows.

@xmath The center of mass. We chose the same coordinate system as in
@xmath and compute the centre of mass of @xmath in this new system.
Obviously, due to the simetry of balls, in this new system the vector
points at the real negative half-line, at the point that we denote
@xmath (which represents the shift in the centre of mass from @xmath
when we cut off part of the ball). The vector is then equal to @xmath .

We can compute @xmath by the standard integral formula for the center of
mass ( 2.43 ) in the new, simpler system. The formula can be found in
e.g. [ 41 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the original coordinate system, the vector of the centre of mass of
the crescent @xmath is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 2.3.4 ) and ( 2.45 ), we get the result. ∎

The following two propositions are auxiliary results in the proof of
Lemma 2.2 .

###### Proposition 2.10.

The sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

can, as @xmath , be represented as the integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

All the coefficients @xmath are the same as in development ( 2.16 ) of
@xmath and @xmath is some constant.

###### Proof.

The idea is to apply integral approximation of the sum. The problem is
that we only have formal asymptotic development of @xmath . The idea is
to cut off the formal asymptotic development at the @xmath -st term, to
get a continuous and decreasing function of @xmath under the summation
sign. We show here that the cut-off remainder is in some sense small and
contributes to the sum with no more than @xmath , as @xmath .

We denote by @xmath the first @xmath terms in the asymptotic expansion (
2.16 ). For the sum with truncated @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to be well-defined, we have to ensure that @xmath for @xmath . Since
@xmath for @xmath by ( 2.14 ), it is enough to achieve that @xmath , for
@xmath , where @xmath is sufficiently small. This is obtained by adding
the term @xmath to @xmath . Here, @xmath is chosen negative and
sufficiently big by absolute value. We denote @xmath . Obviously,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us denote the function under the summation sign in ( 2.46 ) by
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, @xmath . By ( 2.48 ) and by the mean value theorem,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The initial sum ( 2.46 ) can, by ( 2.49 ), be evaluated as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( 2.50 ) and Lemma 2.1 , using integral approximation of the sum, we
get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some constant @xmath , as @xmath .

Furthermore, using integral approximation of the sum and the fact that
the subintegral function is bounded from above, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, by ( 2.51 ), ( 2.52 ) and ( 2.53 ), the result follows. ∎

###### Proposition 2.11.

The integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are as in Lemma 2.2 , can, as @xmath , be
represented as the integral

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We first show that the upper boundary @xmath in the integral is equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( 2.13 ) and ( 2.48 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( 2.16 ), it can easily be seen that @xmath , thus by ( 2.13 ) and
( 2.14 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining ( 2.55 ) and ( 2.56 ), ( 2.54 ) follows.

Using ( 2.54 ), the above integral @xmath can be written as the sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By ( 2.21 ), @xmath . It is then easy to see that the second integral
equals @xmath , as @xmath , due to the boundedness of the subintegral
function in the neighborhood of @xmath . ∎

#### 2.3.5 Perspectives

The concept of reconstructing a diffeomorphism from its one realization
is somewhat similar to the concept of the famous problem: Can one hear a
shape of a drum? , presented by M. Kac in 1966. The question that is
raised is if one can reconstruct the equation from only one solution,
or, if not completely, how much can be said.

The vibrations of a drum are given by the Laplace equation with zero
boundary condition on a given domain @xmath . The domain of the equation
is the only unknown in the problem. The eigenvalues of the Laplace
operator, @xmath , @xmath , present the frequencies. They are
coefficients in the Fourier development of the solution. One tries to
reconstruct the domain of the equation from these eigenvalues.

Let @xmath be the eigenvalue counting function for the Laplace operator
on @xmath . It was conjectured that from the asymptotic development of
@xmath , as @xmath , one can obtain some properties of the domain:

###### Conjecture (Modified Weyl-Berry conjecture, Conjecture 5.1 in
[30]).

If @xmath has a Minkowski measurable boundary @xmath , with box
dimension @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the volume of the unit ball in @xmath , @xmath the
Lebesgue measure of the set @xmath and @xmath the Minkowski content of
the boundary. The constant @xmath is a real constant depending only on
@xmath and @xmath .

The conjecture was proven in the one-dimensional case, @xmath , in
Corollary 2.3 in [ 30 ] . In other dimensions, it is still open.

Although we do not see a direct relation between this problem and the
problem studied in this chapter, in many aspects they appear similar.
The general idea of reconstructing the equation from one solution is
common, as well as the fact that, for obtaining more information on the
equation, we need to use further terms in appropriate developments.

### 2.4 Application of the formal classification result to formal
orbital classification of complex saddles in @xmath

We consider holomorphic germs of vector fields in @xmath , with saddle
point at the origin. Their linear part is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Complex saddles belong to the reduced (elementary) singularities
characterized by @xmath (hyperbolic singularities, saddles, nodes, and
saddle-nodes). For classification, see e.g. [ 32 , Chapter 5] . Complex
saddles are complexifications of planar saddles, as well as of planar
weak focus points.

Complex saddles have two separatrices, corresponding to the complex
axes. Complex planes vertical to the axes, called cross-sections , are
transversal to the ’flow’. The equivalent of the real Poincaré map on a
transversal is the complex holonomy map on a cross-section, defined
below. The equivalents of trajectories for planar fields are leaves of a
foliation. They can be regraded as trajectories, but in complex time.

In this section, we follow the same line of thought as for planar vector
fields. Elements of a normal form of a planar field around a focus point
were reconstructed from the box dimension, either of orbits of the
Poincaré map or of spiral trajectories themselves, in papers of
Žubrinić, Županović [ 56 ] and [ 57 ] . The elements of the formal
normal form are related to the cyclicity of the focus point. In cases of
planar saddles, we would like to do the same: to conclude a normal form
of a saddle, using fractal analysis of trajectories. However, around a
planar saddle point, the trajectory is not recurring. The Poincaré map
cannot be defined. Therefore, we need to consider the complexified
dynamics. For complex saddles, complex leaves of a foliation accumulate
at the saddle and an analogon of the Poincaré map, called the holonomy
map , can be defined.

In Subsection 2.4.1 , we define precisely the notions related to complex
saddles. Then, in Subsection 2.4.2 , we directly apply results from
Section 2.3 to holonomy maps, and deduce formal normal form of complex
saddles from fractal properties of their holonomy maps. In the future,
we would like to compute the box dimension of leaves of a foliation and
relate it to the formal normal form for complex saddles.

In planar cases, in order to obtain a monodromy around the saddle, we
can connect the separatrices of the saddle in a saddle connection
(saddle loop), by a regular map. The computation of the box dimension of
a spiral trajectory around a planar saddle loop, depending on the
saddle, as well as on the connection, is made in Subsection 2.4.3 . It
can be considered as a preliminary technique for computing the box
dimension of leaves in the complexified case. By analogy with planar
saddle loops, a conjecture about the box dimension of leaves for complex
saddles is made in short Subsection 2.4.4 . It needs to be proven in the
future.

#### 2.4.1 Introduction to complex saddles

The definitions and descriptions that we give here can be found in, for
example, [ 26 , Sections 1,2,22] , [ 32 , Chapitre 4,5] , [ 52 ] .

We consider germs of holomorphic vector fields in @xmath , with complex
saddles at the origin. That means, with linear part of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

We call @xmath the hyperbolicity ratio of the saddle. The derivatives
@xmath and @xmath are meant in complex time, @xmath . We say that the
saddle is resonant , if @xmath . On the other hand, if @xmath , we call
the saddle nonresonant .

First we describe the local dynamics (in complex time) at complex
saddles. The phase curves are called leaves . They form a singular
foliation of the phase space , with singular point @xmath . We take the
following definition of singular foliation from [ 26 ] .

###### Definition 2.5.

( [ 26 , p.14] ) Singular foliation with the singular point at the
origin, denoted by @xmath , is a partition ¹ ¹ 1 Every point in phase
space belongs to exactly one phase curve. of the phase space into a
continuum of connected phase curves, called leaves , which locally
except at the origin look like family of parallel affine subspaces.

More precisely, let @xmath be any neighborhood of the origin. We can
partition @xmath into a disjoint union of connected leaves, @xmath . Let
@xmath be any leaf of a foliation. For each @xmath , there exists a
neighborhood @xmath , and a set of indices @xmath , such that @xmath is
biholomorphically equivalent to @xmath , where @xmath is a complex unit
disc.

Locally around the point @xmath , different local leaves (biholomorphic
images of unit discs) may belong to the same global leaf @xmath . The
positions of local leaves belonging to the same global leaf are
described by the so-called holonomy map . We describe it in the
following paragraph.

As in the case of planar saddles, each complex saddle has two complex
separatrices ² ² 2 Leaves through singular point @xmath , whose closure
by the singular point is a germ of an analytic curve. . By change of
variables, we can always suppose that they correspond to the complex
axes ( @xmath and @xmath planes).

Let @xmath be some ’initial’ point lying close to the @xmath -axis
separatrix and let @xmath be a global leaf of a foliation through @xmath
. Due to the complexity of the time, the flow along the leaf does not
have a predefined direction, and we can move along any oriented path on
the @xmath -axis while staying on the same leaf in @xmath . By symmetry,
the same can be done along the oriented paths in the @xmath -axis
separatrix.

Consider the two-dimensional vertical cross-section @xmath at @xmath ,
transversal to the separatrix @xmath and the foliation. Let @xmath
denote the intersection of @xmath with the separatrix. Obviously, @xmath
and we parametrize it simply by variable @xmath . Take any closed
oriented path @xmath around the origin lying in the separatrix plane
@xmath , with the initial point @xmath . Consider further the
transversal cross-sections at some small distances along the path. Due
to the product structure locally around each point, if the distances
between the cross-sections are chosen sufficiently small, we can make a
parallel transport of @xmath along the leaf @xmath , following the path
@xmath . We return to the same cross-section @xmath in some (other)
point @xmath . We consider the function defined on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each point @xmath belonging to some neighborhood @xmath of @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath obtained by its parallel transport along the
corresponding leaf, following the path @xmath . The function @xmath is
called the holonomy map of the @xmath -axis on cross-section @xmath . It
can be shown that its form does not depend on the choice of closed path
@xmath with initial point @xmath going around the origin, therefore we
denote it by @xmath only. The holonomy map of @xmath -axis is defined in
the same way, considering a horizontal cross-section @xmath .

In general, @xmath , due to the fact that phase curves are described by
multiple-valued complex functions. For example, in the simplest case of
the linear saddle ( 2.57 ) with hyperbolicity ratio @xmath , the phase
curves are given by @xmath . Geometrically, this shows that each global
leaf locally has infinitely many parallel levels, accumulating at the
separatrices. The passage from one level to another happens while
circling around the origin. The form of a holonomy map describes the
density of this accumulation. Figure 2.6 taken from [ 32 ] can help us
visualize the dynamics around a complex saddle.

Finally, note the parallel between the complex holonomy map for complex
saddles and the Poincaré map defined on a transversal to a planar
saddle.

At the end of the section, we give an overview of orbital formal normal
forms for complex saddles, from [ 26 ] or [ 32 ] . Recall the definition
of (formally) orbitally equivalent germs of vector fields from e.g. [ 52
] . Two germs of holomorphic vector fields are (formally) orbitally
equivalent if they are (formally) conjugated ³ ³ 3 To remind, (formal)
conjugacy of vector fields means that they can be translated one to
another by a (formal) change of variables. , up to multiplication with a
holomorphic function non-vanishing at the origin. The (formal) orbital
equivalence can equivalently be defined as the (formal) conjugacy of the
induced foliations. Note that (formal) conjugacy of vector fields
implies their (formal) orbital equivalence, but the contrary is not
true. For definitions, see e.g. [ 52 ] .

###### Proposition 2.12 (Orbital formal normal forms for complex
saddles, Section 22B in [26]).

Let @xmath be a complex saddle germ with hyperbolicity ratio @xmath .

1.  Nonresonant saddles @xmath are formally orbitally linearizable, that
    is, formally orbitally equivalent to the linear germ

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.58)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.  Resonant saddles @xmath are either formally orbitally linearizable
    or formally orbitally equivalent to the germ

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.59)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for some @xmath . Here, @xmath , for @xmath , @xmath .

The germs ( 2.58 ), ( 2.59 ) respectively are called orbital formal
normal forms of the initial field X. In case @xmath of nonlinearizable
resonant germs, the quadruple @xmath represents its formal invariants .

#### 2.4.2 Application via holonomy map

It has been proven by Mattei, Moussu [ 36 ] that (formal) orbital
equivalence of complex saddle germs is equivalent to (formal) conjugacy
of their holonomy maps of both the horizontal and the vertical axis, see
[ 32 , Theorem 5.2.1] . On the other hand, the holonomy maps of formal
normal forms ( 2.58 ) and ( 2.59 ) can be computed integrating the
normal forms, see Example 2.2 . Proposition 2.13 follows.

###### Example 2.2 (The holonomy maps of linear saddles, Section
5.1[32]).

The first integral ⁴ ⁴ 4 A first integral of a field @xmath is a
nonconstant holomorphic function @xmath , constant along the phase
curves (leaves) of the field, if such exists. The phase curves are then
given by @xmath . Equivalently, the derivative of @xmath vanishes along
the phase curves, that is, @xmath of a linear saddle ( 2.58 ) is given
by @xmath . The leaves (phase curves) are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The holonomy map of the @xmath -axis, denoted @xmath , on the
cross-section @xmath parametrized by @xmath , is computed by definition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We get the rotation @xmath . Similarly, for the holonomy of the @xmath
-axis on the cross section @xmath parametrized by variable @xmath , we
get @xmath .

In the sequel, @xmath denotes a holonomy map of the @xmath -axis,
defined on a cross-section @xmath parametrized by variable @xmath .
Analogously, @xmath denotes a holonomy map of the @xmath -axis, defined
on a cross-section @xmath parametrized by variable @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.13 (Holonomy maps of complex saddles, Lemma 22.2 in
[26]).

Let @xmath be a saddle germ with hyperbolicity ratio @xmath . If @xmath
, let @xmath .

1.   For nonresonant or formally orbitally linearizable resonant germs ,
    the holonomy maps @xmath and @xmath respectively are formally
    conjugated to the rotations

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Moreover, for formally orbitally linearizable resonant germs it
    holds that @xmath and @xmath .

2.   For resonant, formally orbitally nonlinearizable germs with formal
    invariants @xmath , the holonomy map @xmath is a germ with
    multiplier @xmath , whose @xmath -th iterate @xmath is a parabolic
    diffeomorphism tangent to the identity, of the formal type @xmath .

    Analogously, the holonomy map @xmath is a germ with multiplier
    @xmath , whose @xmath -th iterate @xmath is a parabolic
    diffeomorphism tangent to the identity, of the formal type @xmath .

By Proposition 2.13 , nonhyperbolic germs of complex diffeomorphisms
treated at the beginning of the chapter are related to complex saddle
fields through holonomy maps. We thus directly apply our results of
Section 2.3 about classification of complex diffeomorphisms using
fractal properties of orbits, to read the formal normal form of complex
saddles from fractal properties of orbits of their holonomy maps. We use
the holonomy map @xmath of the @xmath -axis. Similar conclusion can be
drawn using the holonomy of the @xmath -axis.

We suppose here that the saddle is resonant . In nonresonant cases, its
holonomy map is a complex diffeomorphism of the type (NH1), with
irrational rotation in the linear part. This is the case we omitted from
our analysis in Section 2.3 .

Let @xmath be a resonant complex saddle with hyperbolicity ratio @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be the holonomy map of the @xmath -axis,
defined on some cross-section @xmath . Let @xmath be any orbit of @xmath
on @xmath , with @xmath sufficiently close to the origin.

###### Proposition 2.14 (Orbital formal normal form of resonant complex
saddles and fractal properties of orbits of holonomy maps).

Let @xmath be a resonant saddle germ and @xmath , @xmath as above. If
@xmath , the saddle is formally orbitally linearizable. Otherwise, if
@xmath , the orbital formal invariants @xmath of the saddle are uniquely
determined by fractal properties of any orbit @xmath of the @xmath -th
iterate of the holonomy map,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following explicit formulas hold:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath denotes the normalized directed Minkowski content and
@xmath is a function of @xmath , explicitly given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the hyperbolicity ratio of the saddle can be read beforehand
from the geometry of orbit @xmath , as was commented at the beginning of
Section 2.3 . Note also that the second formula holds in the case when
@xmath . The case @xmath requests a slightly different definition of
fractal properties for orbits of @xmath , see comment after Definition
2.5 .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 2.13 , the holonomy map @xmath of a resonant saddle is a
nonhyperbolic complex diffeomorphism with @xmath as a fixed point, with
multiplier @xmath . Here, @xmath is the hyperbolicity ratio of the
saddle. First, the elements @xmath and @xmath of the formal normal form
of the saddle can be read from geometry of any orbit @xmath , as
described at the beginning of Section 2.3 .

Furthermore, we need to read whether the saddle is linarizable and, if
not, the elements @xmath of its orbital formal normal form. It holds
that @xmath is either the identity map or a parabolic diffeomorphism
tangent to the identity. By Proposition 2.13 , in the latter case it is
of the formal type @xmath .

The formally orbitally linearizable case of resonant saddle corresponds
to a special case of formally linearizable holonomy map. In this case,
@xmath is formally linearizable germ tangent to the identity, therefore
it is the identity map by Proposition 2.3 . The orbit @xmath consists of
@xmath points only ( @xmath rotated @xmath times). In this case, @xmath
Note however that this is the only case of trivial box dimension, since
in all other cases we have that @xmath , by finite stability property of
the box dimension. The linearizability result follows.

The nonlinearizable cases ( @xmath ) follow directly applying Theorem
2.2 to @xmath . ∎

#### 2.4.3 A preliminary result: box dimension of a planar saddle loop

We consider an analytic planar vector field with a saddle loop. After
necessary changes of variables, we can suppose that the saddle lies at
the origin and that its separatrices correspond to the coordinate axes.
This section is dedicated to computing the box dimension of a spiral
trajectory accumulating at a saddle loop. This is a preliminary result
for computing the box dimension of leaves of a foliation for complex
saddles, which is left for the future work. We expect to be able to
apply similar techniques as here.

In our computations, we use the notation and the results from the book
of Roussarie [ 46 , Chapter 5] .

Let @xmath be a planar analytic vector field with saddle point at the
origin:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are analytic functions of higher order.
If @xmath , we say that the saddle is resonant . We put @xmath , where
@xmath , @xmath . In the case @xmath , the saddle is called nonresonant
. Moreover, by exchanging the roles of @xmath and @xmath and dividing
the field by @xmath , if necessary, we can always suppose that @xmath .

In computing the box dimension of a spiral trajectory, we will use the
known asymptotics of its Poincaré map on a transversal to the loop. Let
@xmath and @xmath represent the horizontal and the vertical transversal,
parametrized so that the origin lies on the loop. Let @xmath denote the
Poincaré map on any transversal @xmath not passing through the origin.

###### Proposition 2.15 (Poincaré map on a transversal to the loop,
Sections 5.1.3, 5.2.2 [46]).

Let @xmath be an analytic vector field with saddle loop at the origin,
with ratio of hyperbolicity @xmath . The Poincaré map @xmath has the
following asymptotic expansion on @xmath , as @xmath :

1.  @xmath :

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    Here, the coefficients @xmath and @xmath are obtained as follows:

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    is the transition (Dulac) map at the saddle, and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is the inverse of the analytic transition map closing the
    connection.

2.  @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Note that the case @xmath corresponds to the repelling saddle loop. It
can easily be transformed to attracting saddle loop case by the
transformation mentioned above.

Before stating the dimension result, we introduce the notion of
codimension of the saddle loop. There are many different interpretations
of codimension in the literature. This definition is taken from [ 46 ,
Definition 27] . It can be understood as the minimal number of
parameters that we have to add in @xmath to get a generic unfolding of
the saddle loop, see p. 335 [ 40 ] , or equivalently, as the number of
conditions imposed on the loop. Codimension is at least one, since one
parameter is always needed to close the loop (it breaks in unfoldings).

###### Definition 2.6 (Codimension of the saddle loop, Definition 27 in
[46]).

Let @xmath and @xmath . We say that the saddle loop is of codimension
@xmath if @xmath , and of codimension @xmath if @xmath . If @xmath , we
say that the saddle loop is of codimension @xmath .

We state now our main dimension result. Let @xmath be the initial point
lying in the neighborhood of the loop and let @xmath denote the spiral
trajectory with the initial point @xmath , accumulating at the loop.

###### Theorem 2.4 (Box dimension of the spiral trajectory around a
saddle loop).

Let @xmath be the codimension of the saddle loop and @xmath any spiral
trajectory as above. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Sketch of the proof. We compute the box dimension dividing the
trajectory in two parts, @xmath , and using the finite stability
property of box dimension. @xmath is the non-regular part of the spiral
trajectory near the saddle, between @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the
remaining regular part of the trajectory. We first compute the box
dimension of @xmath . The main tools are Lemma 2.9 and Lemma 2.10 stated
below. First, in Lemma 2.9 , we show that @xmath can by bilipschitz
mapping be transformed to a family of parallel ⁵ ⁵ 5 Let @xmath . We
call the family @xmath , where @xmath , the family of parallel
hyperbolas parametrized by @xmath . The set @xmath determines the points
where hyperbolas from the family intersect the transversal. hyperbolas,
intersecting the transversals at the points with the same asymptotics.
Then, in Lemma 2.10 , we compute the box dimension of the family of
parallel hyperbolas with the known asymptotics on the transversal. To
compute the box dimension of the regular part @xmath , we can directly
apply the well-known flow-box theorem , stated in Lemma 2.8 .

We first state the mentioned lemmas.

###### Lemma 2.8 (Flow-box theorem, p.75[29]).

Let us consider a planar vector field of class @xmath . Assume that
@xmath is a closed set the boundary of which is the union of two
trajectories and two curves transversal to trajectories. If U is free of
singularities and periodic orbits, then the vector field restricted to U
is diffeomorphically equivalent to the field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the unit square @xmath .

That is, the flow on @xmath can be represented as a paralel flow.

###### Lemma 2.9.

Let @xmath be an analytic vector field with saddle at the origin, @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

There exists a neighborhood of the origin such that ( 2.60 ) is
orbitally diffeomorphically equivalent to its linear part. Moreover, the
diffeomorphism acts quadrant-wise.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath have a nonresonant saddle at the origin, @xmath . By [ 46 ,
Theorem 13] , such a vector field is linearizable in a neighborhood of
the origin: it is diffeomorphically equivalent to its linear part. This
proves the statement in the nonresonant case.

We prove here the more complicated, resonant case, which is
nonlinearizable. We show that it is orbitally @xmath -linearizable. Let
@xmath have a resonant saddle at the origin, with @xmath . Let @xmath
with @xmath . By Theorem 13 in [ 46 ] , there exists an integer @xmath ,
the coefficients @xmath , and a neighborhood of the origin, such that
@xmath is diffeomorphically equivalent to the polynomial vector field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

We construct a diffeomorphism @xmath , acting quadrant-wise in a
neighborhood of the origin, which sends phase curves of field ( 2.61 )
to phase curves of its linear part. We show here the construction of
@xmath in the first quadrant. Afterwards we glue functions @xmath
constructed in each quadrant to a global diffeomorphism @xmath at the
origin.

We proceed as in [ 46 , 5.1.2] (a similar technique was used there for
obtaining the Dulac map at the resonant saddle). We solve the system (
2.61 ) by substitution @xmath , whereas we get the system

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving ( 2.62 ) by expanding @xmath in series with respect to the
initial condition @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The form of @xmath , @xmath , is described in Proposition 10 in [ 46 ] :
@xmath are polynomials in @xmath , of degree @xmath . Therefore, we
easily obtain the bounds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath sufficiently big.

Let @xmath be a horizontal transversal to the saddle. We should in fact
consider the transversal at some small height @xmath instead at @xmath ,
but the computations are the same. Using ( 2.63 ) and @xmath , we can
now derive the formula for the phase curve of the field ( 2.61 ),
passing through the initial point @xmath . We put @xmath in ( 2.63 ) and
solve @xmath . We get that @xmath , and then, for the phase curve
through @xmath , we have the formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The phase curve of the linear part passing through @xmath is, on the
other hand, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now define mapping @xmath sending phase curves of ( 2.61 ) to phase
curves of the linear part in the following manner. For any point @xmath
close to the saddle, there exists a unique phase curve of the linear
field passing through it, and it is determined by the point @xmath on
@xmath . We consider the phase curve of ( 2.61 ) passing through the
same point @xmath . @xmath is then defined as the orthogonal projection
of @xmath on this phase curve. More precisely, by ( 2.65 ) and ( 2.66 ),
we get the formula for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Function @xmath is obviously well-defined, continuous and differentiable
in @xmath . We show now that we can extend the definition of @xmath to
the axes, so that the function is continuously differentiable in @xmath
.

We define @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath cannot be extended
continuously simply by formula ( 2.67 ) to @xmath due to the logarithmic
term. However, using ( 2.64 ), @xmath . Therefore, extended as above,
@xmath is continuous on @xmath .

Furthermore, @xmath given by ( 2.67 ) is differentiable on @xmath . We
can show, by direct computation of the differential and using bounds (
2.64 ), that the differential is bounded, as @xmath and @xmath .
Moreover,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.68)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Obviously, @xmath as @xmath . We can check directly by definition of
differentiability at @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , after some
computation and using bounds ( 2.64 ) and ( 2.69 ), that @xmath extended
to the axes in the above manner is continuously differentiable at the
axes in the first quadrant and that the differential is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that we can obtain similar formulas for @xmath in other quadrants,
with the same linear part in ( 2.67 ), and other parts possibly
differing in signs (depending on the quadrant). In the second quadrant,
in ( 2.66 ), we have @xmath , @xmath . In the third quadrant, @xmath ,
@xmath . In the fourth quadrant, @xmath , @xmath . Therefore, in the
first and in the second quadrant @xmath are given by the same formula (
2.67 ), while in the third and in the fourth quadrant we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It can be checked that the functions and their differentials in
quadrants glue nicely to a continuously differentiable function @xmath
around the origin, with differential at the origin equal to identity
operator, as in ( 2.70 ). Now we can apply the inverse function theorem
at the origin. We conclude that @xmath is a local diffeomorphism.
Moreover, by construction, it leaves the axes invariant and maps each
quadrant to itself.

Note in the course of the proof that @xmath is the best class that we
can obtain applying bounds ( 2.64 ). ∎

###### Lemma 2.10 (Box dimension of the countable union of hyperbolas at
given distances).

Let @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath be a discrete set of points on
transversal @xmath , accumulating at @xmath , such that the points and
the distances between them are eventually decreasing. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let the @xmath -power sequence @xmath have box dimension equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a countable family of hyperbolas passing through points @xmath on
@xmath . It holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote a horizontal and @xmath a vertical transversal. Note
that, by Lemma 2.10 , the box dimension of the union of hyperbolas
@xmath between @xmath and @xmath is in fact the box dimension of a
product structure generated by hyperbolas around transversals @xmath or
@xmath . The neighborhood of the transversal on which the sequence of
the intersections has a bigger box dimension prevails. The proof
resembles to the proof for the box dimension of the Cartesian product,
where the @xmath -neighborhood of @xmath -dimensional product @xmath may
be directly estimated using the @xmath -neighborhood of @xmath
-dimensional set @xmath .

###### Proof.

The intersections of @xmath with the transversals form a discrete sets
of points, @xmath on @xmath , and @xmath on @xmath . The family @xmath
can be considered as a family of phase curves of the linear saddle with
ratio of hyperbolicity @xmath . Immediately, by flow-box Lemma 2.8 , we
get that the box dimension of @xmath on a small rectangle around @xmath
is equal to @xmath , and around @xmath equal to @xmath . Therefore, by
the finite stability and the monotonicity property of box dimension, we
get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , the hyperbolas are symmetric with respect to @xmath and
sequences generated on @xmath and on @xmath are equal. If @xmath , we
first symmetrize the family by a inverse-lipschitz change of variables.
For @xmath , we apply the change @xmath . For @xmath , the change @xmath
. We compute the box dimension of the symmetrized family and, by the
inverse lipschitz property, conclude that the box dimension of the
original family @xmath is smaller or equal.

Let @xmath . The case @xmath is treated analogously. In the new
coordinate system, we get the symmetric family @xmath of hyperbolas
@xmath . It generates on @xmath and on @xmath the same discrete set
@xmath , of box dimension @xmath . The box dimension of family @xmath
is, by symmetry and by finite stability property of box dimension, equal
to the box dimension of its subset between the diagonal @xmath and
transversal @xmath .

We now directly estimate the area of the @xmath -neighborhoods of the
union of hyperbolas @xmath in this area, establishing the almost product
relation with the @xmath -neighborhoods of the discrete set on the
transversal. We can easily see that the intersection points of @xmath
and the diagonal @xmath are given by @xmath . Therefore, the distances
between the points on @xmath are eventually the smallest, compared to
any other transversal in the area.

We compute the area dividing the @xmath -neighborhood into tail and
nucleus. By tail of the @xmath -neighborhood, @xmath , we mean the
disjoint neighborhoods of the first finitely many hyperbolas. The
remainder of the @xmath -neighborhood, where the neighborhoods of
hyperbolas start overlapping, is called the nucleus , and denoted @xmath
. For the idea of division in tail and nucleus, see [ 53 ] . Since the
distances are the smallest on @xmath , the critical index separating the
tail and the nucleus is the same as for one-dimensional set @xmath
generated on @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath denote the tail and the
nucleus respectively of the @xmath -neighborhood of the set @xmath on
@xmath . Similarly, let @xmath , @xmath , denote the tail and the
nucleus of the @xmath -neighborhood of the union of hyperbolas @xmath .
We now bring them into direct relation, and use the box dimension of the
one-dimensional system on @xmath to directly conclude about the
dimension of @xmath .

By @xmath , we denote the hyperbola passing through point @xmath on
@xmath , @xmath . Their lengths are bounded from below and above: there
exist @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we use that @xmath . Since @xmath , by definition of box dimension
it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( 2.72 ) and ( 2.73 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the nucleus, we can give an easy upper bound. The hyperbola
separating the tail and the nucleus is given by @xmath . The area @xmath
is smaller than or equal to the area between the @xmath -axis, the
hyperbola @xmath lifted by @xmath , the diagonal @xmath and the
transversal @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Take any fixed @xmath . There exists a small @xmath , such that @xmath .
Integrating and estimating ( 2.75 ), it holds that there exist @xmath
and @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Passing to limit as @xmath in the above inequality and using ( 2.73 ),
we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( 2.74 ) and ( 2.76 ), it follows that @xmath

It follows that @xmath The same for the upper box dimension. By ( 2.71
), we get that, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be proven analogously that for @xmath it holds @xmath ∎

We illustrate the product statement of the lemma on Figure 2.7 below. In
the figure, @xmath . The family of hyperbolas @xmath , intersects the
transversals @xmath and @xmath in the one-dimensional sequences @xmath
and @xmath respectively. Box dimension of the sequence @xmath is smaller
than of @xmath ( @xmath for @xmath is lipschitz). The accumulation of
density is therefore around the transversal @xmath , and the set of
hyperbolas takes the product box dimension around @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the next remark, we list the one-dimensional discrete systems that we
have considered so far and that satisfy the conditions of Lemma 2.10 .

###### Remark 2.2.

Let @xmath be a one-dimensional discrete system with initial point
@xmath , generated by function @xmath on @xmath .

1.   (Theorem 1 in [ 13 ] ) Let @xmath , where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It holds that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.77)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The box dimension of a sequence that satisfies ( 2.77 ) is equal to
    @xmath .

2.   (Theorem 1.2 in Chapter 1 ) Let @xmath , where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It holds that @xmath .

3.   (Lemma 1, Theorem 5 in [ 13 ] ) Let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The discrete system generated by @xmath accumulates at zero
    exponentially fast. There exist @xmath and @xmath such that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.78)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The box dimension of a sequence satisfying ( 2.78 ) is trivial,
    @xmath .

Proof of Theorem 2.4 . Suppose that the saddle loop is of codimension
@xmath , with ratio of hyperbolicity @xmath . Additionally, we can
assume that @xmath , otherwise we divide the field by @xmath and
exchange the roles of @xmath and @xmath , which leaves the box dimension
intact. We consider one spiral trajectory @xmath accumulating at the
loop, with @xmath close to the loop. We divide the trajectory in two
parts: the part @xmath near the saddle, between the transversals @xmath
and @xmath , and the remaining regular part @xmath .

We first compute @xmath . The Poincaré map @xmath on the transversal
@xmath is given in Proposition 2.15 . By Lemma 2.9 and its proof, by a
diffeomorphic equivalence, the arcs of the trajectory in @xmath can be
simplified as the union @xmath of countably many hyperbolas of the type
@xmath , which intersect @xmath in the same points generated by @xmath .
By Proposition 2.15 and Remark 2.2 , Lemma 2.10 can be applied to
compute the box dimension of @xmath . Furthermore, diffeomorphic
equivalence is a bilipschitz map,and the dimension of @xmath is equal to
the dimension of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is left to compute the dimension of the remaining, regular part
@xmath of the trajectory. In this area, there are no singularities of
the vector field. Therefore we can directly apply the flow-box Lemma 2.8
. By Remark 2.2 , the box dimension of an orbit of the Poincaré map on
any transversal is equal to @xmath , if @xmath is even, or @xmath , if
@xmath is odd.

The box dimension of @xmath is computed as the box dimension of
Cartesian product,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, by finite stability property of the box dimension, the result
follows. @xmath

##### Application of results: the cyclicity of a saddle loop and the box
dimension of a spiral trajectory around the loop

We have seen in Chapter 1 that, in recognizing the cyclicity of
monodromic limit periodic sets for planar systems, we can use fractal
analysis of orbits of the Poincaré map on a transversal. It was shown
that in focus and limit cycle cases there exists a bijective
correspondence between the box dimension of any orbit of the Poincaré
map and the cyclicity of a set. Similary, the bijective correspondence
was established between the cyclicity and the box dimension of a spiral
trajectory around focus or limit cycle, see [ 57 ] .

However, in Chapter 1 (see Example 1.5 ), we have shown that the box
dimension of orbits of the Poincaré map is imprecise in recognizing
cyclicity in cases of saddle loops. Having computed the box dimension of
a spiral trajectory around a saddle loop in the previous subsection, we
show here that its box dimension exhibits the same deficiency.

###### Proposition 2.16 (Cyclicity of the saddle loop and the box
dimension of a spiral trajectory).

Let @xmath be a generic analytic unfolding of the loop @xmath , such
that the regularity condition ( 1.19 ) is satisfied. Let @xmath be any
point sufficiently close to the loop and let @xmath denote the spiral
trajectory passing through @xmath , with box dimension

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the box dimension, the cyclicity is not uniquely determined. More
precisely,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If @xmath , by Theorem 2.4 , the saddle loop may be of codimension
@xmath or @xmath . By [ 46 ] , under the regularity assumption on the
unfolding, the codimension is equal to the cyclicity. ∎

#### 2.4.4 A conjecture about the box dimension of leaves of a foliation
of complex resonant saddles

We consider resonant complex saddles in @xmath , defined by ( 2.57 ). By
Proposition 2.12 , they are either formally orbitally linearizable or of
the formal type @xmath Here, @xmath is the ratio of hyperbolicity. In
this section, we investigate if the box dimension of leaves of a
foliation can reveal formal orbital linearizability and, otherwise,
formal invariants.

Let @xmath denote one leaf of a foliation, passing through a point
@xmath sufficiently close to the saddle. Let @xmath and @xmath denote a
horizontal and a vertical cross-section. Let @xmath denote the holonomy
map induced by @xmath on @xmath and @xmath on @xmath . We know by
Proposition 2.5 that, around each cross-section @xmath , the leaf of a
foliation has a locally parallel structure (it may be exchanged by a
bilipschitz map with family of unit complex discs). The positions of
different levels belonging to one leaf on @xmath are given by an orbit
of the holonomy map. The holonomy maps of a complex resonant saddle are
known to be complex parabolic diffeomorphisms, see Proposition 2.13 . We
have computed the box dimension of their orbits in Theorem 1 in Section
2.3 .

We distinguish two cases of resonant saddles:

1.  If the saddle is formally orbitally linearizable , by Proposition
    2.13 , orbits of holonomy maps @xmath and @xmath on cross-sections
    @xmath and @xmath are given by @xmath , @xmath points respectively.
    The box dimension of orbits is equal to @xmath . By product
    structure, we conclude that the box dimension of @xmath locally
    around each cross-section is equal to 2.

2.  If the saddle is formally orbitally nonlinearizable , by Proposition
    2.13 , @xmath belongs to the formal class @xmath , and @xmath
    belongs to the formal class @xmath . By Theorem 2.2 in section 2.3 ,
    box dimension of their orbits is equal to

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Since orbits of @xmath ( @xmath ) consist of @xmath ( @xmath )
    disjoint orbits of @xmath @xmath , by finite stability of box
    dimension we get the same dimension result for orbits of holonomy
    maps. By product structure, we conclude that the box dimension of
    @xmath locally around cross-section @xmath is equal to @xmath .
    Locally around @xmath , it is equal to @xmath .

Therefore, in 1. and 2., by finite stability property of box dimension,
we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

To verify the other side of the inequality ( 2.79 ), we need to compute
the box dimension of a leaf in a small neighborhood of the origin, where
the product structure is lost. This is left for future research. Driven
by results of Lemma 2.10 for the planar saddle case, we hope that, also
in the complex case, we have equality in ( 2.79 ). However, due to
connectedness of levels of each leaf in any neighborhood of the origin,
which was not the case for planar saddle, we cannot directly apply
results from Subsection 2.4.2 to complex cases.

###### Conjecture.

Let @xmath be a resonant complex saddle and @xmath any leaf of a
foliation, passing through @xmath close to the saddle. In ( 2.79 ), the
equality holds.

If this conjecture is true, then it holds: a resonant saddle is
linearizable if and only if the box dimension of leaves of a foliation
is equal to 2 (trivial). If this is not the case, the first formal
invariant @xmath of the orbital formal normal form can be read from the
box dimension of any leaf of a foliation, assumed that the ratio of
hyperbolicity @xmath of the saddle is known.

For the other formal invariant @xmath of the saddle, we expect that the
further terms in the development, as @xmath , of the @xmath
-neighborhoods of leaves are needed, similary as in the case of
parabolic diffeomorphisms in Section 2.3 .

## Chapter 3 About analytic classification of complex parabolic
diffeomorphisms using @xmath-neighborhoods of orbits

We consider germs of parabolic diffeomorphisms @xmath , as in Section
2.1 :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We described in Section 2.3 that the formal class of ( 3.1 ) is given by
two formal invariants, @xmath , @xmath . Applying formal changes of
variables reducing a germ of multiplicity @xmath to its formal normal
form, we noticed that the formal class depends only on @xmath -jet of
the germ. According to that, in Subsection 2.3.3 , we showed that the
formal class of a diffeomorphism can be deduced only from the first
@xmath coefficients in the formal asymptotic development in @xmath of
the directed area of the @xmath -neighborhood of only one orbit, as
@xmath .

On the other hand, analytic class cannot be read from any finite jet of
parabolic germ, see e.g. [ 26 , 21H] . It can be shown that there exist
analytically non-conjugated germs with the same @xmath -jet, for every
@xmath (they are formally conjugated by previous considerations). By
Ecalle [ 15 ] and Voronin [ 60 ] , the analytic class of a parabolic
diffeomorphism is given by @xmath diffeomorphisms, the so-called
Ecalle-Voronin moduli or horn maps . We describe the moduli in more
detail in Section 3.1 . Accordingly, in the hope to deduce the analytic
class of a diffeomorphism from directed areas of @xmath -neighborhoods
of orbits, we analyse the whole functions of @xmath -neighborhoods of
orbits, not just finitely many terms in their asymptotic developments in
@xmath .

This chapter is motivated by the following question:

Can we read the analytic class of a diffeomorphism from @xmath
-neighborhoods of its orbits, regarded as functions of parameter @xmath
and of initial point @xmath ?

For simplicity, we consider only the diffeomorphisms in the formal class
@xmath , formally equivalent to the time-one map @xmath . We call @xmath
the model diffeomorphism . Furthermore, we assume that @xmath is
prenormalized . That is, the first normalizing change of variables is
already made, and further we admit only changes of variables tangent to
the identity. Therefore, all such diffeomorphisms are of the form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case, there exists only one attracting petal @xmath , invariant
for @xmath (around negative real axis) and one repelling petal @xmath ,
invariant for @xmath (around positive real axis) for the local dynamics,
see Figure 3.1 .

We denote intersections of petals above and below the real axis by
@xmath , @xmath respectively. Near the origin, these sets consist of
closed orbits .

To avoid confusion with the notion of sectors ¹ ¹ 1 We call a sector any
open set between two rays emanating from the origin, of finite or
infinite radius. , we explain here the term petal . It is an open
bounded set @xmath in the form of petal : it is contained in some sector
of opening say @xmath and, for every @xmath , there exists @xmath , such
that the sector of radius @xmath and of opening @xmath is a subset of
@xmath . The boundary of the petal is tangent to the directions @xmath
and @xmath at the origin.

Petals in the Leau-Fatou flower are obtained as invariant sets for the
dynamics: attracting petals @xmath are invariant sets for @xmath (
@xmath ), and repelling petals @xmath are invariant sets for @xmath (
@xmath ).

###### Remark 3.1 (Leau construction of petals, from Section A.6, [31]
or Leau Theorem 2.3.1 in [32]).

We explain here how we construct invariant petals @xmath and @xmath of
opening angles @xmath , centered at positive and negative real axis
respectively, in case of a diffeomorphism @xmath , as shown in Figure
3.1 .

We first derive @xmath such that @xmath . Let @xmath be the radius of
convergence of @xmath . Inside the discs of radii @xmath , we can find
@xmath -invariant petals @xmath of opening angle less than, but tending
to @xmath , as @xmath . To show that, we work at infinity. Instead of
considering @xmath at @xmath , we send @xmath to infinity and get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is bounded by an uniform constant @xmath on the complement
of the disc @xmath . For @xmath , we search for the set of all @xmath in
the complement of disc @xmath , such that the whole trajectory @xmath
remains in this set. Using @xmath , it can be seen that positive,
infinite trajectory of @xmath , with initial point @xmath , stays in the
infinite sector @xmath with basepoint @xmath , horizontal central line
and of opening @xmath . It is left to find the greatest subset of the
complement of @xmath , such that, for every point @xmath , its
corresponding sector @xmath remains inside this set. Inverting the set
at zero, we get a petal @xmath with origin as the basepoint, centered at
the negative real axis, and of opening smaller, but tending to @xmath ,
as @xmath . By construction, it holds that @xmath . Finally, we can take
our invariant set @xmath to be the union of all sets @xmath , as @xmath
. It can be seen that it is again a petal, centered at the negative real
axis, and of opening @xmath .

The same can be repeated for @xmath , invariant under @xmath .

Furthermore, on the inverse image of each constructed subpetal @xmath ,
it holds that @xmath This can be seen by induction. That is, for each
subpetal @xmath , there exists a constant @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, we cannot find an uniform constant @xmath on the
whole petal @xmath , since @xmath , as @xmath .

Note that we can extend @xmath and @xmath to maximal invariant petals ,
which contain all closed orbits, and whose intersections consist exactly
of closed orbits. We can divide them in the same manner into subpetals
@xmath , such that ( 3.2 ) holds. In the sequel, let @xmath and @xmath
denote the maximal Fatou petals.

We do not provide an answer to the above question about analytic
classification. We investigate analyticity properties of complex
measures of @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits in Section 3.3 . This leads
us to studying analyticity of solutions of special difference equations
for @xmath , which we call the @xmath -Abel equations , @xmath , in
Section 3.2 . The analytic class of a diffeomorphism @xmath is
determined by sectorial solutions of the 0-Abel equation for @xmath , as
we will explain in Section 3.1 . On the other hand, complex measures of
@xmath -neighborhoods of orbits of @xmath are related to sectorial
solutions of the 1-Abel equation for @xmath . In Section 3.4 , we show
that the classes of diffeomorphisms derived using solutions of 0-Abel
and of 1-Abel equation are not close to each other. Rather than that,
they are in a transversal position. Considering complex measures of
@xmath -neighborhoods of orbits from this viewpoint thus gives us no
information about the analytic class of a diffeomorphism, but provides
some interesting classifications.

We introduce here a few definitions and the Borel-Laplace summation
technique that will be used in the sequel.

Let @xmath be the orbit of a diffeomorphism ( 3.1 ) with initial point
@xmath belonging to an attracting petal @xmath . In case @xmath ,
according to Subsection 2.3.1 , we have the following asymptotic
development of the complex measure of the @xmath -neighborhood of @xmath
, as @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Due to the modification in the definition of complex measure with
respect to the definition of directed area, see Definitions 2.1 and 2.2
, the exponents from the development for the directed area ( 2.1 ) are
shifted by @xmath , but the proof is essentially the same. Similarly, in
the boundary case @xmath , we have the development:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath are functions of (finitely many) coefficients of @xmath and
do not depend on the initial point . The coefficient @xmath is the first
coefficient dependent on the initial point @xmath . It is a well-defined
function of @xmath on @xmath .

For orbits @xmath of the inverse diffeomorphism @xmath , with initial
point @xmath belonging to a repelling petal @xmath , a similar
development is valid. In the same way, we get the function @xmath ,
@xmath , as the first coefficient dependent on the initial point.

###### Definition 3.1 (The principal initial point dependent parts).

The principal initial point dependent part of the complex measure of
@xmath -neighborhoods of orbits of @xmath in @xmath is the first
coefficient @xmath in the development ( 3.3 ) depending on the initial
point @xmath , regarded as a function of @xmath .

By abuse, for the sake of simplicity, we will call @xmath only the
principal part of the complex measure for @xmath on @xmath . Naturally,
on a repelling petal @xmath , we define the principal part of the
complex measure for @xmath on @xmath , denoted @xmath , as the first
coefficient dependent on the initial point in the development ( 3.3 )
for the orbit @xmath of the inverse diffeomorphism @xmath .

We define now generalized Abel equations for parabolic diffeomorphisms.
Let us recall from e.g. [ 48 ] or [ 32 ] that the difference equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

is called the Abel equation for a diffeomorphism @xmath . We generalize
this notion.

###### Definition 3.2 (Generalized Abel equation for a diffeomorphism
@xmath).

A generalized Abel equation for a diffeomorphism @xmath with the
right-hand side @xmath , is the difference equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

in some neighborhood of @xmath . The function @xmath that satisfies (
3.5 ) on some domain is called a solution of the generalized Abel
equation on the given domain . In particular, if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we call the equation ( 3.5 ) the @xmath -Abel equation for @xmath .

Such equations have already been mentioned in [ 31 , Section A.6] , but
were not given a name. Note that the @xmath -Abel equation ( @xmath ) is
the standard Abel equation ( 3.4 ).

##### Borel-Laplace summation

We describe the Borel-Laplace summation technique that can be used for
recovering sectorial summability of divergent formal series. We use it
in Examples in Subsection 3.4.1 . The technique in more detail and the
following definitions can be looked up in e.g. [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 10 ] ,
[ 43 ] , [ 48 ] .

We state first the definitions of Borel and Laplace transform. Note that
we work all the time at infinity, but we can pass to the origin simply
by inverting the variable. Suppose @xmath is a formal series at infinity
( @xmath ), without the constant term:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Its formal Borel transform is the linear operator @xmath , attributing
to the formal series @xmath at infinity the formal series @xmath at
zero, by the following formula:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

see Definition 1 in [ 48 ] .

It can be easily seen that if (and only if) @xmath is convergent at
infinity, then @xmath is an entire function. It is moreover
exponentially bounded in every direction – for every @xmath , where
@xmath is the radius of convergence of @xmath , it holds that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We consider the class of formal series @xmath whose Borel transform is a
convergent germ with finite radius of convergence, that can be extended
to exponentially bounded analytic function to all rays emanating from
the origin, except to (at most) finitely many on which it has
singularities. This singular rays are called Stokes directions . Such
formal series appear in many natural problems.

We define now a Laplace transform, see Definition 2 in [ 48 ] . Let
@xmath be a function analytic on some ray of direction @xmath emanating
from the origin, @xmath , and of bounded exponential type:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constant @xmath . The Laplace transform of @xmath in direction
@xmath is a linear operator @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Laplace transformation of @xmath , @xmath , is an analytic function
on the half-plane @xmath , see Figure 3.2 .

In a way, Laplace transform acts as the inverse of formal Borel
transform. We explain now how application of Borel and then Laplace
transform on some formal (divergent) series recovers analytic sums of
the series on sectors.

Let @xmath be some fixed direction emanating from the origin ( @xmath
denotes its angle) and @xmath . We say that the formal series @xmath is
@xmath -summable in arc of directions @xmath , if its Borel transform
@xmath is a convergent germ and can be extended analytically to all
directions in @xmath , with continuous exponential bounds: there exist
continuous, strictly positive functions @xmath , @xmath , such that it
holds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For more on @xmath -summability, see e.g. [ 43 , 2.3] or [ 10 ] .

In this case, using the definition above, we can apply the Laplace
transform of @xmath in all directions in @xmath , and we get that @xmath
is an analytic function in the petal ² ² 2 Petal at the origin, of
opening @xmath , is defined as an open set @xmath , contained in a
sector of opening @xmath , such that, for every @xmath , there exists a
subsector of finite radius of opening @xmath which is a subset of @xmath
. It is called the ouvert sectoriel in [ 31 ] . The petal at infinity is
the unbounded set obtained by inverting the petal at the origin. @xmath
of opening @xmath at infinity. Note that @xmath is of opening angle
bigger than @xmath , and bisected by @xmath . It can be shown that the
asymptotic development of the analytic function @xmath on @xmath , as
@xmath , is exactly the original formal series @xmath . Moreover, for
every subsector of @xmath , there exist constants @xmath , such that,
for every @xmath , it holds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

(The constants @xmath and @xmath do not depend on @xmath ).

In the case that ( 3.6 ) holds, a function (here, @xmath ) is said to be
the @xmath -sum of @xmath on V . Let us mention the Watson’s uniqueness
theorem , see e.g. [ 43 , 2.3] , that states that a @xmath -sum of a
formal series on a sector of opening greater than @xmath is unique. In
this sense, we consider the Borel-Laplace transformation @xmath as a
sectorially analytic sum of the original formal series @xmath . The
number of sectors is determined by the number of Stokes directions
(singular directions) of the Borel transformation @xmath . The sectors
overlap.

We illustrate the Borel-Laplace summation method on the simplest example
of Euler’s divergent series with only one Stokes direction.

###### Example 3.1 (Borel-Laplace sum of Euler series, see [6]).

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The series is divergent at @xmath . After applying Borel transform, we
get the convergent germ

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It can be extended to an analytic function, exponentially bounded with
any @xmath , in every direction except @xmath . Applying Laplace
transform in arc of directions @xmath , we get an analytic function
@xmath on sector @xmath of opening @xmath . Applying Laplace transform
in arc of directions @xmath , we get an analytic function @xmath on
sector @xmath of opening @xmath . They are the sectorial @xmath -sums of
Euler series, and differ on the intersection of sectors @xmath by
exponentially small differences:

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath .

At the end, we state some properties of the formal Borel transform , see
e.g. [ 6 ] . For two formal series @xmath , it holds that:

1.  (translations)

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

2.  (formal products) @xmath ³ ³ 3 a convolution

3.  (formal derivatives (term by term)) @xmath

### 3.1 Ecalle-Voronin moduli of analytic classification

We recall in short the well-known results on analytic classification of
parabolic diffeomorphisms, using the Ecalle-Voronin moduli or the
so-called horn maps. For more details, see the original papers of Ecalle
and Voronin [ 15 , 60 ] or a good overview in e.g. Loray [ 32 , Chapter
2] or in the thesis of Dudko [ 10 , Section 1.1.2] .

For simplicity, we consider prenormalized parabolic germs of the formal
type @xmath and describe their analytic classes. For dynamics, see
Figure 3.1 above. They are all formally equivalent to the formal normal
form @xmath . As we have explained in Section 2.1 , this means that
there exists a formal series @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath converges, then @xmath belongs to the analytic class of @xmath
. However, the formal series may be divergent and only sectorially
analytic, which provides other analytic classes. It can be shown by
Borel-Laplace summation technique that the Stokes directions for this
problem are @xmath and @xmath , with equidistant singularities at @xmath
. The proof can be seen in [ 15 ] or in e.g. [ 6 ] . This recovers the
analytic @xmath -sums of divergent @xmath on the Fatou petals @xmath and
@xmath . The differences of analytic solutions on intersection of petals
are exponentially small . Comparing the solutions on the intersections
of petals in an appropriate way reveals the nature of singularities and
provides the analytic classes. We explain ways of comparing them here,
using their compositions or their differences .

The proof of sectorial analyticity by Ecalle, around the year @xmath ,
was made by transforming the conjugacy equation ( 3.8 ) to the
trivialisation equation. Putting

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

the formal conjugacy equation ( 3.8 ) is transformed to the
trivialisation equation or the Abel equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a solution of trivialisation equation ( 3.10 ) for the
formal normal form @xmath , which is easily computed as global and equal
to, up to addition of a complex constant,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It was shown already by Leau and Fatou at the end of the @xmath century
that there exist unique analytic sectorial trivialisation functions for
@xmath , with an asymptotic development of the type @xmath , defined on
the petals @xmath and @xmath . Their constructive proof is described in
Proposition 3.1 in Section 3.2 in more generality. Later, in the @xmath
century, the same proof was made by Ecalle using the Borel-Laplace
technique. We denote the sectorial solutions by @xmath and @xmath
Sometimes they are also called the Fatou coordinates for @xmath . They
are unique up to an arbitrary chosen additive constant. They transform
orbits on petals simply in translations by @xmath .

Therefore, as shown in Figure 3.3 , the quotient spaces of orbits on
@xmath and on @xmath can be represented as two Riemann spheres, simply
by composition of sectorial trivializations and the exponential
function. Thus whole orbits become just points on spheres. The moduli of
analytic classification are obtained by relating points of both spheres
which correspond to the same orbit, for orbits that lie in the
intersections of petals. They are given by two diffeomorphisms, at
@xmath and at @xmath , of the Riemann sphere, @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It can be checked that for a diffeomorphisms @xmath of the simplest
formal type @xmath , it holds that ⁵ ⁵ 5 We say that @xmath is a germ of
a diffeomorphism at @xmath , with @xmath as a fixed point, if the
inverted germ @xmath is a germ of a diffeomorphism at zero, with zero as
a fixed point. In this notation, the multiplier at infinity means @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Otherwise, if the formal invariant @xmath , it holds that @xmath

The diffeomorphisms constructed in ( 3.11 ) are connected to the
analytic class of @xmath by the following theorem:

###### Theorem 3.1 ([15, 60] or Theorem 17 [10]).

Two germs of diffeomorphisms @xmath and @xmath of multiplicity 2 are
analytically conjugated if and only if there exist constants @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The allowed multiplications by constants come from the fact that
sectorial trivialisations may be chosen up to an arbitrary chosen
additive constants. It is the only freedom we have in the choice of
sectorial trivialisation functions.

The pair of germs @xmath constructed from @xmath in this manner at the
poles of Riemann sphere, up to multiplications by nonzero constant in (
3.12 ), are called the Ecalle-Voronin moduli or horn maps for a
diffeomorphism @xmath . They were constructed independently by Ecalle
and Voronin around the year @xmath .

The converse also holds. For any two germs @xmath and @xmath of the
Riemann sphere, such that @xmath , there exists a parabolic germ of the
formal type @xmath whose horn maps are given by @xmath . Otherwise, for
pairs of germs such that @xmath , for some @xmath , there exists a
parabolic germ of formal type @xmath , with horn maps equal to this
pair.

To conclude, there exists a bijective correspondence between all
analytic classes of diffeomorphisms of formal type @xmath and all
possible pairs of diffeomorphisms @xmath up to multiplications ( 3.12 )
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath .

For example, consider the simplest class of diffeomorphisms analytically
conjugated to the model @xmath . That is, the class of the
diffeomorphisms that are time-one maps of the flows of vector fields .
The class is described by horn maps equal to the identity (up to
multiplication by some nonzero complex constant). Indeed, by ( 3.9 ), a
diffeomorphism is analytically conjugated to @xmath if and only if there
exists a global trivialisation function @xmath , that is, if and only if
@xmath on intersections of petals.

##### Fourier representation of the Ecalle-Voronin moduli

The analytic class of a diffeomorphism @xmath can, instead by a pair of
diffeomorphisms, be described using two infinite sequences of complex
numbers. This method consists in analysing the exponentially small
differences of sectorial trivialisations on intersections of petals,
instead of compositions as above. By @xmath we denote the part of @xmath
above the real axis, and by @xmath the part below the real axis, as
shown in Figure 3.3 . If we subtract equations ( 3.10 ) for
trivialisation functions @xmath and @xmath on the intersections of
petals @xmath , the difference is constant along the closed orbits in
@xmath and in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its composition with @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is therefore @xmath -periodic on @xmath and on @xmath , for some big
@xmath . Therefore it can be expanded in Fourier series on both domains:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We have then that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for diffeomorphisms of formal type @xmath . Specially, @xmath for
diffeomorphisms of formal type @xmath .

The relation between the sequences @xmath and the analytic class of
@xmath is given in the following theorem.

###### Theorem 3.2 ([15] or Theorem 19 [10]).

Two germs of diffeomorphisms @xmath and @xmath of multiplicity 2 are
analytically conjugated if and only if their Fourier coefficients
defined by ( 3.1 ) are related in the following manner:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We must admit above multiplications in the coefficients, due to
uniqueness of sectorial trivialisations for @xmath only up to arbitrary
additive constants. For each diffeomorphism, the coefficients may be
exchanged with @xmath , @xmath @xmath .

Furthermore, if @xmath are any two sequences of coefficients, such that
the corresponding Fourier series from ( 3.1 ) converge and such that
@xmath , then there exists a germ of the formal class @xmath which
realizes these sequences.

To conclude, there exists a bijective correspondence between the
analytic classes inside the formal class @xmath and all possible
sequences of complex coefficients @xmath , @xmath , up to additions and
multiplications from ( 3.2 ), for which the series in ( 3.1 ) converge .

For example, the model analytic class is characterised by @xmath for any
@xmath , and @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

##### Representation of the Ecalle-Voronin moduli as @xmath-cocycles of
the trivialisation series, lifted to the space of orbits

We describe yet another way of expressing the moduli through differences
of trivialisation functions on the intersections of petals, that is
equivalent to Fourier representation. For ideas and definitions, see for
example [ 31 , Sections A.4, A.5, A.6] . We could not find this approach
to the Ecalle-Voronin moduli explicitely stated in the literature, it is
though implicit in the Fourier coefficient approach. We precise it here,
since it is the most convenient approach for this work. Indeed, we will
use the same line of thought in Section 3.4 to define new
classifications imposed by generalized Abel equations, in the same way
as the analytic classification was imposed here by Abel equation.

We simplify a little the following definitions from [ 31 , A.4, A.5] ,
restricting them to our situation, but they are otherwise the same.

Let us consider a formal series @xmath . We call it @xmath -summable,
with Stokes directions at imaginary axes, if it is @xmath -summable (in
the sense defined before) in arcs of directions @xmath and @xmath .
Equivalently, if there exist two analytic functions @xmath and @xmath ,
defined on some petals ⁶ ⁶ 6 Only the opening angle and the central
direction of a petal is important, not the size and the shape. Any two
petals with the same opening and the same central direction are
identified. @xmath and @xmath of opening @xmath , centered at @xmath and
@xmath respectively, which are @xmath -sums of series @xmath on
respective petals. See [ 43 , Section 2.3] . We denote the set of all
such series by @xmath . This notation is taken from [ 31 ] .

Let @xmath and @xmath denote some petals of opening @xmath and centered
at @xmath and @xmath respectively. We call @xmath -cocycle, with Stokes
directions at imaginary axes, the pair @xmath of analytic functions on
petals ⁷ ⁷ 7 Two cocycles that are defined on the petals of the same
opening and central direction, and agree on their intersections, are
identified. @xmath and @xmath respectively, with an exponential
decrease:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We denote the set of all such @xmath -cocycles by @xmath .

Each @xmath -summable formal series with @xmath -sums @xmath on @xmath
and @xmath on @xmath defines a @xmath -cocycle @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the intersections of petals @xmath and
@xmath . In the above manner, we can define the mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a morphism of additive groups. The question of bijectivity
between @xmath -summable series and @xmath -cocycles is solved in the
following theorem:

###### Theorem 3.3 (Ramis-Sibuya theorem [42, 49], Théorème, p.23 in[31]
or Theorem 2.5 in [5]).

The mapping @xmath is surjective . Moreover, it is bijective on the
quotient space @xmath .

That means that to each @xmath -cocycle corresponds a unique @xmath
-summable formal series, up to addition of a convergent series.

Preliminaries being done, we derive now Ecalle-Voronin moduli from
@xmath -cocycles of the formal trivialisation series @xmath . After
subtracting the first term @xmath , @xmath is @xmath -summable, and
defines the cocycle @xmath as described above:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We exploit now the additional fact that @xmath satisfies Abel equation (
3.10 ). Therefore, @xmath and @xmath are constant along the closed
orbits in @xmath and @xmath , see ( 3.13 ). The cocycle @xmath can thus
be lifted to the space of orbits to a well-defined function. For
representation of the space of orbits, we fix one of the two
trivialisation functions, say @xmath , up to an additive constant. The
space of orbits is then a Riemann sphere in the variable @xmath . As
before, see Figure 3.3 , the closed orbits in @xmath lift to the
punctured neighborhood of the pole @xmath and the closed orbits in
@xmath to the punctured neighborhood of the pole @xmath . We thus lift
@xmath to a space of orbits represented by @xmath through a pair of
germs @xmath around @xmath and @xmath of Riemann sphere:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The relation with the Fourier representation is the following. We can
rewrite ( 3.1 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Additionally, inverting @xmath as @xmath , it becomes also a germ at
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The germs are analytic at punctured neighborhoods of 0, since they are
obtained simply by composing differences of two holomorphic functions at
@xmath and @xmath with the logarithmic function. Furthermore, they can
be extended continuously to @xmath by @xmath and @xmath . This extension
is analytic at @xmath by Riemann’s characterization of removable
singularities. Therefore we get a pair of analytic germs @xmath at
@xmath of Riemann sphere (equivalently, at the origin). Note that @xmath
correspond exactly to the difference of the constant terms chosen in
sectorial trivialisation functions @xmath and @xmath , which can be
chosen freely. Furthermore, note that @xmath and @xmath are not
necessarily diffeomorphisms.

We now reformulate Theorem 3.2 considering the pair of analytic germs
@xmath at zero obtained in the above manner as the Ecalle-Voronin
modulus of @xmath .

Before, we identify two pairs of germs, @xmath and @xmath , if it holds
that:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath . This corresponds to choosing trivialisation
functions up to an additive constant.

###### Theorem 3.4 (Ecalle-Voronin moduli as 1-cocycles of
trivialisation series lifted to orbit space).

Two germs of the formal class @xmath are analytically conjugated if and
only if @xmath -cocycles generated by their trivialisations and lifted
to Riemann spheres of their attracting sectors, give the same pair of
analytic germs @xmath at zero, up to identifications ( 3.16 ). It holds
that @xmath . The same holds using Riemann spheres for repelling
sectors.

###### Proof.

This is only a reformulation of Theorem 3.2 . ∎

On the contrary, for any pair of analytic germs @xmath at zero, up to
identifications ( 3.16 ), such that @xmath , there exists a germ of the
formal type @xmath which realizes this pair in the above described
manner. The same can be concluded using trivialisations of repelling
sectors.

We can conclude as before that there exists a bijective correspondence
between all analytic classes of diffeomorphisms from the model formal
class and all pairs @xmath of analytic germs at @xmath such that @xmath
, after identifications ( 3.16 ) .

For example, the trivial analytic class of diffeomorphisms (analytically
conjugated to the model) is described by the trivial pair of germs,
@xmath , up to identifications ( 3.16 ). That is, by a pair of constant
germs of the type @xmath , @xmath .

### 3.2 Analyticity of solutions of generalized Abel equations

In this section, we analyse formal series solutions and sectorial
analyticity of solutions of generalized Abel equations for a
diffeomorphism @xmath , see Definition 3.2 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The results we obtain here will be applied to the @xmath -neighborhoods
of orbits of parabolic diffeomorphisms in the following sections. We
suppose in the sequel that the diffeomorphism @xmath is of formal type
@xmath and prenormalized.

To understand equation ( 3.17 ), in the following Proposition 3.1 we
state results mostly taken and adapted from [ 31 , Section A.6] . The
proof in [ 31 ] follows the idea from [ 18 ] , where Fatou constructed
sectorial solutions of the Abel (trivialisation) equation. In [ 31 ] ,
the case when @xmath was treated. Here we adapt it for all @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.1 (Formal and analytic solutions of generalized
Abel equations, [31]).

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . There exists a unique formal series
solution @xmath of equation ( 3.17 ) without the constant term of the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

All other formal series solutions in the given scale are obtained by
adding an arbitrary constant term.

Furthermore, there exist unique sectorially analytic solutions @xmath
and @xmath without the constant term defined on Fatou petals @xmath and
@xmath of @xmath respectively, which admit @xmath as their asymptotic
development on petals ⁸ ⁸ 8 We say that @xmath is an asymptotic
development of @xmath on petal @xmath if it is an asymptotic development
of @xmath on every subsector @xmath . , as @xmath . Moreover, @xmath and
@xmath are @xmath -sums of formal series ( 3.18 ), as @xmath .

The proof, mainly taken from [ 31 , Section A.6] , is constructive,
since it gives explicit (though unoperable) formulas for sectorial
solutions, which we will exploit in the proof of Theorem 3.6 and
Corollary 3.1 in Section 3.3 . Therefore we give here the main lines.

###### Proof.

The proof of existence and uniqueness of the formal solution is
straightforward, solving the difference equation ( 3.17 ) term by term.
To prove the existence of sectorially analytic solutions, instead of
@xmath , we consider the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is done to eliminate terms in @xmath of order less than @xmath . By
( 3.17 ), @xmath now satisfies the difference equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Now we directly apply results from [ 31 , A.6] . We
construct two sectorially analytic functions @xmath and @xmath , defined
on invariant Leau-Fatou petals @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , which
satisfy equation ( 3.19 ) and which are @xmath -sums of @xmath . We
consider the following series on @xmath and @xmath respectively:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The idea behind the construction of these series is simple. Suppose that
@xmath and @xmath are solutions of ( 3.19 ) on petals, with asymptotic
development @xmath , as @xmath . Then ( 3.19 ) must be satisfied for all
positive iterates @xmath in @xmath , and for all negative iterates
@xmath in @xmath . Summing the equations for positive and negative
iterates separately, and passing to the limit as @xmath , we get
formulas ( 3.20 ) and ( 3.21 ). It is left to prove that the series
converge uniformly on all compact subsets of @xmath , @xmath
respectively, see below. Then, by Weierstrass theorem ⁹ ⁹ 9 See e.g.
Theorem 1 in [ 2 , Ch. 5] : Let the sequence @xmath of analytic
functions on a domain @xmath converge to @xmath , uniformly on every
compact subset of @xmath . Then @xmath is also analytic in @xmath . ,
they converge to analytic functions on petals, which we denote @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It can be shown furthermore that both @xmath and @xmath admit @xmath as
their @xmath -sum, as @xmath . For the definition of @xmath -sum, see
the introductory part at the beginning of Chapter 3 .

The uniqueness of the sectorial analytic solutions @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath respectively, with the asymptotic development @xmath ,
is easy to prove. Any such solution @xmath on @xmath is, by the above
discussion, necessarily given by the same convergent series ( 3.20 ),
and is thus unique. The same can be concluded for @xmath and formula (
3.21 ).

Finally, the solutions of initial equation ( 3.17 ) are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are as in ( 3.2 ). On each petal we choose the appropriate
branch of logarithm. Using results for @xmath , the analyticity and
uniqueness results for @xmath on @xmath respectively easily follow.

Proof of uniform convergence of ( 3.20 ) and ( 3.21 ) on compacts, from
[ 31 ] . The proof is done considering the germ @xmath at infinity. By
Remark 3.1 , it holds that, for every compact subset @xmath of Leau
petal @xmath , there exists @xmath , such that it holds @xmath . Indeed,
every compact subset @xmath of @xmath can be covered by finitely many
subpetals @xmath from Remark 3.1 . @xmath is taken to be the maximum of
@xmath from the estimates ( 3.2 ). Now, using the fact that @xmath , we
conclude that the series ( 3.20 ) converges uniformly on @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.2 (About complex logarithms).

Let us remark that in above computations @xmath namely, in deriving
equation ( 3.19 ) @xmath we use the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is in general not true for complex logarithms. However, for orbits
inside each petal the formula holds. Since all orbits converge to the
origin in a tangential direction, it holds that @xmath is arbitrarily
close to @xmath , for @xmath close enough to the origin. Thus, the
logarithms on the left-hand side are appropriate branches for a given
petal and the logarithm on the right-hand side always denotes the main
branch ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The main branch of the complex logarithm: @xmath . .

Having proven that generalized Abel equations posess two sectorially
analytic solutions, we pose the question about the necessary and
sufficient conditions on a diffeomorphism @xmath for the existence of a
globally analytic solution of its generalized Abel equation. That means
that the sectorial analytic solutions glue to a global analytic solution
@xmath on some neighborhood of @xmath .

Let the right-hand side @xmath of ( 3.17 ) be of multiplicity @xmath .
That is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath or @xmath , let us define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 3.5 (Existence and uniqueness of a globally analytic
solution of a generalized Abel equation).

Let @xmath be of multiplicity @xmath , as in ( 3.23 ). The generalized
Abel equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has a global analytic solution on some neighborhood of @xmath if and
only if the diffeomorphism @xmath is of the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.24)
  -- -- -- --------

for some analytic germ @xmath . The global analytic solution @xmath is
then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is unique up to an arbitrary chosen additive constant.

Here and in the sequel, we will use the term globally analytic in a
slightly incorrect manner. In the case where the linear term of @xmath
is non-zero, @xmath contains a logarithmic term in the asymptotic
development, as @xmath . Also, when @xmath contains the constant term, a
term @xmath appears in the development. Therefore, by globally analytic,
we actually mean that @xmath is globally analytic on some neighborhood
of @xmath , after possibly subtracting a logarithmic term @xmath and a
term @xmath . The global analyticity of the solution @xmath of ( 3.17 )
in these cases in fact means the global analyticity of the solution
@xmath , @xmath , of the modified equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the proof, we need the following technical Lemma 3.1 . The proof of
the lemma is in Section 3.6 .

###### Lemma 3.1.

Let @xmath be a formal series, and let @xmath be a non-constant analytic
germ. Let @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then @xmath is analytic if and only if @xmath is analytic.

Note that the assumption about the existence of a formal Taylor
development of @xmath is essential for one direction of Lemma 3.1 to
hold. Let us suppose, for example, that @xmath , where @xmath is
analytic. Without any assumptions on @xmath , @xmath may jump from one
complex root to another, and thus be discontinuous and non-analytic.
Such situations are excluded by imposing the formal development
condition on @xmath .

Proof of Theorem 3.5 . We consider two cases separately.

@xmath @xmath It is easy to check that the formal solution @xmath is of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equivalently, we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a formal series of the form @xmath . By Lemma 3.1 ,
@xmath is globally analytic if and only if @xmath is globally analytic.

Suppose now that @xmath is globally analytic. Putting @xmath in equation
( 3.17 ), we can uniquely express @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.27)
  -- -- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath , as @xmath . The @xmath -th root we take is
uniquely determined, since @xmath and @xmath are tangent to the
identity. Formula ( 3.27 ) easily transforms to ( 3.24 ).

Conversely, if @xmath is of the form ( 3.24 ) for @xmath , it is easy to
see that @xmath satisfies equation ( 3.17 ) for @xmath and that the
formal development is of the form ( 2.34 ). By uniqueness in Proposition
3.1 , @xmath is the unique analytic solution of ( 3.17 ).

@xmath @xmath . It can easily be computed that the formal solution in is
of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . It is easy to see that @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a nonconstant analytic germ. Now, by Lemma 3.1 , @xmath
is globally analytic @xmath in the sense of @xmath being globally
analytic @xmath if and only if @xmath is. We can proceed as in @xmath .
The function @xmath in the expression ( 3.24 ) is invertible since, in
the case @xmath , it can be regarded as global Fatou coordinate for the
flow of the vector field @xmath , @xmath , see e.g. [ 32 ] . In the case
@xmath , it is merely the logarithmic function, therefore invertible on
sectors. @xmath

###### Example 3.2 (Application of Theorem 3.5 to the Abel equation).

The trivialization (Abel) equation for a parabolic germ @xmath was a
central object for obtaining the moduli of analytic classification in
Section 3.1 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use here Theorem 3.5 to derive a well-known result by Ecalle and
Voronin that the analytic class of the model diffeomorphism @xmath is
described by the existence of a global solution @xmath to the
trivialisation equation ( 3.28 ). Indeed, it is related to the analytic
conjugacy @xmath by @xmath . Of course this is not a new result, and we
put it here only as an example.

Proof by Theorem 3.5 . The Abel equation ( 3.28 ) is a special case of
generalized Abel equations, with the right-hand side @xmath . Therefore,
@xmath . By ( 3.24 ), we get that there exists a global analytic
solution of ( 3.28 ) if and only if @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some analytic diffeomorphism @xmath . It is unique up to an additive
constant and, by ( 3.25 ), of the form @xmath . @xmath

### 3.3 Analyticity properties of complex measures of
@xmath-neighborhoods of orbits of parabolic germs

Let @xmath be a parabolic diffeomorphism tangent to the identity, of any
multiplicity @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath denote any attracting and
repelling petal respectively. Let @xmath , @xmath , denote orbits of
@xmath on attracting petals and @xmath , @xmath , orbits of the inverse
diffeomorphism @xmath on repelling petals.

The asymptotic development in @xmath of the complex measure of @xmath
-neighborhoods of orbits was given by ( 3.3 ) at the beginning of the
chapter. We saw in Chapter 2.3 that the formal class of @xmath can be
read from the first @xmath coefficients independent of the initial point
in this development. To get some insight about the analytic class, we
analyse here the analytic properties of the function of the complex
measure @xmath , in both parameter @xmath and variable @xmath .
Similarly, for the function @xmath , in parameter @xmath and variable
@xmath . We analyse in more detial the remainder term @xmath from ( 2.1
).

In Subsections 3.3.1 and 3.3.2 , we state some bad properties of these
functions – nonexistence of the full asymptotic development and
accumulation of singularities in @xmath for a fixed @xmath ,
nonanalyticity in @xmath for a fixed @xmath . Then, in Subsection 3.3.3
, we derive a sectorial analyticity property of principal parts of
complex measures , defined in Definition 3.1 . This is the main reason
why in the following sections we concentrate only on principal parts, as
the only parts of complex measures of @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits
with sectorial analyticity property.

#### 3.3.1 Analyticity of complex measures as functions of the parameter
@xmath

In this subsection, let @xmath be fixed. Let @xmath , where @xmath ,
denote the orbit with the initial point @xmath . Let the sequence @xmath
denote the sequence of half-distances between consecutive points of the
orbit:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath decreasingly, as @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the complex measure of the @xmath -neighborhood of the
orbit @xmath , as a function of @xmath . We had initially hoped to be
able to extend the function in @xmath to the complex plane in a way that
it exhibits some sectorial analyticity properties. Two propositions that
follow show the difficulties in this approach.

Proposition 3.2 states that the remainder term @xmath in the development
( 3.3 ) does not have a development in @xmath in a power-logarithm scale
any more after a certain number of terms. This presents an obstacle for
extending the function from the positive real line to complex @xmath ,
by means of formal series.

###### Proposition 3.2 (Nonexistence of a full power-logarithmic
asymptotic development in @xmath, as @xmath).

Let @xmath be fixed. A full asymptotic development of @xmath in a
power-logarithmic scale, as @xmath , does not exist. That is, there
exists @xmath , such that the remainder term @xmath in ( 3.3 ) is of the
form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The monomials @xmath are of power-logarithmic type in @xmath , of
increasing flatness at zero, but the limit

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

does not exist.

###### Proof.

We show the obstacle for the existence of a full asymptotic development:
the index @xmath separating the tail and the nucleus of the @xmath
-neighborhood of the orbit does not have asymptotic development in
@xmath after the first @xmath terms.

By Lemma 2.1 in Subsection 2.3.1 , @xmath has the following development,
as @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath in @xmath , for @xmath fixed. We put @xmath here only to
denote the dependence of the function on the initial point. Here, @xmath
is only a fixed complex number.

Suppose that the limit @xmath exists. Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the points @xmath as above, it holds

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath -jet of the development ( 3.29 ) is continuous on @xmath . By
( 3.30 ), @xmath , as @xmath . Therefore we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a contradiction. The limit @xmath does not exist.

Furthermore, we return to the proofs of Lemmas 2.4 and 2.5 in Subsection
2.3.1 , to analyse the remainder term @xmath in ( 3.3 ). First, @xmath
has full asymptotic development, as @xmath , of the type @xmath , with
coefficients depending on @xmath . Indeed, @xmath can be expressed using
sectorial trivialisation function @xmath , as @xmath . By [ 15 , Tome 3,
Ch. 5] , we have that @xmath . On the other hand, the development of
@xmath ( 3.29 ) is finite , since @xmath has no limit. By computations
in proofs of Lemmas 2.4 , 2.5 , we conclude that @xmath and @xmath
develop in power-logarithmic scale in @xmath , with coefficients
depending on initial point @xmath , but only up to a first term in which
@xmath from @xmath interferes and the development in @xmath no longer
exists. The problem is that this does not yet guarantee that their sum
does not have the full development, that is, that critical terms of the
tail and the nucleus do not cancel. This cannot happen in general, due
to different kind of dependence of the tail and of the nucleus on @xmath
. For simplicity, we illustrate it on an example of a germ on the real
line, and considering the length of @xmath -neighborhood of orbits
instead of complex measure.

Suppose that @xmath . It can be computed that, for initial point @xmath
, the points of the orbit @xmath are given by @xmath . We compute @xmath
, where @xmath does not exist. For the length of the whole @xmath
-neighborhood, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath . The asymptotic development after the second term does not
exist. The third term does not have an asymptotic behavior in @xmath :
it is @xmath , but, when divided by @xmath , the limit in general does
not exist. ∎

The next Proposition 3.3 expresses an obstacle for the analytic
continuation of @xmath on the neighborhood of the positive real line. On
the positive real line, function @xmath has accumulation of
singularities at @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.3 (Accumulation of singularities at @xmath).

Let @xmath . The function @xmath is of class @xmath on @xmath and @xmath
on open subintervals @xmath , @xmath . However, in all @xmath , @xmath ,
the second derivative is unbounded from the right:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We analyse the complex measure of the tail and of the nucleus
separately. Without any change in the class in @xmath , we can consider
the complex measure divided by @xmath . We show that the points where
class @xmath is lost are the points @xmath in which, when @xmath
decreases to zero, one disc detaches from the nucleus to the tail. We
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function @xmath is easy to analyse: it is a piecewise constant
function on the intervals @xmath , with jumps at @xmath of value @xmath
.

The complex measure of the nucleus is computed adding the contribution
of each crescent. By Proposition 2.9 in Subsection 2.3.4 , it holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, by @xmath , we denote the complex functions

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath presents the sum of contributions from the crescents
corresponding to the points @xmath etc.

Let @xmath such that @xmath . By Proposition 3.13 in Section 3.6 ,
function @xmath is of class @xmath on each interval @xmath , @xmath .
Therefore, by ( 3.31 ), the point of nondifferentiability of @xmath on
@xmath can only be @xmath , where two parts defined by different
formulae glue together. In the sequel, we show that at the point @xmath
, @xmath is of class @xmath , but not @xmath . Differentiating ( 3.31 )
in @xmath on some interval around @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the two being finite and equal since @xmath is of the class @xmath
around @xmath . Therefore, @xmath is of class @xmath at @xmath , @xmath
.

Differentiating once again, we get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Although @xmath , the other term is unbounded when @xmath . Therefore,
the second derivative of @xmath at @xmath , @xmath , does not exist.

Finally, glueing overlapping intervals @xmath and adding the tail and
the nucleus, we get the desired result. ∎

We saw, in the course of the proof, that the loss of analyticity at
points @xmath at which separation of the tail and the nucleus occurs is
related to the different rate of growth of the tail and of the nucleus
of @xmath -neighborhoods in @xmath , due to their different geometry
(overlapping discs in nucleus, disjoint discs in tail). The culprit for
overlapping is the way of forming the @xmath -neighborhoods using discs
of the same radius @xmath at all points. It remains for the future
investigation to see if some other way of defining @xmath
-neighborhoods, perhaps using discs of varying radii, would give us
better properties.

#### 3.3.2 Analyticity of complex measures as functions of the initial
point

In this subsection, let @xmath be fixed. The following proposition
states that sectorial analyticity property cannot be obtained directly
considering the function @xmath , for a fixed @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the (symmetric) sectors of opening @xmath and radius
@xmath around any attracting, respectively repelling, direction.

###### Proposition 3.4 (Non-analyticity in the variable @xmath).

Let @xmath . The function @xmath is not analytic on any attracting petal
@xmath . The function @xmath is not analytic on any repelling petal
@xmath .

Moreover, we show in the proof that @xmath is not analytic on any open
sector @xmath . Similarly, @xmath is not analytic on any open sector
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be fixed. By @xmath we denote the open set @xmath . For
@xmath , the @xmath -discs centered at points @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath overlap. Therefore, the @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits @xmath
and @xmath differ by a crescent. By Proposition 2.9 in Subsection 2.3.4
, we get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , @xmath . We define the function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( 3.33 ), it holds

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It holds that there exists some punctured neighborhood of @xmath such
that @xmath , for all @xmath in that neighborhood. Otherwise, by
analyticity ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Uniqueness theorem for analytic functions : Let
@xmath be analytic in domain @xmath and let @xmath , where @xmath is a
sequence of distinct points, such that @xmath , @xmath . Then, @xmath in
@xmath . In other words, two functions analytic in @xmath which coincide
on a set with an accumulation point in @xmath are equal on @xmath . of
@xmath at @xmath , it would hold that @xmath on some neighborhood of 0.
By inverse function theorem applied locally to @xmath and @xmath , and
since absolute value is nowhere analytic, we see that @xmath is nowhere
analytic on @xmath .

We now take any small sector @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is analytic on
@xmath . Since @xmath is analytic, and @xmath for @xmath , the function
@xmath defined by ( 3.34 ) is also analytic on @xmath . The intersection
@xmath is nonempty and therefore we obtain a contradiction. ∎

#### 3.3.3 Analyticity of principal parts of complex measures

Having described bad properties of complex measures of orbits, we
concentrate now on their principal parts @xmath and @xmath , as
functions of @xmath , @xmath respectively. The principal parts are
defined at the beginning of the chapter, in Definition 3.1 .

For simplicity, from now on we restrict ourselves to diffeomorphisms of
the type @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.6 (Principal parts of complex measures for orbits of
@xmath and of @xmath).

The principal part of complex measures @xmath for @xmath is analytic on
the attracting petal @xmath , and satisfies the following difference
equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously, the principal part @xmath of complex measures for @xmath is
analytic on the repelling petal @xmath , and satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We split the proof in two parts:

1.  finding equations ( 3.35 ), ( 3.36 ) for the principal parts on
    petals in Proposition 3.5 below,

2.  proof of analyticity of the principal parts on petals.

###### Proposition 3.5 (The equations).

The principal parts of complex measures @xmath and @xmath satisfy the
following difference equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Let us first derive equation ( 3.37 ) for @xmath . Let @xmath . By the
definition of complex measure, it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath small enough with respect to @xmath . Putting the development
( 3.3 ) in ( 3.39 ), we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By ( 3.3 ), @xmath . Dividing by @xmath and passing to the limit as
@xmath , ( 3.37 ) follows.

Equation ( 3.38 ) is derived in the same manner, but considering complex
measures of orbits of @xmath on the repelling petal @xmath . ∎

Proof of Theorem 3.6 .

The first part of the proof, the equations for the principal parts, are
obtained in Proposition 3.5 . It is left to show analyticity. We first
show analyticity of @xmath on @xmath . We analyse the form of the
coefficient @xmath in front of @xmath in development ( 2.5 ), as a
function of @xmath . We follow the steps for obtaining the developments
of the tail and of the nucleus from Subsection 2.3.1 . Let us remind,
the tail of the @xmath -neighborhood is the part of the @xmath
-neighborhood which is the union of the disjoint @xmath -discs, while
the nucleus is the remaining part with the overlapping discs. We denote
by @xmath the principal parts in the developments of the complex
measures of the nucleus and the tail respectively. It holds that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the proof of Proposition 2.5 in Subsection 2.3.2 , we see that the
principal part for the nucleus is constant and equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dependence on @xmath of the principal part comes from the tail. The
complex measure of the @xmath -neighborhood of the tail is equal to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the index where separation of the tail and the nucleus
occurs, that is, the index of the point of the orbit where @xmath -discs
start overlapping. Obviously, @xmath , as @xmath . Developing the sum
@xmath , as @xmath , as described in the proof of Lemma 2.5 in
Subsection 2.3.2 , we get that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , denotes the constant term in the asymptotic development
of @xmath , as @xmath . We conclude, using ( 3.42 ) and the development
for @xmath in @xmath from Lemma 2.1 in Subsection 2.3.2 , that the
coefficient in front of @xmath in development ( 3.42 ), as @xmath , can
be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( 3.40 ), ( 3.41 ) and ( 3.43 ), we get the expression for the
principal part:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.44)
  -- -- -- --------

Our next step is to prove analyticity of the function @xmath given by (
3.44 ) on @xmath . To this end, we consider the unique analytic solution
on @xmath without the constant term of the following @xmath -Abel
equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

see Proposition 3.1 in Section 3.2 . By the proof of Proposition 3.1 ,
it is given by the limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

which was proven to converge pointwise to an analytic function on @xmath
.

To prove analyticity of @xmath on @xmath , it suffices to show that the
expression ( 3.44 ) for @xmath coincides pointwise with @xmath in ( 3.45
), up to a constant. For a fixed @xmath , as in ( 3.42 ), we estimate
the first terms in the development of @xmath , as @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The last equality is obtained using the development:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath denotes the main branch of logarithm for @xmath and @xmath
the branch for @xmath . The function @xmath denotes the analytic change
of variables on @xmath that reduces @xmath to its formal normal form
@xmath .

Passing to the limit in ( 3.45 ), by ( 3.46 ), we get the pointwise
equality:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By ( 3.44 ), we conclude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, since @xmath is analytic on @xmath , @xmath is also analytic
on @xmath .

Analyticity of @xmath on @xmath can be proven in the same manner,
considering the inverse diffeomorphism @xmath . @xmath

Note that equations ( 3.35 ) and ( 3.36 ) for principal parts of complex
measures from Theoerem 3.6 resemble to the trivialization (Abel)
equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for a parabolic diffeomorphism. Recall that the Abel equation was used
in Section 3.1 for obtaining the Ecalle-Voronin moduli of analytic
classification. Sectorially analytic solutions on petals correspond to
the Fatou trivialisation coordinates @xmath on @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath , whose comparison reveals the analytic class of @xmath .

We show next, in Corollary 3.1 , that the geometrically obtained
principal parts, @xmath on @xmath and @xmath on @xmath , can be
considered as sectorial solutions of only one difference equation for
the diffeomorphism @xmath , instead of both ( 3.35 ) and ( 3.36 ) for
@xmath and @xmath respectively. We consider the following 1-Abel
equation ¹² ¹² 12 The @xmath -Abel equations are introduced in
Definition 3.2 at the beginning of the chapter. for diffeomorphism
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath , denote the unique
sectorially analytic solutions of @xmath -Abel equation ( 3.48 ) without
the constant term, which exist by Proposition 3.1 .

###### Corollary 3.1 (Up to an explicit constant, the sectorial
solutions of @xmath-Abel equation without the constant term give both
principal parts of complex measures).

With the notations as above, the following relations hold:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 3.3.

In general case, when @xmath , similar relations hold on all petals. The
constants that are added are more complicated: they depend explicitely
on the first @xmath coefficients of the diffeomorphism @xmath and on the
petal we consider, by means of the choice of @xmath . We are not going
into details here.

###### Proof.

By formulas ( 3.2 ) from the proof of Proposition 3.1 , we get the
following convergent series for the unique solutions @xmath and @xmath
without the constant term of the equation ( 3.48 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We now compare the first formula ( 3.49 ) with formulas ( 3.45 ), ( 3.47
) for the principal part @xmath on @xmath in the previous proof. The
same can be done for @xmath on @xmath . ∎

The Fatou coordinates @xmath and @xmath glue to a global Fatou
coordinate, analytic in some punctured neighborhood of the origin, if
and only if @xmath belongs to the model analytic class of @xmath .
Analogously, we give here the necessary and sufficient conditions on a
diffeomorphism @xmath for global analyticity of its principal parts of
complex measures.

###### Theorem 3.7 (Global principal parts of complex measures).

The principal parts @xmath on @xmath and @xmath on @xmath glue to a
global analytic function on a neighborhood of @xmath if and only if the
diffeomorphism @xmath is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some analytic germ @xmath . The principal parts are then given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, the branches of the complex logarithm are determined by the
petals.

###### Proof.

The theorem is a consequence of Theorem 3.5 and Corollary 3.1 . By
Corollary 3.1 , the principal parts of complex measures are explicitely
related to the sectorial solutions of the generalized Abel equation
@xmath , with right-hand side @xmath . By ( 3.24 ) in Theorem 3.5 , this
equation has a global analytic solution if and only if @xmath , for some
@xmath . ∎

###### Example 3.3 (Examples of germs with global principal parts in the
sense of Theorem 3.7).

1.  @xmath , for @xmath ,

2.  @xmath , for @xmath .

### 3.4 Principal parts of complex measures of @xmath-neighborhoods of
orbits and analytic classification

#### 3.4.1 Counterexamples for reading the analytic class from principal
parts

We saw in Section 3.1 that the Abel equation for a diffeomorphism @xmath
has two sectorially analytic solutions @xmath and @xmath on Fatou petals
@xmath and @xmath respectively, unique up to an additive constant.
Furthermore, we saw that the analytic class of @xmath was readable from
the difference of sectorial solutions @xmath on the intersection of
petals, @xmath . The trivial difference means that the diffeomorphism
belongs to the analytic class of @xmath .

On the other hand, by Corollary 3.1 in Subsection 3.3.3 , the principal
parts are directly related to the @xmath -Abel equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

By Proposition 3.1 in Section 3.2 , this equation also has two
sectorially analytic solutions @xmath and @xmath , unique up to an
additive constant, on petals @xmath and @xmath . It makes sense to
subtract the solutions on the intersection of petals as above, and to
see if we can tell the analytic class by considering only this
difference in an appropriate way.

We show here some examples that the answer is negative . That is, when
considering only the differences of the sectorial solutions @xmath on
@xmath , the information on the analytic class is lost. We show it
providing examples of diffeomorphisms both analytically conjugated and
not conjugated to the model @xmath , with trivial differences @xmath .
Obviously, the trivial difference cannot be used in any way to
distinguish between analytically conjugated and not conjugated cases.

Triviality of differences of sectorial solutions of ( 3.50 ) means:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nontrivial term @xmath on @xmath stems from different branches of
logarithms on petals and cannot be eliminated. The condition ( 3.51 ) is
equivalent to the existence of a global analytic solution of ( 3.50 )
and is, by Theorem 3.5 in Section 3.2 , realized on the set of
diffeomorphisms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let, on the other hand, @xmath be the class of diffeomorphisms
analytically conjugated to @xmath . The following example shows that the
intersection @xmath is nonempty. Furthermore, neither of the sets is a
subset of another.

###### Example 3.4 (Position of @xmath versus @xmath).

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

In the first example, we take @xmath , for both classes. The second
example follows from the fact that no entire function is analytically
conjugated to @xmath , stated in paper of Ahern and Rosay [ 1 ] . The
third example follows from Example 3.5 below, which shows non-triviality
of differences @xmath for the model diffeomorphism @xmath .∎

In the next example, we compute explicitely the differences @xmath for
the simplest model diffeomorphism @xmath . The difference of sectorial
trivialisations @xmath was in this case trivial. We apply the method of
Borel-Laplace summation, described at the beginning of the chapter,
directly to the difference equation. The procedure is standard and a
similar one can be found in e.g. [ 10 , Example 2] .

###### Example 3.5 (The differences for the model germ @xmath).

We substitute @xmath in the equation ( 3.50 ) for @xmath and thus obtain
the equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the change of variables @xmath , denoting @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath . The right-hand side of this equation is of the type
@xmath . We denote it by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Applying the Borel transform to ( 3.52 ) and using property ( 3.7 ) of
Borel transform, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function @xmath has @xmath -poles at @xmath in directions @xmath ,
and it is exponentially bounded and analytic in every other direction.
Indeed, since @xmath is analytic @xmath has radius of convergence @xmath
, it holds that there exists a constant @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, there exists a continuous function @xmath on @xmath ,
@xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath is 1-summable in the arcs of directions @xmath and
@xmath . The Laplace transform yields two analytic solutions as @xmath
-sums, @xmath on @xmath , and @xmath on @xmath . By the residue theorem
applied to the difference of Laplace integrals, on intersections of
@xmath and @xmath they differ by @xmath -periodic functions. For @xmath
, we have:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath are close to @xmath . To be precise, some limit
argument is needed to justify the application of the residue theorem
along the curve with endpoints at @xmath . We consider sectors @xmath of
finite radii @xmath , @xmath , bouded by directions @xmath and @xmath .
We close the sectors not necessarily by circles, but by arcs @xmath ,
which avoid all @xmath by some fixed positive distance. The radii of
points on the arcs are bounded by @xmath from below and from above, as
@xmath , with the same constants independent of @xmath . The indefinite
integral (along the infinite curve) can be written as limit of integrals
along outer lines of sectors @xmath , as @xmath . Applying the residue
theorem for each sector @xmath , we get that the original integral is
the sum of all residues at @xmath , minus the limit of integrals along
the arcs @xmath , as @xmath . The latter limit is zero. Indeed, since
@xmath avoid all poles by some fixed positive distance, the subintegral
function on @xmath can be bounded by @xmath , with @xmath , independent
of @xmath . It holds that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , independent of @xmath . Since, for fixed @xmath , it
holds that there exists @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath , the
exponential bound follows. The lengths of arcs @xmath , on the other
hand, grow no faster than linearly in @xmath , as @xmath .

Similarly, for @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Replacing @xmath with @xmath and returning to the variable @xmath , we
get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath and @xmath are petals in the @xmath -plane, obtained by
inverting @xmath and @xmath by @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are their
intersections, that is, the inverse images of @xmath and @xmath .

We see that for the model germ @xmath , the 1-cocycle generated by
@xmath is represented on the space of orbits exactly by the germ @xmath
itself, in both components. For theory of 1-cocycles, see the end of
Section 3.1 . This is certainly not a coincidence. It would be
interesting to have some geometrical explanation.

In the above manner, the differences can be computed by Borel-Laplace
transform for any diffeomorphism @xmath analytically conjugated to
@xmath , and it can be seen in general that the cocycles are not
trivial.

###### Example 3.6 (Explicit formulas for the sectorial solutions @xmath
for the model diffeomorphism @xmath).

Using ( 3.44 ) in the proof of Theorem 3.6 and Corollary 3.1 , we get
that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the standard Gamma function, holomorphic on @xmath .
Therefore, @xmath are well-defined and analytic on @xmath .

#### 3.4.2 Higher-order moments and higher conjugacy classes.

So far, we have seen that Abel and @xmath -Abel equations for germs of
diffeomorphisms appear naturally in applications, in the context of the
trivialisation functions or of the principal parts of complex measures
of @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits. In this section, we put Abel
equation and @xmath -Abel equation in a more general context of @xmath
-Abel equations , @xmath .

We furthermore define new classifications of diffeomorphisms with
respect to their @xmath -Abel equations , mimicking the way in which
Abel equation was exploited for defining analytic classes. We will call
the new classes the @xmath -conjugacy classes.

Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

be the @xmath -Abel equation for a diffeomorphism @xmath , as defined in
Definition 3.2 at the beginning of the chapter.

It was shown in Proposition 3.1 in Section 3.2 that there exist two
analytic sectorial solutions @xmath and @xmath of ( 3.53 ) on petals
@xmath and @xmath , which define the @xmath -cocycle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now repeat the procedure from the very end of Section 3.1 . There,
the analytic moduli of @xmath were recovered using differences of
sectorial solutions of the Abel equation for @xmath on intersections of
petals. Here, we use the differences of sectorial solutions of @xmath
-Abel equations, to define new classifications of diffeomorphisms.

Subtracting ( 3.53 ) for both solutions, @xmath and @xmath , on
intersections of petals, we get that @xmath is constant along the closed
orbits in @xmath and @xmath .

Therefore, the cocycle is a well-defined function on the space of closed
orbits. As already explained in Section 3.1 , the space of orbits on
each petal can be represented as a Riemann sphere, by composition of
trivialization functions of the petal and the exponential function
@xmath . To avoid confusion, for representation of functions defined on
the space of orbits in the intersection of petals, in the sequel we
choose always trivialisations of attractive petals . Then, @xmath and
@xmath correspond to the punctured neighborhoods of @xmath and @xmath of
the sphere. The @xmath -cocycle ( 3.54 ) on @xmath and @xmath is thus
lifted to a pair of germs @xmath on neighborhoods of poles @xmath and
@xmath of the Riemann sphere:

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (3.55)
        @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -- --------

The term @xmath is put in brackets, since it appears only in the case
when @xmath , due to different branches of the complex logarithm on
petals. We further transform @xmath , to obtain two analytic germs at
zero. In the same way as at the end of Section 3.1 , it follows that the
germs can be extended analytically to @xmath . Therefore, we conclude
that the cocycle ( 3.54 ) of differences of sectorial solutions on
intersections of petals can be represented by a pair of analytic germs
at zero, @xmath .

We note that the trivialisation function @xmath is uniquely determined
only up to an arbitrary constant. Also, if we add any complex number to
@xmath or @xmath , they remain the solutions of the @xmath -Abel
equation ( 3.50 ). As before, due to this freedom of choice, we identify
two pairs of analytic germs if ( 3.16 ) from the end of Section 3.1
holds. Note that it always holds that @xmath , since the constant term
is the difference of constant terms chosen in solutions @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Definition 3.3 (@xmath-moments for diffeomorphisms).

The @xmath -moment of a diffeomorphism @xmath with respect to a
trivialization function of the attracting petal or, shortly, the @xmath
-moment of @xmath , is the pair

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of analytic germs ¹³ ¹³ 13 The notion germ refers to a function defined
on a small neighborhood of the origin, not addressing the size of its
domain. That is, two germs are identified if they are equal on any
neighborhood of the origin. at @xmath from ( 3.55 ), up to the
identifications ( 3.16 ).

###### Remark 3.4.

In the case of @xmath -Abel equations, the @xmath -moments are in fact
defined subtracting the sectorial solutions @xmath , @xmath , of the
modified equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

instead of sectorial solutions @xmath of the original @xmath -Abel
equation ( 3.50 ). Here, @xmath . In this way we remove the constant
term @xmath in ( 3.55 ), coming from different branches of the
logarithm.

We now classify diffeomorphisms of the formal type @xmath into
equivalence classes, putting those which share the same @xmath -moment
(up to the identifications ( 3.16 )) inside the same class.

###### Definition 3.4 (The @xmath-conjugacy relation on a set of
diffeomorphisms).

Let @xmath . The @xmath -conjugacy is the equivalence relation on the
set of all diffeomorphisms formally equivalent to @xmath , given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we denote the equivalence class of @xmath with respect to the @xmath
-conjugacy.

We illustrate the definition on the two most important examples for this
work.

###### Example 3.7 (@xmath- and @xmath-conjugacy classes).

1.   The @xmath -Abel equation is in fact the Abel equation. The @xmath
    -conjugacy classes correspond to the standard analytic classes. The
    @xmath -moments correspond to the Ecalle-Voronin moduli, as they are
    described in Theorem 3.4 . The diffeomorphisms analytically
    conjugated to the model @xmath have the trivial @xmath -moment, the
    pair @xmath (the Abel equation has globally analytic solution).

2.   The @xmath -conjugacy classes are obtained using @xmath -Abel
    equations ( 3.50 ). By Theorem 3.5 , the trivial @xmath -conjugacy
    class (the set diffeomorphisms with the @xmath -moments equal to
    @xmath , that is, the set of all diffeomorphisms with globally
    analytic solutions of equation ( 3.50 )) is the set

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

We finish the section with converse question of realization of @xmath
-moments and @xmath -moments.

###### Proposition 3.6 (Realization of @xmath-moments).

For every pair @xmath of analytic germs at zero, such that @xmath ,
there exists a diffeomorphism @xmath , such that the pair @xmath is
realised as is its @xmath -moment.

###### Proof.

The @xmath -moments are in fact the Ecalle-Voronin moduli, as they are
defined in Theorem 3.4 . The statement follows directly from Theorem 3.4
. ∎

###### Proposition 3.7 (Realization of @xmath-moments).

For every pair @xmath of analytic germs at zero, such that @xmath ,
there exists a diffeomorphism @xmath from the model formal class, such
that the pair @xmath is realised as its @xmath -moment.

Note that by varying the constant term chosen in sectorial
trivialisation function @xmath and constants chosen in solutions @xmath
and @xmath , we can realise all other @xmath -moments identified by (
3.16 ) using the same diffeomorphism @xmath .

###### Proof.

This proposition follows from Theorem 3.8 stated and proven in Section
3.4.3 . ∎

The question is important since it states that all possible @xmath - or
@xmath -conjugacy classes may be represented by all possible pairs of
analytic germs @xmath at zero such that @xmath , up to identifications (
3.16 ).

We do not address the question of realisation for the higher conjugacy
classes. In this thesis, they are introduced only because they present
the natural context in which @xmath - and @xmath -conjugacy classes
appear. They remain a subject of further research.

#### 3.4.3 Relative position of the @xmath-conjugacy classes and the
analytic classes.

It was noted in Example 3.4 in Subsection 3.4.1 that there exists no
inclusion relation between the trivial analytic class and the trivial
@xmath -conjugacy class. We investigate here more precisely the relative
position of analytic classes and @xmath -conjugacy classes. We prove
that they lie in a transversal position, that is, they are far away and
not related to each other. In this way, we explain and support
theoretically the counterexamples from Subsection 3.4.1 , that claimed
that the analytic classes cannot be read only from the differences of
sectorial solutions of the @xmath -Abel equation. On the other hand,
they can be read from the differences of sectorial solutions of the Abel
equation.

The relative positions of higher conjugacy classes to each other are not
discussed and remain the subject for further research.

Let @xmath denote the mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined on the set of all diffeomorphisms. It attributes to each
diffeomorphism its @xmath -conjugacy class, that is, the appropriate
pair of analytic germs up to the identifications ( 3.16 ).

The next theorem states that not only every pair of analytic germs
@xmath such that @xmath can be realized as the @xmath -moment of some
diffeomorphism, but it is moreover realized inside each analytic class.

###### Theorem 3.8 (Surjectivity from each analytic class onto the set
of all @xmath-conjugacy classes).

Let @xmath denote any analytic class. The restriction @xmath maps
surjectively from @xmath onto the set of all @xmath -conjugacy classes.

We first give the outline of the proof. Take any analytic class @xmath
and any representative @xmath . Let @xmath be any pair of analytic
germs, satisfying @xmath . We will show that there exists a
diffeomorphism @xmath whose @xmath -moment is equal to @xmath . We first
show that there exists an analytic, tangent to the identity right-hand
side @xmath of the generalized Abel equation for @xmath , such that the
pair @xmath represents the moment of @xmath with respect to this
equation. The idea for first part is borrowed from [ 31 , A.6] . Then,
simply by a change of variables, we transform the equation to @xmath
-Abel equation, but for a different diffeomorphism. This new
diffeomorphism is analytically conjugated to @xmath by @xmath .

Proof of Theorem 3.8 . Let @xmath be any analytic class and @xmath any
representative. Moreover, let @xmath be any trivialisation of the
attracting sector @xmath for @xmath .

On some petals @xmath and @xmath of opening @xmath and centered at
@xmath and @xmath respectively, we define the pair @xmath by:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , we first subtract the constant term. This can be done
without loss of generality, since a constant term can be added to any
sectorial solution afterwards. The functions @xmath and @xmath are thus
analytic, exponentially decreasing of order one ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 @xmath , for
some positive constants @xmath . on @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the
pair ( 3.4.3 ) defines a @xmath -cocycle in the sense of definition from
Section 3.1 . By surjectivity in Theorem 3.3 , there exists a 1-summable
formal series @xmath , whose differences of @xmath -sums @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath realize the cocycle @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

We adapt now slightly functions @xmath and @xmath by adding the
appropriate branch of logarithm,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define functions @xmath on @xmath respectively by:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

From ( 3.4.3 ) and ( 3.57 ), computing the difference @xmath , we see
that @xmath and @xmath glue to an analytic germ @xmath . By ( 3.58 ),
@xmath , tangent to the identity.

To conclude, @xmath and @xmath are sectorial solutions of the
generalized Abel equation for the diffeomorphism @xmath , with the
right-hand side @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the analytic change of variables @xmath and multiplying by @xmath ,
we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath , ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 We are a little bit imprecise here. The new
petals @xmath are in fact images @xmath of original petals. They can be
identified, since @xmath is a conformal map that preserves shapes and
angles, moreover tangent to the identity. The petals are again of
opening @xmath , centered at the same directions. @xmath , are solutions
of @xmath -Abel equation for diffeomorphism @xmath , analytically
conjugated to @xmath . The former equality on petals holds ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 In
fact, the statement holds in more generality, without using the fact
that formal series @xmath is a solution of some generalized Abel
equation. By [ 47 , Theorem 13.3] , if @xmath is @xmath -summable in
arcs of directions @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath -sums @xmath on
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath , and if @xmath is an analytic
diffeomorphism tangent to the identity, then @xmath is again @xmath
-summable in the same arcs of directions, with @xmath -sums @xmath ,
@xmath . by formulas from Proposition 3.1 applied to both generalized
Abel equations, since @xmath is an analytic change of variables.
Furthermore, by ( 3.4.3 ) and ( 3.57 ),

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here, @xmath is a trivialisation function for @xmath , for an
appropriate choice of constant term, see Lemma 3.2 .

Thus, the cocycle @xmath is realized as @xmath -moment of the
diffeomorphism @xmath , analytically conjugated to @xmath . @xmath

We pose the question of injectivity in Theorem 3.8 . That is, if inside
each analytic class there exist different diffeomorphisms with the same
@xmath -moments. We show in the next Proposition 3.8 that the
injectivity is not true. Inside the trivial analytic class, we even
characterize the diffeomorphisms that have the same @xmath -moments in
Proposition 3.9 .

###### Proposition 3.8 (Non-injectivity).

Let @xmath be any analytic class. Let @xmath . If there exists an
analytic change of variables @xmath conjugating @xmath to @xmath ,
@xmath , of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an analytic germ, @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath have
the same @xmath -moment.

Note that although @xmath and @xmath belong to the same analytic class,
not every formal change of variables conjugating @xmath to @xmath is
necessarily analytic . See proof of Lemma 3.2 for description of all
formal changes conjugating @xmath and @xmath . We only know that at
least one formal change is analytic. Therefore, the request on change of
variables being analytic in Proposition 3.8 is not superfluous.

###### Proposition 3.9 (Characterization of diffeomorphisms analytically
conjugated to @xmath with the same @xmath-moment).

Let @xmath be analytically conjugated to @xmath . @xmath and @xmath have
the same @xmath -moment if and only if there exists a change of
variables @xmath conjugating @xmath to @xmath , @xmath , of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an analytic germ, @xmath .

###### Remark 3.5 (About the statement of Propositions 3.8 and 3.9).

1.   Note that in the propositions it suffices that only one conjugacy
    between @xmath and @xmath satisfies ( 3.59 ). We have seen the
    relation between all conjugacies expressed in Lemma 3.2 . The
    following question remains: if ( 3.59 ) is satisfied for one
    conjugacy, does this imply that ( 3.59 ) is in fact satisfied for
    all other conjugacies between @xmath and @xmath ?

2.   The accent in the propositions is on @xmath being globally analytic
    . Indeed, for any change of variables @xmath , there exists a
    sectorially analytic function @xmath such that ( 3.59 ) holds.
    Equation ( 3.59 ) can be rewritten as the generalized Abel equation

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.60)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and the existence of sectorial solutions @xmath and @xmath is given
    in Proposition 3.1 . However, good changes of variables are only
    those @xmath , for which equation ( 3.60 ) with right-hand side
    @xmath has a globally analytic solution.

3.   The propositions are constructive . Using ( 3.59 ), for any
    diffeomorphism @xmath we can construct infinitely many
    diffeomorphisms inside its analytic class, such that they all belong
    to the same @xmath -conjugacy class.

4.   The question remains if Proposition 3.9 is true for all analytic
    classes, not only for the trivial analytic class. There seems to be
    a technical obstacle in the proof, which we do not know how to
    bypass.

The idea of the proof is simple. The proof follows from the proof of
Theorem 3.8 . Going through the proof, we note the ambiguity in the
definition of the diffeomorphism @xmath : the formal series @xmath may
be chosen up to adding a convergent series (see the bijectivity
statement in Theorem 3.3 ). In other words, the formal series @xmath
that realizes the same cocycle @xmath in Theorem 3.8 is unique up to
addition of a convergent series. The formal proof follows.

For the proof, we need the following known result.

###### Lemma 3.2 (Non-uniqueness of formal conjugation, reformulation of
Theorem 21.12 from [26]).

Let @xmath be formally conjugated to @xmath . The formal conjugation
@xmath is unique up to a precomposition by analytic germs of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This only freedom of choice is related to addition of the constant term
@xmath in the trivialisation series @xmath of @xmath .

Furthermore, for any two germs @xmath and @xmath formally conjugated to
@xmath , and for any choice of formal trivialisations @xmath and @xmath
(meaning, for any choice of constant term in them), there exists a
formal conjugation @xmath , such that it holds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, for any formal conjugation @xmath , there exist trivialisations
@xmath and @xmath such that ( 3.61 ) holds. All possible choices of
constants in trivialisation series result in all possible conjugacies
@xmath conjugating @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider a germ @xmath formally conjugated to @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we put @xmath , for @xmath , from ( 3.62 ) we get the trivialisation
equation for @xmath , @xmath . This equation has a unique formal
solution up to a constant term, and therefore @xmath is also unique up
to a controled transformation that we derive here. Indeed, if we change
the formal transformation by a constant term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

and search for a formal change @xmath , such that it holds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

If such change @xmath exists, then, putting @xmath in the trivialisation
equation for @xmath , we get that @xmath also conjugates @xmath to
@xmath . Putting ( 3.63 ) and @xmath in ( 3.64 ), we get the formula for
the new conjugation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, let @xmath and @xmath be formally conjugated by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath and @xmath be any two trivialisations (any choice of constant
term). Let @xmath and @xmath be the corresponding conjugacies such that
@xmath and @xmath . It holds, simply by transformations of
trivialisation equations, that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Expressing @xmath by @xmath from the first equation and putting in the
second one for @xmath , we see that @xmath is again a formal conjugation
conjugating @xmath to @xmath , as was @xmath . On the other hand, by
above, it holds that @xmath .

Just to mention, the new conjugation @xmath is related to @xmath . If we
put @xmath and @xmath from ( 3.66 ) in ( 3.65 ), we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the first part of the lemma, there exists @xmath , @xmath , such
that @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Proof of Propositions 3.8 and 3.9 .

We first prove the additional implication of Proposition 3.9 that holds
only for germs in the trivial analytic class. Let @xmath and @xmath be
two germs analytically conjugated to @xmath . In the course of the proof
of Lemma 3.2 , we see that any formal conjugacy between @xmath and
@xmath is necessarily analytic. This is an important property of the
trivial analytic class that is not satisfied for other analytic classes.
Due to this, we cannot carry out the same proof for other analytic
classes. Suppose that @xmath and @xmath have the same @xmath -moments,
@xmath . Since @xmath -moments are determined only up to the
identifications ( 3.16 ), this actually means that we can choose
trivialisations @xmath and @xmath (with appropriate constant terms) such
that the moments are exactly the same. Here, we neglect the possible
constant term in @xmath -moments, simply by choosing the same constant
term in @xmath and @xmath and @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath , as in
Remark 3.4 .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The same holds with @xmath for @xmath . By Lemma 3.2 , for no matter
what choice of trivialisations @xmath and @xmath , there exists an
analytic change of variables tangent to the identity @xmath , such that
it holds @xmath and @xmath . We therefore get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly for @xmath on @xmath . We see now that the two formal series
@xmath and @xmath realize the same cocycle on @xmath and can thus differ
only by a converging series @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

Putting ( 3.67 ) in the equation @xmath , obtained from ( 3.50 ) for
@xmath after change of variables, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now prove the converse for diffeomorphisms in any analytic class. Let
@xmath and @xmath belong to any analytic class, @xmath . Suppose @xmath
, for some @xmath , and suppose that there exists @xmath such that
@xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath denote the @xmath -moments for @xmath and
@xmath respectively. We will prove that they coincide, up to the
identifications ( 3.16 ). From equation ( 3.50 ) for @xmath , after the
change of variables and then using ( 3.59 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the uniqueness of the formal solutions of equation ( 3.50 ) for
@xmath up to a constant term @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is analytic, from ( 3.68 ), we have that (up to a constant
term from the choice of sectorial solutions)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

By Lemma 3.2 , for the conjugation @xmath above, there exists a choice
of trivialisations (appropriate choice of constant terms) @xmath and
@xmath , such that @xmath . Then, for @xmath -moments with respect to
these trivialisations, it holds that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

By ( 3.69 ) and ( 3.70 ), and repeating the same for the other component
@xmath for @xmath , we get that the @xmath -moments coincide (defined up
to the identifications ( 3.16 )). @xmath

Proposition 3.9 enables us to define a relation on the model analytic
class that identifies all diffeomorphisms with the same @xmath -moment.
Let @xmath denote the model analytic class, containing all
diffeomorphisms analytically conjugated to @xmath .

###### Definition 3.5 (Equivalence relation on the model analytic
class).

Let @xmath . We say that @xmath and @xmath belong to the same
equivalence class in @xmath , and write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if there exists a change of variables @xmath conjugating @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , and an analytic function @xmath , such that ( 3.59 )
holds.

It can be checked that this relation is an equivalence relation on
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the quotient space of the trivial analytic
class with respect to relation @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.9 (Bijectivity from the quotiented model analytic class
to the set of all @xmath-conjugacy classes).

The restriction @xmath is a bijective map from @xmath onto the set of
all @xmath -conjugacy classes.

###### Proof.

The statement follows from Theorem 3.8 and Proposition 3.8 . ∎

We finish the section with a comment about the relative positions of the
analytic and the @xmath -conjugacy classes. Theorem 3.9 states that the
quotiented trivial analytic class in fact parametrizes the set of all
@xmath -conjugacy classes. By Theorem 3.8 , we see that the analytic
classes and the @xmath -conjugacy classes lie in transversal position .
Each analytic class spreads through all @xmath -conjugacy classes. Each
@xmath -conjugacy class spreads through all analytic classes. Moreover,
by Proposition 3.8 , each @xmath -conjugacy class has infinitely many
representatives in each analytic class. This makes more precise our
observation from Section 3.4.1 that analytic classification cannot be
read only from the differences @xmath .

In particular, in the model analytic class @xmath there exist
diffeomorphisms from all @xmath -conjugacy classes, and in the trivial
@xmath -conjugacy class @xmath there exist diffeomorphisms from all
analytic classes. This confirms Example 3.4 .

The same classification analysis could have been done considering the
moments with respect to trivializations @xmath , for repelling instead
for attracting petals.

For further research, we hope to determine the relative position of all
@xmath -conjugacy classes to each other.

#### 3.4.4 Reconstruction of the analytic classes from the
@xmath-conjugacy classes

We have seen in Subsection 3.4.3 , that we cannot read the analytic
classes from the @xmath -conjugacy classes with respect to positive
trivialisations (or with respect to negative trivialisations).
Nevertheless, by comparing the @xmath -conjugacy classes of a
diffeomorphism with respect to both sectorial trivializations , in cases
where the @xmath -moments are invertible, we can read the analytic
class. This is nothing unexpected, since comparing the sectorial
trivializations themselves reveals the analytic class.

Let @xmath be formally conjugated to the model @xmath . We denote by
@xmath its @xmath -moment with respect to trivialisations of the
attracting sector, and by @xmath its @xmath -moment with respect to
trivialisations of the repelling sector.

###### Proposition 3.10 (Ecalle-Voronin moduli expressed using
@xmath-moments with respect to both trivialisations).

If all @xmath -moment components @xmath above are invertible at @xmath ,
the Ecalle-Voronin moduli ( 3.11 ) defined in Section 3.1 correspond to
compositions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.71)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes the inversion.

###### Proof.

By definition of @xmath -moments from Subsection 3.4.1 , it holds that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The statement now follows directly from the definition of the
Ecalle-Voronin moduli ( 3.11 ) in Section 3.1 . ∎

We discuss the invertibility in the next proposition.

###### Proposition 3.11 (Invertibility of @xmath).

Suppose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The germs @xmath are either analytic diffeomorphisms or have finitely
many analytic (except at zero) inverses.

On the other hand, if the difference @xmath is trivial on @xmath or on
@xmath , the moduli cannot be reconstructed using @xmath on @xmath in
the above manner, and the analytic class cannot be reconstructed.

###### Proof.

As we have noted when defining @xmath -moments, @xmath and @xmath extend
to @xmath to analytic germs. We can suppose without loss of generality
that the constant term is @xmath , simply by taking the same constant
term in sectorial solutions @xmath and @xmath . The germs are nonzero by
( 3.72 ). Depending on the first nonzero term in their Taylor series, we
distinguish between two cases of invertibility of @xmath at @xmath .

From ( 3.55 ), it holds that @xmath . Since modulus @xmath is an
analytic diffeomorphism, the developments for @xmath and @xmath begin
with the same monomial, say @xmath . Therefore their invertibility is
discussed in the same manner.

Let @xmath @xmath , @xmath .

1.  @xmath . The functions @xmath are analytic diffeomorphisms and they
    have unique inverses @xmath .

2.  @xmath . It holds @xmath . There exists a unique analytic
    diffeomorphism @xmath , tangent to the identity, such that @xmath .
    There exist @xmath different analytic (except at @xmath ) inverses
    of @xmath , given by the formulas

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is unique inverse of @xmath . Here, @xmath inverses are
    determined by the choice of @xmath different roots @xmath .

∎

In the second case, one of the analytic inverses gives moduli by ( 3.71
). For example, if we choose both trivialisations @xmath and @xmath with
the same constant term, then the moduli @xmath and @xmath are tangent to
the identity , and we know exactly which inverse to choose. Indeed, it
can be seen directly from formulas ( 3.11 ) for the moduli that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are constant terms of @xmath and @xmath respectively.

### 3.5 Perspectives

#### 3.5.1 Can we read the analytic class from @xmath-neighborhoods of
only one orbit?

We exploit ideas from the proof of Proposition 3.3 to prove that a
parabolic diffeomorphism is uniquely determined by the complex measures
of @xmath -neighborhoods of only one orbit , given on some small
interval in @xmath . That is, by the function @xmath , @xmath , where
@xmath is arbitrary small. Note that @xmath is fixed and this function
is realized using only one orbit . This result suggests that the @xmath
-neighborhoods of only one orbit should be enough to read the analytic
class, as was the case for formal classification discussed in Chapter 2
. Therefore, it should suffice to fix @xmath and regard @xmath as
function of @xmath only. However, how this can be done remains open and
subject to further research. Note that this is a different approach to
the problem. In Chapter 3 , we have been considering and comparing
sectorial functions, derived from @xmath , with respect to the variable
@xmath .

###### Proposition 3.12.

Let @xmath be fixed. Let @xmath . The mapping

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is injective on the set of all parabolic diffeomorphisms @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath We show that the germs @xmath and @xmath must be
equal.

Separating the tails and the nuclei, and dividing by @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The proof relies on the presence of singularities at points @xmath ,
which was stated in Proposition 3.3 . Let @xmath denote the orbit @xmath
and @xmath the orbit @xmath . Recall from Proposition 3.3 that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose that the sequences of singularities for @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , do not eventually coincide. Then, there exists
@xmath arbitrary big and an interval @xmath , such that @xmath and
@xmath . Consider the second derivative @xmath of ( 3.73 ) from the
right. With all the notations and conclusions as in the proof of
Proposition 3.3 , from ( 3.3.1 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since all terms are bounded except for the term in brackets and @xmath ,
( 3.5.1 ) leads to a contradiction. Therefore, the sequences of
singularities @xmath and @xmath eventually coincide,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, considering the second derivative ( 3.73 ) at the singularity
@xmath from the right, instead of ( 3.5.1 ), we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The term in brackets is the only unbounded term, therefore @xmath The
middle points of the orbits @xmath and @xmath eventually coincide. Since
the distances @xmath and @xmath coincide, and since both orbits converge
to some tangential direction, it is easy to see that the orbits
themselves eventually coincide.

The diffeomorphisms @xmath and @xmath , both analytic at @xmath ,
coincide on a set accumulating at the origin. Therefore, they must be
equal. ∎

#### 3.5.2 @xmath-Abel equation in analytic classification of
two-dimensional diffeomorphisms

This result is due to David Sauzin, in personal communication, and we
put it here only as a possible application. It gives an application of
the @xmath -Abel equation for a diffeomorphism @xmath , along with its
standard Abel equation, for obtaining the analytic classification of
two-dimensional germs derived from @xmath , of the form @xmath .

Let @xmath belong to the formal class of @xmath . We consider
two-dimensional germs of diffeomorphisms @xmath of the type

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Each two-dimensional diffeomorphism of the above type can by a unique
formal change of variables @xmath be reduced to a formal normal form of
the type

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the formal normal form for @xmath and @xmath denotes a
formal series of the form @xmath , without the constant term.

The formal conjugation @xmath , @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the formal conjugation that conjugates @xmath to @xmath
. @xmath is the formal solution (without the constant term) of @xmath
-Abel equation ( 3.50 ) for the diffeomorphism @xmath and @xmath is the
formal solution for @xmath .

To conclude, @xmath is analytically conjugated to its formal normal form
@xmath if and only if @xmath is analytically conjugated to @xmath by
@xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the latter difference for @xmath being known by Example 3.5 .

The problem of formal conjugacy can be formulated equivalently using
trivialization equation that conjugates @xmath with translation by
@xmath . We search for formal solutions @xmath of the trivialization
equation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be checked that formal solutions of the trivialization equation (
3.76 ) for the formal normal form @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is (global) trivialization function for @xmath , and @xmath
is the (fixed) formal solution of 1-Abel equation ( 3.50 ) for @xmath ,
which is only sectorially analytic, see Examples 3.5 and 3.6 in
Subsection 3.4.1 .

As in 1-dimensional case, by ( 3.75 ), ( 3.76 ) and ( 3.77 ), we get
that the formal trivialization @xmath for diffeomorphism @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the formal solution of the Abel equation for @xmath .

Obviously, by ( 3.78 ), Abel equation for @xmath appears as first
coordinate, and 1-Abel equation for @xmath as second coordinate in the
trivialization equation ( 3.76 ) for @xmath .

### 3.6 Proofs of auxiliary results

We prove here Lemma 3.1 from Section 3.2 . We also state an auxiliary
proposition from the proof of Proposition 3.3 in Section 3.3 .

Proof of Lemma 3.1 . One implication is obvious.

We prove the other implication, i.e., that the analyticity of @xmath
implies the analyticity of @xmath . Let @xmath . In the case where
@xmath is an analytic diffeomorphism, that is, begins with the linear
term, the statement is obvious simply by inverting. In other cases, the
proof relies on the existence of formal series of @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is of order @xmath , that is, @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . Suppose @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath , since @xmath and
@xmath are not constant functions, we can cancel the constant term on
both sides and proceed as in the case @xmath . Suppose therefore @xmath
. By ( 3.26 ), @xmath , and we can divide by @xmath . We can therefore
suppose without loss of generality that the leading coefficient in
@xmath , and @xmath is equal to 1. Since @xmath and @xmath are analytic,
there exists an analytic function @xmath of order @xmath and an analytic
diffeomorphisms @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath . The equation (
3.26 ) can therefore be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering @xmath and @xmath as two formal series in the appropriate
subsets of @xmath , putting them in ( 3.79 ) and simply comparing the
coefficients on both sides, we conclude that the formal series for
@xmath and @xmath must be equal. Since @xmath is analytic, the formal
series @xmath also converges to an analytic function. Now inverting the
analytic diffeomorphism @xmath , we conclude that @xmath is analytic.
@xmath

We state and prove an auxiliary proposition that we use in the proof of
Proposition 3.3 in Subsection 3.3.1 .

###### Proposition 3.13.

Let the sequence @xmath be as defined in Subsection 3.3.1 . Let @xmath
such that @xmath . For each @xmath , the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a well-defined @xmath -function in @xmath on the interval @xmath .
Moreover, the differentiation of the sum is performed term by term.

###### Proof.

We consider separately real and imaginary part of the function. We show
that the real part,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has all the properties from the statement. For the imaginary part, the
proof is the same.

Let us denote the functions under the summation sign by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , as @xmath , and @xmath , the following upper bound holds:
there exists a constant @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , @xmath , see ( 2.16 ) in Subsection 2.3.1 , the series
@xmath converges. Therefore the series for @xmath converges uniformly on
@xmath . As a uniform limit of continuous functions on a segment, @xmath
is a continuous function on @xmath .

We now show that @xmath is differentiable on @xmath and that it can be
differentiated term by term. The functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are continuous functions on @xmath , and it can be shown similarly as
above that the series @xmath converges uniformly on @xmath . Therefore,
it can be differentiated termwise,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath is a continuous function on @xmath , as uniform limit
of continuous functions. Therefore @xmath is of class @xmath on @xmath .
The same procedure can now be repeated for higher-order derivatives. ∎

## Chapter 4 Conclusions and perspectives

In this thesis, we considered discrete dynamical systems generated by
germs of diffeomorphisms of the real line and by complex germs of
diffeomorphisms, locally around a fixed point.

In the first part of the thesis , Chapters 1 and 2 , we used fractal
analysis in recognizing diffeomorphisms of the real line and complex
diffeomorphisms and saddles, from the viewpoint of formal
classification. In case of diffeomorphisms of the real line, we
considered those differentiable at the origin, as well as those which
are not, but which additionally decompose in so-called Chebyshev scales
, well-ordered by flatness. In case of complex diffeomorphisms, we
considered all except those with irrational rotation in the linear part.
In all mentioned cases, it was shown that fractal analysis of only one
trajectory of the system tending to a fixed point is enough to classify
the generating diffeomorphisms. That is, to read the multiplicity of the
fixed point or the formal class of the diffeomorphism. The method of
fractal analysis is applicable since fractal properties of only one
orbit can be computed numerically.

Furthermore, we applied the obtained results to continuous dynamical
systems. This was done using Poincaré maps in simple cases of planar
limit periodic sets, or using holonomy maps for germs of complex saddle
fields. We showed that the box dimension (or its appropriate
generalization) of only one trajectory of the Poincaré map shows the
cyclicity of the set in a generic analytic unfolding. Similarly, we
proved that generalized fractal properties of only one trajectory of the
holonomy map show the orbital formal normal form of a complex saddle
itself. We expect that the normal form can equivalently be read using
fractal properties of one leaf of a foliation around the saddle. We made
some preliminary results. This was motivated by an analogy with planar
cases, where the box dimension of one spiral trajectory could have been
used instead of the box dimension of one orbit of its Poincaré map, see
e.g. [ 56 , 57 ] .

However, many questions related to this research are still open, and we
list here some of them. We expect to consider them in the future.

To start with, we need to compute the box dimension of leaves of a
foliation at complex saddles and prove the conjecture from Subsection
2.4.3 that the box dimension of any leaf of a foliation around the
formally orbitally nonlinearizable complex saddle reveals its first
orbital formal invariant. For another formal invariant, we are obliged
to analyse further terms in the asymptotic development of the @xmath
-neighborhoods of leaves, as was the case with parabolic diffeomorphisms
before.

Secondly, we mentioned in Section 2.2 that we omitted the very
complicated case of complex diffeomorphisms with irrational rotations in
the linear part. They are formally linearizable. On the other hand, the
necessary and sufficient conditions imposed on them for analytic
linearizability at the origin are very complicated. They were discovered
by Bryuno and Yoccoz. It would be of interest to see if fractal analysis
of their orbits can give us some insight to analytic linearizability. We
have seen that if a diffeomorphism of the above form is analytically
linearizable, then the box dimension of its any trajectory is equal to
1. The question is the converse.

The second part of the thesis , Chapter 3 , was dedicated to the problem
of reading the analytic classes of parabolic diffeomorphisms from @xmath
-neighborhoods of their orbits. We provided results describing
analyticity properties of the complex measures of @xmath -neighborhoods
of orbits, but we did not solve the original question of analytic
classification. Many interesting questions for the future work have
appeared.

The first one concerns the analytic classification of parabolic
diffeomorphisms using @xmath -neighborhoods of only one orbit , that is,
for fixed initial point @xmath . We proved in Section 3.5 , that the
complex measures of @xmath -neighborhoods of only one orbit on some
small interval @xmath determine the diffeomorphism uniquely. In
particular, its analytic class is determined. It is nevertheless unclear
how to read it, and this question remains for the future research.

Secondly, investigating analyticity properties of measures of @xmath
-neighborhoods of orbits of parabolic diffeomorphisms, special type of
difference equation has appeared, which we have named the generalized
Abel equation of order one . These equations resemble the trivialisation
(Abel) equation, which is standardly used in the analytic classification
problem. This suggested considering the generalized Abel equations of
higher orders , into which both equations fit as special cases. It
motivated us to introduce new classifications of diffeomorphisms with
respect to the equations of higher orders, in a similar manner as the
analytic classification was deduced from the trivialisation equation. We
were mostly interested in the first order equation, that appeared
naturally when considering the @xmath -neighborhoods of orbits. For the
future, many questions are open. For example, if these new classes can
be interpreted geometrically and what geometric properties of a
generating function they reveal. For the first and the zero order
equations, we analysed to some extent the relative position of their
classes, to see if they are in any relation to each other, and found out
that they are transversal . In the future, this should be also done for
the generalized Abel equations of higher orders.