##### Contents

-    Resumen
-    Summary
-    1 Introduction
-    2 Spectral line polarization in stellar atmospheres
    -    2.1 Radiative transfer with polarization.
        -    2.1.1 Quantum mechanical description
        -    2.1.2 The radiative transfer equation
        -    2.1.3 Line broadening mechanisms
        -    2.1.4 Radiative transfer coefficients
        -    2.1.5 Statistical equilibrium equations
        -    2.1.6 Radiation field.
    -    2.2 Numerical methods for polarized radiative transfer.
        -    2.2.1 Integration of the transfer equation.
        -    2.2.2 Statement of the iterative problem.
        -    2.2.3 Iterative scheme.
        -    2.2.4 Evaluation of @xmath
    -    2.3 Line formation in moving atmospheres
        -    2.3.1 Effect of the velocity on the radiative transfer.
        -    2.3.2 Effect of the velocity in the SEE.
        -    2.3.3 Effect of the velocity on the atomic density matrix.
    -    2.4 The Hanle Effect in the solar atmosphere
        -    2.4.1 Description
        -    2.4.2 A hands-on guide to the Hanle equations
        -    2.4.3 Hanle effect at work: two examples.
-    3 Developed tools and methodology.
    -    3.1 A RT code for dynamic scattering polarization.
        -    3.1.1 Traviata.
        -    3.1.2 The new version of Traviata
        -    3.1.3 A FEM-based optimization method for the spatial grid.
    -    3.2 Response functions in chromospheric solar models.
    -    3.3 Tools for Principal Component Analysis.
    -    3.4 The Solar Inspector
    -    3.5 Advanced 3D visualization with Mayavi.
-    4 Scattering Polarization with Velocity Gradients.
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 Formulation of the problem and relevant equations
        -    4.2.1 The atomic model and the statistical equilibrium
            equations (SEE)
        -    4.2.2 The radiative transfer equations (RTE)
        -    4.2.3 Numerical method
    -    4.3 Effect of a velocity gradient on the radiation field.
        -    4.3.1 Anisotropy seen by a moving scatterer.
        -    4.3.2 Calculations in a Milne-Eddington model.
        -    4.3.3 Two-level model atom in dynamic atmospheres.
    -    4.4 Results for the Ca ii IR Triplet
        -    4.4.1 Behavior of the anisotropy in the Ca ii IR triplet
        -    4.4.2 The impact of the emergent radiation on the
            polarization.
        -    4.4.3 Variations on the atomic alignment due to velocity
            gradients.
    -    4.5 Conclusions
-    5 Scattering Polarization of the Ca ii IR triplet in Hydrodynamical
    Models
    -    5.1 Description of the problem and the resolution procedure.
    -    5.2 Description and characterization of the results.
    -    5.3 Analysis and discussion of results.
        -    5.3.1 The effect of the velocity.
        -    5.3.2 The combined effect of velocity and temperature on
            the linear polarization.
        -    5.3.3 Averaged values of the polarization profiles.
        -    5.3.4 The velocity free approximation.
        -    5.3.5 The effect of photospheric dynamics.
        -    5.3.6 The effect of the integration time.
        -    5.3.7 The effect of a decreasing velocity on the averaged
            profiles.
    -    5.4 Considerations on the Hanle effect
    -    5.5 Conclusions
-    6 Synthesis of Stokes profiles in a 3D MHD atmospheric model.
    -    6.1 Description of the MHD model and the RT calculations.
        -    6.1.1 Pre-processing the models.
        -    6.1.2 Description of physical quantities in the model.
    -    6.2 Synthetic polarization profiles in forward scattering.
        -    6.2.1 Individual profiles.
        -    6.2.2 Slit profiles.
    -    6.3 Maps of radiative quantities.
        -    6.3.1 Maps of polarization amplitudes.
        -    6.3.2 The Hanle Polarity Inversion Lines.
        -    6.3.3 Maps of the Polarization Degree.
        -    6.3.4 Maps of polarization contrasts.
    -    6.4 Effect of the vertical velocities.
    -    6.5 Synthetic observations.
        -    6.5.1 The space telescope Solar- C.
        -    6.5.2 Degraded and restored maps of Polarization
            Amplitudes.
        -    6.5.3 Degraded and restored maps of the Linear Polarization
            Degree.
        -    6.5.4 The practical disadvantages of the typical
            spectropolarimetric quantities.
        -    6.5.5 Reconstruction with PCA methods.
    -    6.6 Spectropolarimetric inference of the magnetic field.
        -    6.6.1 The Zeeman effect and the weak field approximation.
        -    6.6.2 Magnetic Field Direction and Ambiguities in the Hanle
            regime.
        -    6.6.3 The disambiguation process.
        -    6.6.4 Magnetic field intensity.
-    7 Conclusions and future work
    -    7.1 Goals achieved
    -    7.2 Conclusions
    -    7.3 Future work
-    A Appendix.
    -    A.1 Special functions in section 4.3.1
    -    A.2 Statistical equilibrium equations in the non-magnetic case.
    -    A.3 Derivation of the fractional linear polarization under EB
        approximation.
    -    A.4 Other figures in Chapter 6.
    -    A.5 Stereographic view of a cool chromospheric bubble.
-    Agradecimientos

## Chapter 1 Introduction

In @xmath , Charles A. Young wrote ( Young , 1862 ) :

“ …This outer envelope…seems to be made up not of overlying strata of
different density, but rather of flames, beams and streamers, as
transient as those of our own aurora borealis. It is divided into two
portions…the outer portion…may almost, without exaggeration, be likened
to ’the stuff that dreams are made of’, since it is chiefly due to the
’corona’ or glory which surrounds the darkened Sun during an eclipse… At
its base, and in contact with the photosphere, is what resembles a sheet
of scarlet fire… This is the ’chromosphere’ … ”

These annotations already gave a clear qualitative description of the
outer layers of the solar atmosphere, containing also one of the first
scientific reports of what today is known as a chromospheric emission.
Beginning in the famous Indian eclipse of 1868 August 18, the
application of the yet novel spectroscopic visual techniques to the Sun
started to reveal several crucial facts about its physical properties.
They would also constitute the basis for the flourishment of the present
astrophysical spectropolarimetry.

Irrespective of the scientific explanations we could give, the vision of
our moon exactly matching the Sun’s circumference will never cease to be
amazing (Figure 1.1 , left panel). But better eyes to observe it are
always welcome. Thanks to the instrumental works of Secchi in the 1860s
and to the subsequent establishment of a proper observational
methodology, the increasing interest and fascination of the scientists
for the solar atmosphere transformed it in a very attractive topic of
research. Besides the identification of the main outer regions of the
Sun, the incipient spectroscopy allowed their composition to be
measured. Scientists like Herschel, Rayet, and Janssen realized that the
faint glow of the chromosphere was due to an emission spectrum from hot,
low density gases emitting at discrete wavelengths, the “scarlet fire”
being due to the strong Balmer H @xmath emission (Figure 1.1 , middle
panel). Also through spectroscopic methods, the discovery of the second
most abundant element in the universe, helium, was first done in
emission lines seen in the solar chromosphere during that Indian eclipse
of 1868 (helium was not found on Earth until 1895!).

At that time, the chromosphere could only be distinguished easily during
a total solar eclipse because it glows faintly relative to the
photosphere. But the invention of the first spectroheliograph by Hale
and Deslandres (1890) allowed the study of the solar disk chromosphere
at any time. It led Hale to reveal the “chromospheric network” at
various wavelengths in the Ca ii H and K lines and in H @xmath , and
showed that enhanced chromospheric emission occurs in “clouds” or
“flocculi” above photospheric faculae ( Hale & Ellerman , 1904 ) . These
regions are overlaid and mixed with ubiquitous hair-like fine
structures, later termed “jets” or “spicules” when they are seen at the
limb, or “mottles” when seen on disk. Hale ( Hale & Adams , 1909 ) also
obtained the first spectroheliograms of the disk in H @xmath , which
revealed that “ …is clearly visible on the hydrogen photographs. It is a
decided definiteness of structure indicated by radial or curving lines,
or as some such distribution of the minor flocculi as iron filings
present in a magnetic field ”. Thus, together with the discovery of the
Zeeman effect in sunspots ( Hale , 1908 ) , Hale had confirmed a
stunning and essential fact: the magnetic nature of the Sun (figure 1.1
).

The magnetic field plays a crucial role in the behavior of the solar
atmosphere. It is one of the three main drivers defining the
chromosphere (together with dynamics and thermodynamics). Indeed, its
importance in Astrophysics is universal. To explain it, we can first
consider the symmetry between electric and magnetic fields in the
Maxwell equations describing the propagation of electromagnetic waves.
They are symmetric in their interactions. On the contrary, there is a
lack of symmetry between the sources (charges) of the electric and
magnetic fields in such equations. Effectively, the matter throughout
the cosmos is found to consist only of electrically charged particles,
i.e., electrons and nucleons, with no indicia of scalar magnetic sources
(magnetic monopoles). On the other hand, since most of the gases in the
universe are at least partially ionized, there is an abundance of free
electrons and ions. Hence, a consequence of these facts is that an
electric current density can be easily created by a very weak electric
field, quickly reducing to negligible values any large-scale electric
field in the reference frame of the moving plasma ¹ ¹ 1 Only in places
without large electrical conductivity, as the very good insulated
regions of the planetary atmospheres, can electric fields exist. This
favours the emergence of life. . In other words, the abundance of free
charges shortcircuits the electric fields very fast, leaving the
universe impregned only by the magnetic field at large distances (
Parker , 2007 ) . At the same time, charges in motion with respect to an
external observer, are themselves sources of seed magnetic fields that
are amplified by rotation and convection in the stars (as stated by the
induction equation in MHD theory). That is one of the basis of the solar
dynamo mechanism ( Charbonneau , 2010 ) . The stellar magnetic fields
are then created and driven by organized macroscopic relative motions
between electric charges in the plasma ² ² 2 The magnetic field itself
is a relativistic phenomenon. According to the special theory of
relativity, the partition of the electromagnetic force into separate
electric and magnetic components is not fundamental, but varies with the
observational frame of reference: an electric force perceived by one
observer may be perceived in a different frame of reference as a
magnetic force. Special relativity combines the electric and magnetic
fields into a rank-2 tensor, called the electromagnetic tensor. Changing
reference frames mixes these components. This is analogous to the way
that special relativity mixes space and time into spacetime, and mass,
momentum and energy into four-momentum. Interestingly, also the Stokes
parameters (read further) form a Minkowskian four-vector . In the
absence of motions, the most notable chromospheric and coronal
structures, such as those spicules or the longer “iron fillings”
described by Hale, would not exist.

In relation with the outer solar layers, it is believed that the
dissipation of magnetic energy in the @xmath K corona may be
significantly modulated by the strength and structure of the magnetic
field in the chromosphere (e.g., Parker , 2007 ) . According to the
variation of the magnetic field with height in the Sun, the chromosphere
is an interface layer lying between the gas-dominated photosphere (where
field lines are frozen in the plasma, dragged about by surface flows)
and the field-dominated corona (where the ionized plasma is forced to
flow along the field lines). At such extremes the field adopts the form
of small-scale intense flux tubes in the high- @xmath photosphere ³ ³ 3
The @xmath of the plasma is the ratio between the gas pressure and the
magnetic pressure. and produces loop-like structures in the low- @xmath
corona. In the middle, magnetic fields can be highly twisted and
tangled, being expanded from below to fill the chromosphere.

The structure of the chromosphere is thus determined by the magnetic
field, while its dynamics is dominated by oscillations and flows
arriving amplified from the convective photosphere. Indeed, dynamics is
specially important in the solar chromosphere because of the much larger
velocities existing there in comparison with the photosphere. The
combination of intricate structure on small scales and fast dynamics
make the chromosphere one of the most defying regions for the
comprehension of the solar atmosphere. Some problems are the channelling
of the highly conducting and partially ionized plasma through the field
lines, and the changing of the force balance ( @xmath parameter) within
the chromosphere, which leads to drastic variations in field morphology
and wave mode propagation. The magnetic field dramatically changes the
ways energy can be transported and dissipated, compared with the
field-free case. Figure 1.2 sketches some of the complications
introduced by magnetic fields and dynamics ( Judge , 2006 ) .

In particular, the turbulent nature of the underlying photosphere will
inevitably lead to magnetic free energy (current systems) throughout the
entire atmosphere. It basically consists in very small scale current
sheets and dissipation regions below the current observable scales (
Parker , 1994 ) . Thus, the combination of magnetic fields and dynamics,
which includes shocks and turbulence, leads to an atmospheric “global
warming”.

The temperature profile is the third distinctive attribute commonly used
to define the solar chromosphere. In this region, most of the
non-thermal energy that creates the corona and the solar wind is
released, with a heating rate requirement that is between one and two
orders of magnitude larger than in the corona ( Ayres et al. , 2009 ) .
In quiet Sun regions, the chromosphere extends from the temperature
minimum at about @xmath km to the sudden steep increase around @xmath km
(the transition region to the corona, where temperature changes from
@xmath K to @xmath K). The nature of the chromospheric temperature rise
is still unclear. Acoustic waves have long been proposed as the main
energy source that heats the quiet-Sun chromosphere. They steepen into
shocks as they propagate upward in the atmosphere, heating it as they
dissipate. This would produce a highly time-dependent heating (e.g.,
Carlsson & Stein , 2002 ) .

In the last instance, only one driver alters the chromosphere at all
scales: dynamics. Motions of charges generate and sustain the fields;
macroscopic motions in plasmas can transport and distort the fields, or
can alter the optical properties of the fluid; and even temperature is a
proxy for microscopic motions.

To observationally understand the information that we receive from the
chromosphere, it is also important to discriminate what we are looking
at. Since the visual work of Secchi in the 1870s to the impressive
satellite pictures of today, the observational appearance of the
chromosphere has always shown the remarkable and beautiful fine
structure that seems to predominate (figure 1.1 , right panel). It is
then easy to imagine a chromosphere mostly composed by those streamers
of plasma (spicules) that Charles A. Young pointed out.

But, contrarily to that first impression, most of the mass in the
chromosphere have to be disposed in gravitationally stratified layers of
plasma, not in spicules defying gravity ( Judge , 2010 ) . We have here
to distinguish between the fine-structured chromosphere and the ambient
chromosphere from which spicules originate. The chromosphere fibrilar
structure bears similarities in morphology and dynamics to the overlying
corona, being a kind of conspicuos interface layer. When observing with
broadband filters, the instruments preferentially detect those bright,
dynamic jets whose line widths and Doppler shifts are sufficient to
avoid the absorption by the intervening material ( Judge & Carlsson ,
2010 ) . Thus, the “non-spicule” chromosphere, which in any case must be
present to account for material with significant opacity in the Ca II
lines ( Lites et al. , 1993 ) , cannot be easily seen in the
observations. Today we know that spicules have far smaller filling
factor and density (by several orders of magnitude) than the
chromospheric pool ⁴ ⁴ 4 They are important because they present a large
areal interface to the corona, so having a great potential to supply
large amounts of mass upwards, and channelling Alfvenic fluctuations
that can release magnetic energy into the external layers ( de Pontieu
et al. , 2007 ) . .

A signature property of such ambient chromosphere pointed out before is
its geometrical extension (near ten pressure scale heights), which is
much larger than expected in a hydrostatic atmosphere where gravity is
balanced by pressure gradients. During a long time the question was:
which are the forces balancing the chromospheric stratification? In the
past, the two competing solutions were a hydrostatically stratified
chromosphere supported on radiation-pressure gradients ( Milne , 1924 )
, and a similar model whose extra support was given by turbulence
instead of radiation ( McCrea , 1929 ) . It was not until the middle of
the twentieth century that the development of the radiation transfer and
spectral line formation theory started to include the extreme departures
from classical Local Thermodynamic Equilibrium (LTE) at the very low
densities and high temperatures of the chromospheric regions. The
solution inclined favourably to Milne’s model, and the discussion led to
the introduction of Non-LTE ⁵ ⁵ 5 Contrary to the photosphere, the
atomic excitation of the chromospheric plasma strongly depends on a
radiation field which does not correspond with local conditions but with
the emission at distant points within the solar atmospheres. effects for
explaining the observations. Years later, Athay & Thomas ( 1961 )
concluded that, including NLTE effects, a hydrostatically stratified
distribution of plasma is in good agreeement with the limb observations
made in the continuum. They also showed that in NLTE, the dependence of
ionization equilibrium on electron pressure still naturally produces
higher ionization stages at higher layers in stratified media, as Saha
(1920) found assuming LTE ⁶ ⁶ 6 These facts seems to apply in most part
of the chromosphere. Perhaps only in the highest chromospheric layers
the spicules tend to appear as a natural consequence of the predominance
of the magnetic field over the plasma dynamics, which would channel and
accelerate the particles along the spicules altering the hydrostatic
stratification along them. . Several decades of research on chromosheric
lines have redounded in a well-established line formation theory able to
model chromospheric spectral lines under NLTE conditions (e.g., the
monographs by Mihalas , 1978 ; Cannon , 1985 ; Rutten , 2003 ) .

Today, the large extent of the chromosphere is explained in terms of
ionization of its dominant constituent, hydrogen. Given its large
ionization potential, hydrogen acts as a sponge that soaks up energy,
buffering the gas to some degree from local heatings (like acoustic
shocks) and moderating the temperatures ( Ayres et al. , 2009 ) . The
key point is that ionization frees electrons to feed regular and
continuous cooling by collisional excitation and subsequent radiative de
excitation of abundant species such as Fe ii , Mg ii and Ca ii . The
radiative cooling produced by those lines is a signature property of the
chromosphere. This “ionization valve” works effectively along many scale
heights because of the large dynamic range of the electron fraction,
@xmath . It is only @xmath at the base of the chromosphere (where the
electrons are from singly ionized metals), but at the top it approaches
unity (hydrogen mostly ionized). This allows considerable margin for the
gas to balance heating even while the overall density falls outward (
Ayres , 1979 ) . Once the pool of neutral hydrogen is exhausted, the
valve cannot continue to balance the heating and a thermal escape could
propagate towards the corona. This scenario is appealing to explain the
large extent and the “thermostat” role of solar-like chromospheres but,
for the moment, it is not enough to fully explain the so-called coronal
heating problem. To solve this and other various problems we have to
engage more pieces of the puzzle. How do we connect the physical
properties of the chromosphere with the observed spectral line
radiation? This thesis is about the answer to that question.

To validate and test the link between theory and observations, a
reliable diagnostic technique should be able to accomodate the influence
of magnetic field, temperature and velocity, while guided by a detailed
line formation theory.

On one hand, the scattering in strong resonance transitions feeded by
the hydrogen ionization becomes a dominant energy transport mechanism
(radiative cooling). The nonlocality of such radiation fields, induced
by the lower opacity in higher layers, creates serious challenges for
remote sensing that have to be solved with the help of theoretical and
numerical approximations to the radiative transfer problem.

On the other hand, “measuring” the chromospheric magnetic field is
notoriously difficult (e.g., reviews by Casini & Landi Degl’Innocenti ,
2007 ; Harvey , 2009 ; Trujillo Bueno , 2010 ) . While spectroscopic
observations allow us to determine temperatures, flows and waves, they
do not provide any quantitative information on the chromospheric
magnetic field. To this end, we need to measure and interpret the
polarization that some physical mechanisms introduce in chromospheric
spectral lines. From Maxwell’s electromagnetic wave theory it follows
that the spectral radiation is characterized by its intensity and also
by its polarization, which is defined in the plane perpendicular to the
direction of propagation of the light ray (the transversal plane). G. G.
Stokes showed how intensity and polarization could be described in a
unified way by the Stokes ⁷ ⁷ 7 Apart from the polarimetry and the many
contributions that Stokes did to science, some evidences suggest that he
could have also been the first one (several years before Kirchhoff) in
formulating the fundamental principles of spectroscopy, which allowed
the identification of substances in the Sun and in the stars. 4-vector.
The first vector component represents the ordinary intensity (I), the
second and third components (Q and U) describe linear polarization along
two reference directions in the transversal plane, while the fourth
component (V) relates to the circular polarization. This is a very
powerful way to describe any partially polarized light beam while giving
all the four vector components in the same (intensity) units ( Born &
Wolf , 1980 ) . In practice, this representation implies that
spectropolarimetry is actually differential photometry. The difference
between the number of photons oscillating in one reference direction
along the transversal plane and the number of photons oscillating
perpendicularly in the same plane gives Stokes Q and U. Something
similar holds for Stokes V, which is the difference between right-handed
and left-handed circularly polarized photons. Going from spectroscopy to
spectropolarimetry thus means an increment in the dimensionality of
information space from 1-D to 4-D. Hence, in polarized radiative
transfer (RT), instead of a scalar problem we have to deal with the
transfer of a 4-vector. This increases the richness ⁸ ⁸ 8 Note that the
information provided by the new dimensions (Q, U, and V ) cannot be
derived from Stokes I, but each independent dimension gives a different
but complementary diagnostic window to the universe. but also the
complexity of the physical situation. It is the price to pay for getting
access to stellar magnetic fields.

Historically, the discovery of the magnetic effects on the light was
guided by laboratory experiments. In @xmath , Pieter Zeeman, disobeying
the direct orders of his supervisor, used laboratory equipment to
measure the action of a strong magnetic field on spectral lines. Thus,
he discovered his homonymous effect, consisting in the splitting of a
spectral line into several polarized components by the action of a
static magnetic field.

The circular and linear polarization signals that the Zeeman effect can
produce in a spectral line are caused by the wavelength shifts between
the so-called @xmath and @xmath transitions of the line (Zeeman
splitting) induced by the presence of a magnetic field. The amplitude of
the circular polarization scales with the ratio @xmath between the
Zeeman splitting and the Doppler line width. The amplitude of the linear
polarization scales with @xmath (see Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi ,
2004 ) . Outside sunspots (where @xmath G at chromospheric heights)
@xmath , which explains why it is so difficult to detect the linear
polarization of the Zeeman effect in a chromospheric line. Typically,
only the Zeeman circular polarization is detected, especially in
long-wavelength chromospheric lines such as those of the IR triplet of
Ca ii (e.g., Trujillo Bueno , 2010 , Figure 3) . Then, the linear
polarization observed in quiet regions of the solar chromosphere has
practically nothing to do with the transverse Zeeman effect.

On the other hand, in 1922 Wood and Ellett published a paper describing
the effect of a magnetic field on the polarization of resonance
fluorescence radiation emitted by a cell of mercury vapor. It turned out
that a constant magnetic field of a few gauss was sufficient to
depolarize the scattered radiation. Wood and Ellett soon realized that
this behavior could not be interpreted as a Zeeman effect since the
Zeeman separation in such fields was very small compared to the typical
Doppler-broadened linewidth of such radiation. In @xmath Hanle gave a
classical explanation of the effect arguing that the external magnetic
field produces, due to the Lorentz force, a precession of the atom
electrons about the field direction. Such precession breaks the linear
pattern of the oscillations re-emitted by the atoms and leads to a
depolarized detected radiation. Attempts to better understand the
phenomenon were important in the subsequent development of quantum
physics.

It was through spectropolarimetry that measurements of stellar magnetic
fields became possible: first, with the works of Hale (remember, the
spectroheliograph’s inventor who detected the Zeeman effect in intensity
while studying sunspots), and Babcock ( 1947 ) , who succesfully
measured the circularly polarized Zeeman components on stars; much later
on, with the pioneering works of Omont et al. ( 1973 ); Bommier &
Sahal-Bréchot ( 1978 ) and Stenflo ( 1978 ) , the Hanle effect was
studied in the context of the radiative transfer and measured in the
solar atmosphere ( Stenflo , 2013 ) .

Polarization is related to some symmetry breaking process. For instance,
in the case of the Zeeman effect, the spatial symmetry breaking induced
by the magnetic field is transferred to the radiation as an asymmetry
between the orientation sense of the circularly polarized blue and red
sigma components. In a non-magnetized atmosphere, the symmetry can be
broken by a scattering process, depending on the angles between the
incident and scattered radiation. Similarly to the light emitted from
the Earth sky, which is linearly polarized by molecular Rayleigh
scattering, the solar spectrum is linearly polarized by scattering
processes in the Sun’s atmosphere. In weakly magnetized regions, the
linear polarization of chromospheric lines is dominated by scattering
processes. The geometrical distribution of the solar atmospheric
structures can create, simply by the lack of symmetry in the
illumination they produce, a phase relationship between the excitation
and emission processes in scattering atoms. The quantum origin of this
polarization is the difference among the electronic populations of
sublevels pertaining to the levels of the spectral line under
consideration. This so-called atomic level polarization, which is
induced by the anisotropic illumination of the atoms, produces selective
emission and/or selective absorption of polarization components without
the need of a magnetic field (e.g., Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno , 2003a
, 2010 ) . The larger the anisotropy of the incident radiation field the
larger the induced atomic level polarization and the larger can be the
amplitude of the linear polarization of the emergent spectral line
radiation. In an optically thick plasma like the solar atmosphere, the
anisotropy of the radiation field depends mainly on the spatial
distribution of the physical quantities that determine, at each point
within the medium, the angular variation of the incident intensity.
Great attention has been paid to the gradient of the source function
(e.g., Trujillo Bueno , 2001 ; Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 )
but, in a highly dynamic medium like the solar chromosphere, the
gradients of the macroscopic velocity of the plasma may also play an
important role in the modulation of the anisotropy. That is the central
idea of this thesis.

Those processes together with other processes modifying it (e.g., the
Hanle effect and the collisions), can generate a net linear polarization
signal. Since the emergent linear polarization has contributions from
many scattering angles, the measured quantity is a very small average.
The small amplitude of the scattering polarization signals delayed the
development of solar spectropolarimetry until technical advances allowed
the design of instruments with high polarimetric sensitivity.

Stenflo et al. ( 1983 ) did the first survey of the scattering
polarization throughout the solar spectrum by measuring the linear
polarization at the solar limb. They covered from the far UV to the near
infrared, so revealing a new world of linearly polarized spectral line
signals that received the name of the second solar spectrum . Such
signals respond to a rich variety of underlying physical mechanisms,
like the Hanle effect, what gives them a great potential for field
diagnosis. Since in the quiet chromosphere of the Sun the magnetic
fields are weak (which means a smaller Zeeman splitting) and the
spectral lines forming there tend to have larger thermal widths
(decreasing the effective sensitivity to the Zeeman splitting), the
Zeeman effect shows a kind of blindness to the magnetism of these
atmospheric layers. It leaves the Hanle effect as a preferred mechanism
to measure the magnetic field in those quiet areas (which does not mean
that it cannot be used in active regions because its applicability
depends on the spectral line considered).

The synthesis of the line scattering polarization requires several
ingredients, such as a well-established theory of line formation, a
precise characterization of many atomic processes, suitable iterative
methods of solution and reliable atomic and atmospheric models. Despite
its intrinsic difficulty, there have been a good number of studies
contributing to the development and the establishment of this reseach
topic. A few representative examples can be the modelling of the Mg i -b
lines by Trujillo Bueno ( 1999 , 2001 ) ; the development of the code
HAZEL ( Asensio Ramos et al. , 2008 ) for the synthesis and inversion of
Stokes profiles resulting from the joint action of the Hanle and Zeeman
effects in lines of neutral helium; the interpretation of the Ce ii and
Ti i lines by Manso Sainz & Landi Degl’Innocenti ( 2002 ) ; the
modelling of the Ba ii 4554 Å line by Belluzzi et al. ( 2007 ) ; and the
work of Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ( 2003b , 2010 ) , who successfully
synthetized the scattering polarization in the IR triplet lines of Ca ii
for the first time. This latter example is of especial relevance for
this thesis because we focus on the same lines. The calcium IR triplet
is a set of subordinated chromospheric lines whose RT modelling requires
taking into account also the strong resonance absorption in the H & K
lines of Ca ii . Hence, their scattering polarization is directly
sensitive to the chromospheric “thermostat” (radiative cooling) and, as
we will see, also to the magnetic field and the dynamics. Being three
lines with different heights of formation, they offer us a tomographic
heartbeat of the whole system photosphere @xmath chromosphere. The
polarization of the IR triplet of Ca ii lines is a good choice to study
the quiet Sun magnetism with the Hanle and Zeeman effects. They are
suitable to evaluate the reliability of MHD models via spectral
synthesis and comparison with spectropolarimetric observations.

Retrospectively, a rigorous quantum theory to describe polarization and
radiative transfer (see Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 )
together with the development of high-sensitivity instrumentation have
been important steps towards the understanding of the solar
chromosphere. However, to achieve a successful comparison between
observations and theory, much work is still needed on both sides. For
example, despite the Sun’s proximity, the polarimetric accuracy needed
to capture chromospheric vector fields is not presently achievable at
the desired fine spatial and temporal scales (dividing the photons into
space, time, frequency, and polarization states quickly exhausts the
supply). Innovations in this area are actively being pursued, especially
focused on larger telescope apertures both on earth and in space.
Examples are the European Solar Telescope (EST, Collados et al. , 2013 )
, the Advanced Technology Solar Telescope (ATST, Rimmele et al. , 2013 )
and the Solar-C space telescope ( Shimizu et al. , 2011 ) . The
spectropolarimetric technique has been recently improved with the Zimpol
3 polarimeter ( Ramelli et al. , 2010 ) . On the theoretical side, the
complexity of the quantum theory for treating partial redistribution
effects ( Bommier , 1997 ) or the sophistication of the methods needed
to carry out radiative transfer (RT) calculations in 3D models imply the
need of doing approximations when including scattering polarization (
Ŝtêpán & Trujillo Bueno , 2013 ) .

On the other hand, the research field of 3D radiation hydrodynamic
simulations of the solar atmosphere has reached a level of
sophistication which is far beyond that of idealised numerical
experiments, and allows a direct confrontation between models and real
stars (e.g., Asplund et al. , 2000 ; Stein & Nordlund , 1998 ; Leenaarts
et al. , 2009a ) . By performing RT calculations in such models, it is
possible to study, based on first principles, the effect that the
physical atmospheric properties produce on the emergent Stokes vector.

In this thesis, we follow such strategy with emphasis on the radiative
transfer problem with polarization. We pay particular attention to the
linear polarization generated by scattering proceses with the aim of
exploring its potential application for deciphering the magnetism of the
quiet solar chromospheric regions. We try to improve the current
theoretical diagnosis capabilities based on radiative transfer,
scattering polarization and Zeeman and Hanle effects. Of particular
interest is that we introduce and study the effects of dynamics on the
synthesis of the scattering polarization. Furthermore, we use realistic
1D and 3D MHD models to synthetize temporal series and tomographic
spatial maps of the Stokes parameters in the presence of shocks,
magnetic fields and temperature gradients.

In Chapter 2 , we review the theory of radiative transfer (RT) with
polarization, the numerical methods we have used and some general
considerations about the inclusion of macroscopic velocities in this
problem.

In Chapter 3 , we briefly present the computational methods and computer
programs that we have developed in the context of this thesis. The
chapter reports on seven tools: a RT code, a program to compute response
functions, a Principal Component Analysis program, two interactive
programs for visualization and a semi-empirical method that facilitates
the convergence of the RT problem.

In Chapter 4 , we show some basic numerical experiments done for
understanding the effect of vertical velocity gradients on the synthesis
of the linear polarization in spectral lines. We present also results
for non-magnetic semiempirical models. This chapter is an adapted
version of Carlin et al. ( 2012 ) .

In Chapter 5 , we calculate synthetic profiles using a more realistic
dynamic chromospheric model (including shocks) for obtaining a temporal
evolution of the linear polarization signals in a simulated solar-limb
observation. This chapter is an adapted version of Carlin et al. ( 2013
) .

In Chapter 6 , we show spatial maps of emergent Stokes profiles
resulting from a snapshot of a realistic 3D MHD model in a disk-center
observation, trying to relate the computed observables with the physical
properties of the model chromosphere.

Finally, in Chapter 7 , we summarize our conclusions and discuss
near-future directions of research.

## Chapter 2 Spectral line polarization in stellar atmospheres

Stellar atmospheres are plasma regions of low density and high
temperature. They are constituted by a mixture of many chemical elements
in form of atoms, ions, free electrons and molecules. Their physical
conditions vary with the position, generally more steeply along the
vertical direction because of the gravitational stratification. Due to
the relatively low densities, the material behaves as an ideal gas,
whose state is determined by the particles distribution (atomic
populations) over all the free and bound energy states accesible to the
system. The calculation of the populations of the atomic energy levels
and sublevels requires to consider the radiative and collisional
processes producing atomic transitions in each chemical species in the
plasma. The collisional processes are assumed to be isotropic and are
described by the laws of statistical mechanics. Being purely local
interactions, this kind of transitions approach the atomic system to the
local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) with the surroundings, a situation
in which the matter and radiation are strongly coupled. On the contrary,
radiative processes directly depend on the (non-local) radiation field,
which interacts with matter through radiative excitations and
photoionizations. These interactions detach the atomic populations from
their local thermodynamic values, making them sensitive to the physical
conditions in distant regions (non-LTE; hereafter NLTE). While LTE
conditions are valid in deep stellar atmospheric layers due to the
higher densities and collisional rates, the general case of NLTE must be
accounted for when dealing with spectral lines forming at higher layers.
Thus, considering the external illumination and all the microscopic
processes that alter the excitation state of the atoms, it is possible
to characterize the macroscopic behavior of each plasma element. In
particular, it is our aim to focus on the phenomena of scattering line
polarization and its modification by the action of weak ( @xmath G)
magnetic fields (Hanle effect) in dynamic atmospheres.

We will review in this chapter all the aspects related to the radiative
transfer problem of spectral line polarization in weakly magnetized
atmospheres (the so-called radiative transfer problem of the second
kind). First, we will explain how to quantify the excitation state of
the plasma and the transfer of polarized light through it. We will
specify the radiative transfer coefficients by paying attention to the
microscopic processes defining them, which includes the Hanle and Zeeman
effects produced by the action of the magnetic field. We will present
also the statistical equilibrium equations. Later on, we will consider
the numerical methods employed for solving the ensuing NLTE radiative
transfer problem. In the last sections we will discuss some
considerations to treat the radiative transfer with macroscopic
velocities, ending with a somewhat detailed guide about the Hanle
effect.

### 2.1 Radiative transfer with polarization.

#### 2.1.1 Quantum mechanical description

We refer to the plasma element as the smallest indivisible volume or
resolution element of a stellar atmosphere that is theoretically
characterized when modelling the emergent spectral radiation.

We consider a plasma element composed by multi-level atoms of the atomic
species of interest, which is assumed devoid of hyperfine structure. In
the absence of interactions, the independent particles of such a system
are individually represented by a pure quantum state. But, following
statistical mechanics, the total ensemble of particles is in a
statistical mixture of states ¹ ¹ 1 The lack of information about the
initial state of the atomic subsystem due to its microscopic
interactions avoids a complete description based on a single pure state.
and, consequently, it has to be described by the density operator (
Bommier & Sahal-Bréchot , 1978 ; Blum , 1981 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the probability for the atoms to be in the pure
dynamical state identified by the vector @xmath , and where the sum is
extended to all the pure states in which the atoms can be found. The
matrix elements of the density operator (density-matrix elements) are
evaluated on a given basis of the Hilbert space associated with the
quantum system. Such density-matrix elements contain all the accesible
information about the system and its dynamical state.

The most natural basis in which the density-matrix elements can be
defined for an atomic system is the basis of eigenvectors of the total
angular momentum @xmath of the atom. Each atomic energy level is
identified by the set of integer (or half-integer) quantum numbers
@xmath plus a set of inner quantum numbers omitted for simplicity. Here,
@xmath is the angular quantum number of the energy level, while @xmath
is the magnetic quantum number, which is the eigenvalue of the
projection of @xmath along an arbitrarily chosen quantization axis.
According to the postulates of quantum mechanics, the atomic system in a
given level can occupy any of the @xmath possible @xmath magnetic
substates ( @xmath ), which are degenerate if no magnetic field is
present.

On this basis, the general density matrix elements are then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

being the diagonal elements proportional to the populations of the
corresponding magnetic sublevels. The off-diagonal components are the
so-called coherences or phase relationships describing the quantum
interferences that can exist between different magnetic sublevels.
Coherences between pairs of magnetic sublevels will be assumed in this
thesis to occur exclusively between sublevels of the same @xmath level
(multilevel approximation; see Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 )
.

Thus, the full description of an atomic system, in the general case in
which polarization phenomena are accounted for, requires the
specification of a matrix for each energy level ² ² 2 Instead of using
one quantity per atomic level to describe the excitation state of the
atoms in the non-polarized case, now @xmath unknowns are needed. It is a
considerable increase because it applies to each energy level and at
each position in the atmosphere. . When this matrix is not diagonal or
when the diagonal elements are not equal, the atom is said to be
polarized or to show atomic level polarization.

In particular, atomic polarization can be introduced in the quantum
system by any kind of external anisotropy to which the atoms are
sensitive (e.g., the incident radiation field). As a consequence, the
radiation re-emitted by a polarized atomic system is, in turn,
polarized.

It is convenient to express the atomic density matrix in the spherical
tensor representation, obtaining the so-called multipole moments of the
atomic density matrix. It allows an easier interpretation of the
physical situation. In the multilevel case, they are defined for each
J-level as ( Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 )

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.3)
  -- -- -- -------

where the sum is extended to all possible values of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , being the symbol between brackets a coefficient called @xmath
-symbol (e.g., Brink & Satchler , 1968 ) . In this new basis, the
overall population of each level J is given by @xmath and the population
imbalances between the corresponding magnetic sublevels are quantified
by the terms @xmath . In particular, if @xmath with @xmath even is
nonzero, the system is said to be aligned (which produces linearly
polarized radiation ), while the ones with @xmath odd quantify the
atomic orientation (which produces circularly polarized radiation).
Finally, the quantum coherence between pairs of magnetic sublevels are
described by the complex numbers @xmath (with K and Q non-zero).

#### 2.1.2 The radiative transfer equation

Consider a polarized electromagnetic wave propagating through a plasma
with a certain refraction index. The refraction index of a medium is a
complex quantity that can be anisotropic, so showing a different value
along any of the three reference directions of space. Then, since the
electromagnetic wave oscillates in a plane, the two complex components
of the electric field @xmath and @xmath can perceive a different
refraction index. From a macroscopic point of view, this simple idea
explains the effects of absorption, emission, dichroism and dispersion
produced during the radiative transfer of the electromagnetic wave.
Thus, the total absorption is the ability of the plasma of absorbing
photons in any state of polarization (intensity), and it is related to
variations in the total modulus of the refraction index. The emission is
the opposite process in which the atoms re-emit the energy absorbed in
collisional and radiative processes. Dichroism is the ability of the
plasma of absorbing photons oscillating along a preferential direction
(selective absorption of polarization states) and it is connected with
the differential attenuation between the modulus of @xmath and @xmath
during the propagation. Finally, anomalous dispersion is the ability of
the plasma element to dephase @xmath and @xmath , so changing the
polarization state during the propagation.

More specifically, the transfer of polarized light at frequency @xmath
propagating along the direction @xmath is described by the radiative
transfer equation (RTE), which gives the differential variation of the
Stokes vector inside each plasma element:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the geometrical distance along the ray ( Landi
Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) . The emission vector and the
absorption matrix in Eq. ( 2.4 ) contain the radiative transfer
coefficients that quantify the emission ( @xmath ) ³ ³ 3 We will use the
notation @xmath for physical vectors and @xmath for formal vectors. The
former is reserved for vectorial magnitudes with three components in the
ordinary space, such as the velocity or the magnetic field. The latter
is for quantities that are better described by collections of points
involving dimensions different than ordinary space. For instance, the
Stokes parameters. , total absorption ( @xmath ), dichroism ( @xmath )
and dispersion ( @xmath ) at each spatial point within the model
atmosphere under consideration. Thus, the entire atmosphere is modelled
as a sucession of plasma elements that are instantaneously intercepting
the rays of light emitted by the surrounding neighbors.

We define the axis of reference assigned to a positive sign of Stokes Q
as the direction in the plane of the sky that is parallel to the limb
nearest to the scattering point (e.g., in Fig. 2.1 , such direction is
parallel to the x axis when @xmath ). This also sets the same direction
of reference for other quantities related to geometrical tensors: the
radiation field components and the radiative transfer coefficients.

#### 2.1.3 Line broadening mechanisms

Before presenting the expressions for the total radiative coefficients,
we need to complete the description of the plasma element specifying the
interaction mechanisms between the main atomic species and the
surroundings. These interactions are affected by anisotropies,
unresolved motions, quantum uncertainties, magnetic fields and by the
radiation field illuminating the plasma. All together define the
spectral variation of the absorption, emission and dispersion
coefficients that characterize the radiative transfer properties of
bound-bound transitions.

Since these properties are related to a complex refraction index, it is
natural that the spectral variations of the radiative coefficients are
characterized by a complex line profile @xmath . The real part ( @xmath
) describes the absorption and emission properties whereas the imaginary
part ( @xmath ) specify the dispersion effects in the polarization. They
are probability distributions with unit area whose functions are given
by the complex Voigt profile ⁴ ⁴ 4 We will assume that the reader is
familiarized with the expressions for the complex Voigt profile and the
probabilistic distributions of Gauss, Maxwell and Lorentz. : @xmath .
Next, we will consider the treatment of @xmath but the total dispersion
profile follows from the same considerations with just substituting the
real part of the Voigt profile H by the imaginary part L.

The spectral variation of the total absorption and emission coefficient
@xmath in a given spectral line is obtained by normalizing in area the
Voigt function @xmath . In a weakly magnetized atmosphere with no
macroscopic plasma velocities, the resulting profile is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

being @xmath the total damping “constant”, @xmath the total Doppler
width of the profiles and @xmath the line center frequency in the atom
frame. The Voigt profile is the result of a convolution between a
Lorentz profile characterizing the radiative plus collisional broadening
mechanisms and the Gauss profile that describes the Doppler broadening.
We have:

-   [leftmargin=0.23cm, labelsep=0.05cm]

-   Radiative broadening. The quantum uncertainty principle applied to
    the atomic energy levels limits the lifetime of the upper and lower
    levels of a transition. Thus, the infinitely sharp energy level is
    substituted by a statistical distribution function, the Lorentz
    profile, whose damping coefficient gives the radiative or natural
    broadening of the level @xmath (with @xmath the mean lifetime of the
    level). In general, a number of radiative transitions involving a
    level @xmath set its total natural damping to

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where the first sum accounts for the spontaneous emission rates and
    the second sum for the absorption ones, being @xmath and @xmath the
    corresponding Einstein coefficients and @xmath the angle-averaged
    mean intensity. The induced emission to lower levels can be
    similarly added ( Mihalas , 1978 ) . The total radiative broadening
    of the transition @xmath is then given by @xmath ⁵ ⁵ 5 The total
    profile is a convolution between the Lorentz profiles of both
    levels. The convolution of two Lorentz profiles delivers a new
    Lorentz profile and the original broadening parameters add up
    linearly to give the resulting one. . We consider electric dipole
    radiative interactions, which connects atomic energy levels such
    that @xmath and @xmath .

-   Collisional or pressure broadening. This broadening appears when the
    main species emitting the spectral line radiation are perturbed by
    elastic collisions with other surrounding particles. The usual
    assumptions for modelling the collisional broadening in spectral
    lines are that the collisions are instantaneous (impact
    approximation), that they are isotropic and that the atomic
    emissions before and after the collisions are totally uncorrelated (
    Sobelman , 1973 ) . In such case, the resulting spectral broadening
    is (again) a Lorentz profile whose damping @xmath can be simply
    added to @xmath (by convolution of profiles), so giving the total
    @xmath coefficient that enters in Eq. ( 2.6 ). Various collisional
    processes in turn contribute to @xmath , being typically classified
    by the power index of the potential law that explains the collider
    interactions. Thus, we have the linear and quadratic Stark
    mechanisms ( @xmath and @xmath ), resonance broadening ( @xmath )
    and Van der Waals broadening ( @xmath ). Then,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Elastic collisions do not only broaden the profiles but also tend to
    eliminate the phase correlations (coherences) between energy
    substates @xmath and @xmath , for what they are usually referred to
    as depolarizing collisions. Elastic collisions do not change the
    overall population of the level, but their actual rates are
    necessary to treat transitions between sublevels in the polarized
    case ( Lamb & Ter Haar , 1971 ; Derouich & Sahal-Bréchot , 2003 ) .
    On the contrary, inelastic collisions interchange energy between
    colliders, producing bound-bound transitions among different energy
    levels.

-   Doppler broadening. Thermal motions below the plasma element scale
    produce spectral line broadening through the Doppler effect. The
    probabilistic distribution of velocities due to pure thermal motions
    is defined by the component form of a maxwellian distribution, which
    is a gaussian. The Maxwell distribution is strictly valid under LTE
    conditions, but it is commonly used in most astrophysical
    applications. The spectral variation of the pure thermal broadening
    as seen by an stationary observer is then obtained as a convolution
    of a delta @xmath that describes radiation emitted by a single
    particle (being @xmath the Doppler-shifted frequency emitted by the
    particle) with the Maxwell distribution that characterizes the
    thermal motions of the emitting/absorbing atoms. On the other hand,
    it is usual to also assume here the presence of microturbulent
    motions when modeling the observed spectral line radiation using
    one-dimensional models of stellar atmospheres. The microturbulent
    broadening is given by non-thermal “turbulent” velocities ( @xmath )
    but are also assumed to have a random nature under the resolution
    element. The total spectral profile produced by both Doppler
    broadening mechanisms is other Gaussian whose total Doppler width is
    ⁶ ⁶ 6 The resulting profile is then a convolution of two Gaussian
    contributions, which is another Gaussian whose Doppler width is the
    geometrical sum of the contributing Doppler widths.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with @xmath the atomic mass of the main species. The microturbulent
    velocity @xmath is an ad-hoc fitting parameter that was introduced
    in the past to correct for deficiencies in plane-parallel modeling.

Other two “broadening” mechanisms affecting the spectral variation of
the profiles are:

-   [leftmargin=0.23cm, labelsep=0.05cm]

-   Statistical redistribution in frequency. Thermal motions in the
    stellar atmosphere produce complete redistribution in frequencies
    (CRD) within the Doppler Gaussian core of the emerging line profiles
    ⁷ ⁷ 7 If the scattering is coherent in the frame of the atom (no
    elastic collisions), frequency redistribution (in the observer
    frame) occurs over a range of @xmath around the line center. .
    However, toward the line profile wings (lorentzian region), the
    probabilistic distribution of frequencies is instead controlled by
    the radiative and collisional elastic rates. If the former rates
    dominate ( @xmath ) at some height, the electrons leave their atomic
    levels at exactly the same energy they arrived in, so maintaining
    the memory of the previous process (coherent scattering). But, as
    the elastic collisional rates increases downward in the atmosphere
    with the perturber density, they are able to produce a frequency
    reshuffling at those layers before radiative transitions occur.
    Thus, it approaches CRD in the spectral line wings. In intermediate
    layers where @xmath , scattering is neither coherent nor completely
    redistributed, which is known as partial frequency redistribution or
    PRD. Both coherent scattering and complete redistribution can be
    equivalently treated, frequency by frequency, just correctly
    modelling the local processes that build the line profile. However,
    in PRD, the probability of scattering photons from one frequency to
    another is sensitive to the non-local monochromatic radiation field
    @xmath reaching each plasma element, which must be accounted for. In
    some cases, the lines affected by PRD exhibit extense line wings
    with challenging and complicated polarization patterns not fully
    understood so far. That is not the case of the IR triplet of the Ca
    ii lines, which are well described by CRD.

-   Zeeman splitting. Considering a magnetically sensitive transition
    that connects an upper energy level @xmath with a lower level @xmath
    , the presence of a magnetic field produces an energy splitting in
    the magnetic sublevels. This changes the spectral profiles. In
    general, the radiation emitted by the various transitions between
    the upper sublevels @xmath and the lower ones @xmath is usually
    referred to as Zeeman components. They are characterized by well-
    defined polarization properties that depend on the inclination
    @xmath and azimuth @xmath angles of the magnetic field vector
    measured in the reference frame of the ray with direction @xmath .
    For the electric dipole mechanism, the only allowed transitions are
    those with @xmath ( @xmath components) and those with @xmath (
    @xmath and @xmath components, respectively). To specify the Zeeman
    profiles, we assume an isolated spectral line, no macroscopic
    velocity and a magnetic field weak enough for the Zeeman regime to
    hold. Furthermore, atomic polarization between magnetic sublevels is
    neglected in both levels of the transition. Then, the total line
    profiles are (e.g., Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 )

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                              
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.11a)
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.11b)
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.11c)
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.11d)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    where

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

    describe the superposition of Zeeman components. Each @xmath is a
    profile like Eq. ( 2.5 ) evaluated around its corresponding Zeeman
    frequency

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with @xmath the central wavelength of the transition and @xmath the
    Larmor frequency ( @xmath ). In wavelength units, the Larmor
    frequency becomes the Zeeman splitting @xmath . When the Zeeman
    splitting is of the same order as the thermal Doppler width of the
    profiles, the polarization signals are in Zeeman regime . If the
    Zeeman splitting is small compared to the thermal width (e.g., due
    to weak magnetic fields or in some lines at optical wavelengths),
    the weak-field regime holds. In both cases the Zeeman components
    superpose producing a broadened line profile (magnetic broadening).

#### 2.1.4 Radiative transfer coefficients

The coefficients appearing in Eq. ( 2.4 ) are the important connection
between the micro and the macro state of the plasma. They have two
contributions: continuum and line processes. In the solar atmosphere,
the continuum opacities and emissivities are due to free-free and
bound-free transitions, Thompson scattering and Rayleigh scattering.

On the other hand, the line terms are due to bound-bound transitions in
the atomic species under consideration. Thus, line emission is described
by the quantities @xmath and @xmath in terms of the atomic density
matrix elements and the emission profile @xmath . Namely, in the case of
weak magnetic field and no stimulated emission, the line emissions in I,
U and Q for a transition @xmath are ( Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ,
2010 ) :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.14a)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.14b)
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.14c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

being @xmath and @xmath the inclination and azimuth of the ray @xmath
with respect to the local solar vertical (quantization axis). The
direction of reference for @xmath is parallel to the nearest solar limb
from the observed point. All the density-matrix components in these
expressions correspond to the upper level of the transition. The @xmath
coefficients were introduced by Landi Degl’Innocenti ( 1984 ) and @xmath
is calculated with the Voigt profile @xmath and with @xmath the total
number of atoms of the considered species per unit volume.

Since in this thesis we assume a negligible contribution of atomic
polarization to Stokes V, the corresponding line emission coefficient is
dominated by the Zeeman effect. Thus, under the same previous
assumptions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath was defined in Eq. ( 2.11d ). We remark again that the
angles ( @xmath ) appearing in such equation are measured with respect
to the magnetic field direction. The corresponding absorption
coefficients @xmath have identical expressions to the emission ones, but
changing @xmath and @xmath in all the subscripts (including the ones in
the expression of @xmath ). Furthermore, the @xmath elements become the
ones of the lower level of the transition.

The anomalous dispersion coefficients @xmath are given by the same
equations than the @xmath , respectively, but substituting the profiles
@xmath (appearing in @xmath and in the Zeeman components of Eq. ( 2.12
)) by the normalized anomalous dispersion profile @xmath , introduced in
Sec. 2.1.3 . Considering the total complex profile @xmath (Sec. 2.1.3 ),
the absorption and dispersion coefficients can be seen as real and
imaginary part of the same complex coefficient @xmath with @xmath .

The source function @xmath is an important quantity related to the
intensity coefficients that describes the propagation of the intensity
in the plasma. Under LTE conditions, it equals the Planck function.

#### 2.1.5 Statistical equilibrium equations

In the case of LTE, the populations of the atomic energy levels are
given by the Saha-Boltzmann distributions ( Mihalas , 1978 ) . They are
totally determined by the local conditions of the plasma (basically, the
density and a common temperature for all the particles) resulting in
magnetic energy sublevels that are equally populated (hence, without
atomic level polarization). When the spectral line is formed under NLTE
conditions, the energy level and sublevel populations are not dominated
by the collisional rates but by the radiative transitions. The radiation
field interacts with matter through radiative excitations,
photoionizations and their inverse processes (radiative desexcitations
and recombinations), which strongly affects the atomic level populations
especially in the outer atmosphere. To determine the resulting
excitation state of the atoms in the plasma element, we have to solve
the rate equations for the atomic density matrix corresponding to each
level @xmath . There is a rate equation per multipolar component of the
density matrix. The rate equations account for the time evolution of the
atomic system by specifying all the processes (see Fig. 2.2 ) that
produce trasitions between energy states. In the case of a multilevel
atom without hyperfine structure, and neglecting coherence between
sublevels of different levels, the rate of change of the density matrix
element @xmath in the solar vertical frame reads ( Landi Degl’Innocenti
& Landolfi , 2004 ) :

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.16)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where we have included the effect of elastic and inelastic collisions
assuming they are isotropic and that the impact approximation is valid.
The first term in the r.h.s. of this equation accounts for the effect of
the magnetic field (Hanle effect, see Sec. 2.4 ). The second term shows
the action of the depolarizing collisions through the elastic
collisional rate @xmath . Both terms affect only the population
imbalances inside the same energy level, either by the coherence or by
population redistributions between energy sublevels.

In general, the rate @xmath represents the probality that a transition
carries atomic coherence from the level @xmath , where is described by
the multipole @xmath , to the level @xmath , where it generates @xmath .
The quantities @xmath and @xmath are the inelastic and superelastic
collisional rates, respectively. The radiative rates are divided in the
(populating) transfer rates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and the
(depopulating) relaxation rates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , which
together describe the effects of absorption (A), spontaneous emission
(E) and stimulated emission (S). The explicit expressions of all the
rates can be found in Chapter 7 of Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi (
2004 ) .

The whole system of @xmath equations (one per unknown @xmath ) at a
given position in the atmosphere can be written in matrix form as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath matrix containing all the transition rates,
@xmath is a vector of length @xmath containing the @xmath elements for
all the levels in the atomic model and @xmath is a vector with zeros
everywhere (assuming statistical equilibrium; i.e., @xmath ). Note that
@xmath implicitly depends on the unknown @xmath elements through the
radiation field and that such a system of equations is highly
non-linear.

The resulting set of equations is not linearly independent. To close the
system, we have to substitute one of the equations, typically that of
the ground level, by the equation of conservation of particles (the
trace equation in the density matrix formalism). It establishes that the
overall population of the atomic model considered is conserved:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, one of the zeros in @xmath must be substituted by @xmath .

The combination of the SEEs with the RTE poses the radiative transfer
problem. The input of the former (the radiation field tensor components)
depends on the output of the latter (the Stokes vector) and viceversa,
which implies that an iterative method is needed to find the solution.
Once the self-consistent solution for the @xmath elements is found, we
can compute the emergent Stokes profiles for any desired line of sight.

#### 2.1.6 Radiation field.

In concordance to the previous treatment of the density matrix, the
radiation field illuminating each plasma element is also expressed in
the spherical tensor representation. Thus, we obtain the tensor
components @xmath , having @xmath with only three possible ranks @xmath
( Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) . They are integrals over
frequency and angle of the Stokes vector components @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . In particular, the even @xmath components are the
main excitation sources for the scattering polarization. The explicit
expressions for @xmath and @xmath are ⁸ ⁸ 8 The components with @xmath
are obtained with the conjugation property @xmath (with @xmath the
symbol for complex conjugation).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

As usually along this thesis, the reference direction for @xmath
(defined in the plane of the sky) is chosen parallel to the solar limb
that is nearest to the local vertical (z axis) ⁹ ⁹ 9 This reference is
sometimes referred to as the direction perpendicular to the plane
containing the line of sight ( @xmath ) and the local solar vertical (z
axis). . The anisotropy factor for each spectral line transition is
defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

It ranges from @xmath (azimuthally independent incident radiation field
contained in the horizontal plane) to @xmath (collimated vertical beam),
vanishing at the bottom of the atmosphere where the radiation field is
unpolarized and isotropic. The dominating factor @xmath in the
definition of @xmath makes that the rays with @xmath (which are mainly
horizontal) contribute always negatively to the anisotropy factor, while
radiation coming from other directions (that is, mainly vertical) always
contributes positively. The anisotropy factor is thus especially
sensitive to temperature gradients ( Trujillo Bueno , 2001 ; Landi
Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) .

The @xmath components with @xmath measure the breaking of the axial
symmetry of the radiation field. In plane-parallel atmospheres only the
magnetic field can break the symmetry of the radiation field and
generates such components.

### 2.2 Numerical methods for polarized radiative transfer.

#### 2.2.1 Integration of the transfer equation.

The formal solver used in our calculations is based on a
short-characteristics scheme ( Kunasz & Auer , 1988 ) , which allows the
numerical integration of the RT equations along ray paths between
neighbouring points.

The RTE (see Eqs. ( 2.4 )) in compact form can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where s is the geometrical distance along the ray and @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are the propagation matrix, the emission and the Stokes
vectors, respectively. Making a change of variable to @xmath and
formally integrating between consecutive points along the ray under
consideration we get ( Rees et al. , 1989 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath identity matrix, @xmath is the optical
thickness between M and O and @xmath is the optical path along the ray.

For a given direction and frequency, the optical depth discretization is
obtained from the geometrical depth grid, taking into acount its
definition and assuming an exponential dependence of @xmath with z . If
we assume a parabolic variation of @xmath between three successive
points M, O and P along the ray, while assuming that @xmath varies
linearly between M and O, then we can perform the integral in Eq. ( 2.25
) and obtain the Stokes vector at point O with ( Trujillo Bueno , 2003c
)

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.26)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath are numerical coefficients that depend on the optical
distances @xmath between M and O, and @xmath between O and P. Similarly,
@xmath only depend on @xmath . Explicit expressions for these
coefficients are given in Kunasz & Auer ( 1988 ) . This generalization
of the short-characteristics method to the polarized case is called
DELOPAR. To apply it, we start at one atmosphere’s boundary and
successively calculate @xmath at each grid point, proceeding along any
given ray direction until the opposite boundary.

Finally, to obtain the radiation field tensors (see Section 2.1.6 ) we
have to integrate numerically the calculated Stokes parameters for all
the points in the frequency and angular discretization. For the
frequency quadrature we use a trapezoidal rule over the absorption
profiles. For the polar angles we use a Gaussian quadrature in
inclination and an equally spaced trapezoidal rule for the azimuth.
Formally, we can write the radiation field tensor components as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an operator ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 To illustrate the following
concepts we symplify for the moment the notation of the @xmath operator.
As will be detailed later, it is different at each spatial grid point
but also when connecting different tensor components. giving the
response of the radiation field to perturbations in the density-matrix
elements and the @xmath vector gives the contribution of the boundary
conditions to the radiation field at the spatial points considered.

#### 2.2.2 Statement of the iterative problem.

In general, to solve the RT problem with polarization it is necessary to
calculate the self-consistent values for the @xmath multipolar
components of the density matrix at each spatial point @xmath in the
model. The main problem is that such components are coupled in a highly
non-linear and non-local way through the radiation field. The strategy
is to start from an estimation of the solution and to perform iterative
corrections to that estimation until arriving to self-consistent values.

The procedure is as follows. Given an initial guess @xmath at each
depth, the radiative transfer equations are integrated to obtain the
Stokes parameters (at each depth and for any angle and frequency), which
gives the radiation field tensor components @xmath at each of the @xmath
heights of the model atmosphere under consideration. From Eq. ( 2.27 ),
it can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once the @xmath are estimated, the transfer rates can be calculated and
the algebraic system formed by the SEEs (Eq. 2.17 ) is linearized and
solved as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

to obtain the new corrected elements @xmath . We remark that @xmath
depends on the @xmath values.

If the initial guess is not the exact solution, then @xmath and Eq. (
2.29 ) will have a certain residual error. The objective is to find the
@xmath values (equivalently, the corrections @xmath ) that leads to
precisely fulfill Eq. ( 2.17 ). The linearization makes the solution at
each step to never be exact, but successive iterations reduce the errors
to the desired small size as @xmath ( Hubeny & Lanz , 1992 ) .

The different iterative methods applied to the RT problem are
distinguished by the way they approximate in Eq. ( 2.29 ) the @xmath
values from the @xmath by modifying @xmath . The simplest method is the
@xmath -iteration, which consists in introducing the @xmath values again
into Eq. ( 2.28 ) to build @xmath , thus using only the @xmath values of
the previous iterative step. The convergence rate of this method is very
poor in optically thick atmospheres because the numerical information is
propagated through the spatial grid along one photon mean free path per
iteration, which takes many iterations to radiatively connect all the
points in the atmosphere.

In the following, we specify the conceptual strategies used by more
sophisticated methods to estimate the new @xmath values. Basically, we
require a formal solver to integrate the RT equations and a suitable
linearization of the SEE that guarantees convergence in the iterative
process.

#### 2.2.3 Iterative scheme.

The linearization of Eqs. ( 2.17 ) can be achieved by several methods.
The one we use in our calculations is based on two techniques: operator
splitting ( Cannon , 1973 ) and preconditioning ( Rybicki & Hummer ,
1991 ; Socas-Navarro & Trujillo Bueno , 1997 ) .

Applied to the polarized case, the operator splitting strategy rewrites
the formal solution of the RT equation given by Eq. ( 2.27 ) as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an approximation to the full operator @xmath . This
splitting will allow the substitution of some @xmath values by their
implicit “new” values in the equations, which approaches the final
solution at a higher convergence rate. A good choice for the approximate
operator @xmath is the diagonal of the full @xmath operator (so making
it local ) because it is easy to obtain and to invert. This is the
extension of the Accelerated @xmath -iteration (ALI ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Sometimes
known as Jacobi iteration in the astrophysics literature; as MALI, when
applied to multilevel systems; or as DALI, when applied to the density
matrix formalism in the polarized case. ) method to the polarized case (
Trujillo Bueno & Fabiani Bendicho , 1995 ) .

The next step is to approximate the dominant tensor component @xmath by
considering that, for each i -th spatial point, it can be obtained using
the @xmath values at all grid points but only @xmath at point i . From
Eq. ( 2.30 ), this can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the numerical values of the r.h.s. are known except for @xmath ,
which is the implicit unknown to be calculated in the current iterative
step. Here, the @xmath values correspond to the upper level of the
transition.

Substitution of Eq. ( 2.31 ) into the SEE yields a non-linear system of
algebraic equations. This non-linearity is due to terms of the form
@xmath that are tied to the absorption rates pumping population and
coherence from each lower level @xmath . In order to linearize such
terms we calculate them at each spatial point @xmath making ( Trujillo
Bueno , 2003c )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

again with all the quantities evaluated at point @xmath , the @xmath
components corresponding to the upper level of the transition and @xmath
to the lower one. This is the preconditioning scheme we use in our
calculations. It allows to transform the statistical equilibrium
equations given by Eqs. ( 2.17 ) in a linear system at each iterative
step.

In summary, the combination of preconditioning and operator splitting
achieves linearity building @xmath with a strategical combination ¹² ¹²
12 Avoiding multiplications of two “new” values. of “new” and “old”
terms indicated by Eq. ( 2.32 ). With respect to @xmath iteration, the
only extra calculation in the ALI method are the local elements @xmath ,
which can be efortlessly obtained using a formal solver based on
short-characteristics.

#### 2.2.4 Evaluation of @xmath

We can detail Eq. ( 2.27 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33b)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are formal vectors with @xmath
components, one per spatial grid point, whose imaginary parts are
indicated with the hat ( @xmath ); and where @xmath is the total number
of multipole components different from zero in the problem considered (6
in our most general case). Each @xmath are @xmath operators with
elements @xmath . Their expressions in terms of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath multipoles are given in Manso Sainz ( 2002 ) .

In the standard methods, only the calculation of a few @xmath elements
is necessary. We show the Eqs. ( 2.33 ) just to illustrate how the
calculation of the required operator elements can be done at the same
time the formal solution of the Stokes vector is computed. Namely, to
obtain an specific @xmath element, we have to calculate the @xmath -th
component of the @xmath multipole in the equation @xmath after making
@xmath and taking equal to zero all the @xmath vectors except for the
@xmath -th component of the @xmath multipole corresponding to the @xmath
position, which has value unity. The result is that the @xmath values
can be obtained at the same time and following similar operations than
when calculating the radiation field tensors with the formal solution.

To understand how the different iterative methods work, we can also make
explicit the action of a given @xmath operator. Take for instance @xmath
. In general, that component operates as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34d)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where all the letters in brackets especify a spatial position and the
superscripts A,B and C can be “old” or “new” depending on the iterative
scheme followed. Thus, in the simplest case of @xmath -iteration they
are @xmath , which means that @xmath for any K and Q. This can be
interpreted as if we were solving the SEE with a radiation field that
does not react to the corrections in the populations because the
operator @xmath of Eqs. ( 2.17 ) was exclusively built with the old
population estimation. In the ALI method used in this thesis, @xmath old
but @xmath , which means that @xmath is only affected by the local
corrections in the new populations. In the case we choose @xmath with
@xmath , we would be updating the contributions given by all the spatial
points that were previously considered when performing the formal
solution of the RT equation along a ray. In other words, we use an
approximate triangular operator @xmath that contains more information
about the radiative couplings between points in the atmosphere than the
diagonal approximate @xmath operator. This gives a faster iterative
method known as Gauss-Seidel and SOR, which can be also efficiently
solved ( Trujillo Bueno & Fabiani Bendicho , 1995 ) . The main drawback
of these operator splitting methods is the deterioration of the
convergence rate when the spatial resolution of the grid is refined. In
the limit of an infinitely fine grid, all such methods will converge as
slow as the @xmath -iteration method. For iterative methods whose
convergence rate is insensitive to the grid size consult Fabiani
Bendicho et al. ( 1997 ) .

### 2.3 Line formation in moving atmospheres

The existence of systematic velocity fields in solar and stellar
atmospheres is well-documented by abundant observational evidence.
Plasma motions appear to be present on all scales, from microscopic
thermal to macroscopic motions (i.e., nonthermal velocities that are
coherent over distances much larger than a particle mean-free path).
Indeed, the consideration of systematic motions is essential to explain
the observations in many astrophysical contexts: pulsating stars, hot
stars with fast stellar winds, expanding nebulae, supernovae and fast
changes in solar prominences are good examples. In particular, the
increasing interest in the highly inhomogeneous and dynamic solar
chromosphere has served to highlight plasma dynamics as a key point to
understand the outer solar layers.

The modelling of radiative transfer in dynamic atmospheres is more
complicated than in static atmospheres. On one hand, the presence of
velocity gradients makes the opacity and emissivity angle-dependent,
which may have a significant impact on the radiation field anisotropy.
On the other hand, any of the existing methods to solve the RTE add
higher levels of complexity in dynamic atmospheres, with significant
increase of the computational demand, either because the RTE adopts a
more involved form to treat the problem in a comoving frame, or due to a
meaningful increment in the numerical resolution ( Mihalas , 1978 ) .
Such drawbacks are more severe when including the polarization.

Most of the theoretical works done so far have only considered polarized
light in static atmospheres, being however unbalanced by the large
number of observational investigations studying it in dynamic media. On
top of that, most of the computational tools and theoretical
investigations in moving atmospheres only consider the effect of the
velocities in the framework of the Zeeman line-formation theory (e.g.,
Stenflo , 1994 ; Socas-Navarro et al. , 2000 ; Uitenbroek , 2011 ) ,
sometimes even without putting an special emphasis on the analysis of
dynamic effects. Other authors treat the problem in very schematic
situations ( Molodij & Bommier , 2011 ; Landolfi & Landi Degl’Innocenti
, 1996 ) . With respect to the scattering polarization, the work of
Nagendra ( 1996 ) accounts for the impact of macroscopic velocities in
moving media using the two-level atom approximation for describing
resonance lines.

#### 2.3.1 Effect of the velocity on the radiative transfer.

Although in many physical situations the RTE can be formulated as in the
static regime, in many others a full dynamic treatment is required. For
instance, the influence of bulk motions is small for the continuum, but
can be important in spectral lines because even small Doppler shifts can
cause large changes in opacity (leading to significant variations in the
radiation received by a stationary observer). In general, the effects
acting on the emitted line radiation due to systematic velocities in a
stellar atmosphere are: Doppler shifts, producing variations of the line
profiles with frequency; aberration of photons, producing variations of
the line profiles with the ray direction; and advection, producing
variations of the line profiles with the distance along the line of
sight.

The numerical methods required for solving the general line-formation
problem in moving media are reviewed in Mihalas & Kunasz ( 1986 ) .
Nowadays, the discussion is still around techniques and valid
approximations that can be applied in different situations to solve the
RTE for the intensity. In a nutshell, there are four essential ways of
treating radiative transfer in atmospheres with velocity gradients: (i)
Monte Carlo methods ( Bernes , 1979 ; Lucy , 2005 ) ; (ii) Sobolev or
supersonic approximations ( Sobolev , 1958 , 1960 ) ; (iii) observers’
frame methods; and, (iv) comoving frame methods ( Mihalas , 1978 ) . The
first method is not suitable for treating optically thick atmospheres .
The relatively low solar velocity fields, with outflows not much larger
than the microturbulent velocities (in comparison with extreme events),
also excludes the Sobolev approximation.

The preference between the observer’s and the comoving frame methods in
points (iii) and (iv) will depend on various issues. For instance, the
application of the comoving frame method has the advantage that the
opacity and emissivity coefficients are not affected by motion and may
be treated as in the static case (i.e., since they are isotropic for the
static case, then they are isotropic also in a local reference frame in
a moving atmosphere). Other important point is that the comoving frame
method admits the simplification of using angle-averaged redistribution
functions in calculations where PRD is required. However, the RTE
becomes more complicated due to an additional term containing the
frequency derivative of the intensity. Lorentz transformations have also
to be considered to transmit the information between different comoving
frames. Finally, the comoving-frame transfer equation is usually solved
using Feautrier variables, which furthermore limits the applicability of
this method to monotonic velocity fields. Very recently, we have been
aware of improved (and more sophisticated) methods to solve the RTE in
the comoving frame that allow the treatment of arbitrary velocity fields
( Baron et al. , 2012 ) , but they do not represent a significant
advantage with respect to the computational effort of doing it in the
observer’s frame.

Thus, although the solution of the RTE in the comoving frame would
require much less angle-quadrature points when macroscopic velocities
are present ( Mihalas , 1978 ) , we treat the radiative transfer in the
observer’s frame because it is better suited to the non-monotonic
velocities that are present in the chromosphere. Other authors have used
this strategy for solving the problem under the Zeeman line-formation
theory in the absence of atomic polarization (e.g., Stenflo , 1994 ;
Uitenbroek , 2002 ) . In the observer’s frame, the opacity and
emissivity of the material, as seen by a stationary observer, become
angle-dependent but the formal structure of the RTE is maintained.
Consequently, it is also a suitable method for including the effect of
the macroscopic velocity in a previously existing code, as it has been
the case in this thesis. The details of the implementation are left for
the next chapters.

-   Frequency redistribution in dynamic cases:

An issue that will trascend our results is how they could be affected by
PRD effects in dynamic situations. The investigation of PRD in the
polarization is presently limited by the applicability of the
theoretical framework developed so far. The quantum theory of spectral
line polarization ( Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) that we
follow in our investigation is based on the hypothesis that the pumping
radiation field has no spectral structure across intervals smaller than
the frequency separation between interfering atomic levels
(flat-spectrum approximation), which is equivalent to the CRD
approximation. Despite its limitations, this theory represents the most
robust quantum approach to the physics of polarization developed so far
and it even has demonstrated to be useful in situations out of their
applicability regime.

In absence of macroscopic motions, CRD is a good approximation for weak
lines whose extreme wings do not require extensive line transfer. On the
contrary, the modelling of very strong (typically resonant) lines should
be done in principle using PRD. For CRD to be valid across the whole
line profile, the intrinsic radiative rates (most importantly @xmath )
must be low enough, in such a way that collisional rates overcome them
in middle layers ¹³ ¹³ 13 That is not necessary for radiation forming at
higher layers because it is already redistributed due to thermal
motions. See Section 2.1.3 . . On the contrary, if the radiative
transition probabilities are very large (as in resonant lines),
collisional damping will no longer be an efficient frequency mixer
already from deeper layers, leaving an intermediate extended region in
which PRD holds. Even in that case, the intensity profiles of solar
resonant lines (e.g., Mg ii or Ca ii H and K) calculated with PRD and
with CRD have almost identical absorption cores ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 The effect of
modelling resonant lines in CRD is that the wings are darker than in PRD
because the PRD line source function (which is nearly pure coherent
scattering in the wings) uncouples from the thermal source function
deeper in the atmosphere and, as a consequence, is smaller than in CRD.
. In typically subordinated lines whose lower atomic energy levels are
not connected to the fundamental levels (e.g., the Ca ii IR triplet
lines), CRD can be safety applied in static media ( Uitenbroek , 1989 )
.

On the other hand, for flow speeds on the order of the mean thermal
speed ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 For flows in which typical speeds are much larger than
the mean thermal speed, CRD and coherent scattering lead to essentially
identical results ( Lucy , 1971 ; Mihalas & Kunasz , 1986 ) . , velocity
gradients could cause the line center intensity to depend more strongly
on frequency and direction than in comparable static media because they
tend to assymetrize the Maxwell distributions describing the thermal
motions at the core. Hence, the CRD assumption would deteriorate (
Hummer & Rybicki , 1968 ) . On the basis of previous works, we expect
the difference between PRD and CRD profiles of resonant lines to be
enhanced as the ratio of systematic to turbulent velocities decreases
and as the line formation region is larger, showing an effectively thick
chromosphere ( Drake & Linsky , 1983 ) . In next chapters, we deal with
atmospheres whose maximum velocities ( @xmath ) are comparable to the
mean turbulent velocity ( @xmath ). However, we are interested in the
polarization amplitudes of non-resonant lines at their cores, where the
PRD effects should be notably less limitating. Indeed, the exact line
profile at the wings is not relevant to our aims because their physics
is actually very different from the physics of the core, which is the
true recorder of the Hanle and Zeeman effects and where the
observational Ca ii IR triplet signals show a measurable polarization.

#### 2.3.2 Effect of the velocity in the SEE.

Being a conservation law applied to a volume element, the statistical
equilibrium equations depend on the plasma velocities. For instance, the
@xmath component of each atomic level J satisfy a rate equation of the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the r.h.s contains the variations of @xmath due to radiative and
collisional transitions (both included in the generic processes @xmath
and @xmath ) that populate @xmath and depopulate @xmath the level @xmath
. In static cases, the l.h.s. is zero because statistical equilibrium is
assumed. In dynamic but non-relativistic calculations, the atmosphere
can still be considered stationary ( @xmath ) and the advection term is
usually neglected.

The advection term accounts for the amount of material that enters or
exits the fluid element volume considered. The rate at which the
non-relativistic material can enter or leave the volume element in the
simulation is assumed slow compared with that at which the atomic system
reaches the statistical equilibrium (which is a fast microscopic process
following the atomic transition rates). The conclusion is that
statistical equilibrium can be safety applied.

#### 2.3.3 Effect of the velocity on the atomic density matrix.

Due to the Doppler effect, the radiation field experienced by an atom
depends on its velocity @xmath . Consequently, the density matrix will
also depend on it ( Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) . Being
@xmath the spherical statistical tensor of the atomic system dependent
on @xmath , and @xmath the velocity distribution function of the atoms
in a given point of the atmosphere, a complete statistical description
of the atomic collectivity is given by the product @xmath . Such
quantity is the so-called velocity-space density matrix.

This formalism is presently being developed for the case of a two-level
atom with infinitely-sharp levels and it has shown to be equivalent to
the redistribution matrix formalism for treating PRD effects ( Belluzzi
et al. , 2013 ) . Indeed, it constitutes a more general approach to such
a problem because it is able to account for the phenomenon of pure
Doppler redistribution including broadening collisions and lower level
polarization in multilevel systems. Consequently, the velocity-space
density matrix formalism seems to be also a likely solution for
describing the macroscopic velocity effects in PRD-affected lines.

### 2.4 The Hanle Effect in the solar atmosphere

#### 2.4.1 Description

The Hanle effect can be understood classically ( Hanle , 1924 ) with the
oscillator model for the atomic electrons. In this picture, the magnetic
field makes the oscillating electrons to precess around the magnetic
field direction, producing a rosette pattern (Fig. 2.3 , left drawing).
There is a competition between the radiative damping rate of such
oscillator and the rate of Larmor precession, which is proportional to
the magnetic field strength ( Stenflo , 1994 ; Trujillo Bueno , 2001 ;
Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) . Thus, when the former
prevails, the Hanle effect can leave its fingerprint on the Stokes
parameters (Fig. 2.3 , right drawing). From the point of view of the
observer, the action of the Hanle effect is a modification of the linear
polarization, measured by Stokes Q and U. When the Zeeman splitting is
negligible compared with the line width ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 In this regime, the
Hanle effect can be fully operative, well as saturated Hanle effect or,
when the field is even smaller, as lower-level or upper-level Hanle
effect. But for strong magnetic fields, the transversal Zeeman effect
dominates the linear polarization through Eqs. ( 2.11b ) and ( 2.11c ).
, the transverse Zeeman effect signals (affecting Q and U) are of second
order, in such a way that Q and U only measure the scattering
polarization and its modification by the Hanle effect.

In the following, we introduce how the orientation and strength of a
magnetic field in a solar plasma element produces the Hanle effect in
the quantum theory. Consider a spectral line whose upper and/or lower
levels can be polarized ( @xmath ). Then, the Hanle effect consists in
the modification of such atomic polarization through a magnetic field
whose Larmor frequency ( @xmath ) is comparable to the inverse of the
radiative lifetime of the energy levels of the transition. This defines
one critical magnetic field strength @xmath per polarized level, given
in gauss by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Landé factor and @xmath (in seconds) can be
approximated with @xmath for the upper level and with @xmath for the
lower one. As the Larmor frequency in wavelength units is the Zeeman
splitting, Eq. ( 2.36 ) is equivalent to say that the Hanle effect
operates when the Zeeman splitting is comparable to the natural width of
the energy levels. Note that the Zeeman effect produces clear
polarization signals when the Zeeman splitting is comparable to the
thermal width of the line profiles.

The above considerations suggest that the Hanle effect can be seen as a
result of the coupling between the magnetic field with Larmor frequency
and the radiative rates. In the quantum approach, this coupling alters
the quantum coherence between pairs of magnetic sublevels and modifies
the atomic level polarization. The direct action of the magnetic field
on the density-matrix multipoles is introduced in the rate Eqs. ( 2.16 )
through the magnetic term, which also accounts for the geometry of the
physical situation. Geometry is a essential piece of the Hanle effect.
The Hanle magnetic term is ( Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Choosing the quantization axis along the vertical, the only non-zero
magnetic kernels for @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.38b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the angles define the orientation (inclination @xmath and azimuth
@xmath ) of the magnetic field in the reference frame of the solar
vertical passing through the scattering point. Eqs. ( 2.37 ) and ( 2.38
) indicate that the magnetic field can create or destroy coherences with
a certain @xmath by changing and dephasing any multipolar component with
@xmath , but it cannot modify the overall population of a level by
itself. Similarly, those equations indicate that population imbalances
@xmath can be created from coherence terms with @xmath . This way, the
magnetic field transfers the information about its orientation and
strength to the quantum system. The Hanle effect becomes important when
the orientation of the magnetic field produces a significative symmetry
breaking in the atmosphere ( @xmath ) and when the field strength is
near the critical values for the energy levels (Hanle regime). In other
cases, coherences vanish and the magnetic kernel in the SEE cancels out.

#### 2.4.2 A hands-on guide to the Hanle equations

Next, we underline the physics of the Hanle effect and give some
technical details and approximations to work with it.

##### Eddington-Barbier approximation

We start estimating the linear polarization at line center ( Trujillo
Bueno , 2003a ) . We consider a strong spectral line not affected by
stimulated emission and emerging from a plane-parallel atmosphere that
is assumed to be well described by the Eddington-Barbier approximation.
Then, its fractional linear polarization X @xmath I (with X @xmath Q or
X @xmath U) is given by ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 see also Appendix A.3 for an
alternative derivation :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all the terms in the r.h.s. have to be evaluated at @xmath .
Afterwards, this approximate formula will give us some useful
expressions.

##### No Zeeman-splitting case

In the Hanle regime, the Zeeman splitting is small in comparison with
the spectral line width, so the absorption and emission profiles do not
depend on the magnetic quantum numbers [ @xmath ]. Then, Eq. (7.16e) of
Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi ( 2004 ) can be written as ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 We
follow the standard notation for the following quantities: the Planck
constant (h), the number density of atoms of the considered species (N),
the upper and lower level atomic quantum numbers ( @xmath and @xmath ),
the Einstein coefficients ( @xmath and @xmath ), and the numerical
coefficients @xmath ( Landi Degl’Innocenti ( 1984 ) ). The latter can be
calculated with

@xmath

where the symbols in brackets are called 6-j symbols ( Racah , 1942 )
and take into account the coupling of electronic angular momentum.
Analytic expressions of the 6-j symbols are found in Eqs. (2.36) of
Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi ( 2004 ) . :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hereafter, we will refer to the emission vector components and
propagation matrix elements as @xmath and @xmath , being @xmath for
Stokes I, Q and U. Similar expressions for the absorption coefficients
@xmath are obtained from the previous equation with the changes @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . In Eq. ( 2.40 ), the tensor @xmath gives the
geometrical transformation that projects the multipolar components
@xmath from the quantization axis to the LOS reference system, thus
expliciting the polarized emission of the media along the considered
ray. We always have to choose a quantization axis for the angular
momentum (typically the local solar vertical or the magnetic field
direction). It has associated the reference system in which @xmath and
@xmath are defined. Besides that, the previously assumed independence of
the spectral profiles on the magnetic quantum numbers makes the
emissivity and absorption coefficients invariant under rotations of the
reference frame. It means that in Eq. ( 2.40 ) we can express @xmath and
@xmath in any system (the same for both). Apart from this, we must also
choose the observer reference system by setting the LOS ( @xmath ) and
the angle @xmath that defines the direction for positive Q (see Fig. 2.4
).

##### Non-blended spectral line

If the spectral lines of the atomic system do not overlap, there is only
one transition involved at line center (summations in @xmath disappear
from Eq. 2.40 ). Then, making the substitution @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the superscript on the square brackets indicates that we are
evaluating those quantities in the reference frame of the local
vertical. The advantage of setting the quantization axis along the
vertical is that the angles of the geometrical tensors are referred to a
common and invariant direction, which facilitates the calculation of the
radiation field components ( @xmath ) independently on the magnetic
field direction (the magnetic field can be differently oriented from
point to point). Eq. ( 2.41 ) is the simplest general expression for the
Hanle effect that allows us to derive other published in literature. It
shows clearly that the emission of polarized light in the Hanle regime
is directly proportional to the atomic density matrix elements projected
to our line of sight by the tensor @xmath . If the illumination at the
atmosphere boundaries is not polarized and there are no sources of
atomic orientation, the components with odd @xmath are zero in the
summation. However, an important point is that the mere existence of a
limb darkening at every point of the solar atmosphere generates atomic
alignment and terms with even K that contribute to the emisivity in Q
and U. Such @xmath elements are tipically modified by the magnetic
kernel in the SEE, following Eq. ( 2.37 ). That is the essence of the
Hanle effect on the scattering polarization.

To explicit the dependence of the polarized emission on the coherences
we recall Equations ( 2.14 ). They are derived from Eq. ( 2.41 ) with
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 To perform the summation apply that
@xmath . , after choosing a reference direction for @xmath that is
parallel to the limb nearest to the scattering point (that is, with
@xmath ). The setting of a reference direction simplify the geometrical
tensors ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 In such case, the @xmath components for @xmath (I,Q,U)
used are:

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

(from Table 5.6 in Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) . For
instance, the emissivity in Stokes U:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath the azimuth and inclination of the LOS in the
reference frame of the local vertical. In particular, the emission in U
vanishes when coherences are zero. However, Stokes Q also depends on the
non-vanishing @xmath components excited by the radiation field
anisotropy.

The explicit angular dependence set by the tensors @xmath always
measures rotations from the reference frame in the quantization axis (
@xmath or @xmath , usually) to the one in the LOS (see Fig. 2.4 ). On
the other hand, any spherical tensor can be expressed along a different
quantization axis by following the corresponding rotation law. Namely,
we can pose the @xmath elements in the @xmath system as a combination of
the ones in the @xmath system with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the matrices @xmath carry out the rotations given by the Euler
angles @xmath going from the magnetic field to the solar vertical
reference frame. The advantage of applying this relation in order to
express a given equation as a function of the @xmath elements of the
magnetic field frame is that they simplify in certain circumstances (see
below).

##### Hanle effect in the saturation regime

In saturation, the magnetic field strength is very intense in comparison
with the critical Hanle field of the atomic levels ( @xmath ). Thus, the
separation in energy between them destroy all coherences in the magnetic
field reference frame ( @xmath ). In this case, the polarization of the
emergent spectral line radiation does not depend on the field strength
but only on its orientation, which still plays an active role in the
radiative transfer through the radiative coefficients. The emission (and
similarly the absorption) coefficients can then be particularized from
Eqs. ( 2.14 ) (or Eq. ( 2.41 )) by conveniently expressing the
components @xmath as in Eq.( 2.43 ). Following it, we write the rotation
going from the @xmath to the @xmath frame as @xmath . Recalling the
saturation assumption, the coherence terms vanish in the @xmath frame
and the only relevant transformations are thus given by @xmath , where:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Substituting the so given @xmath in Eq. ( 2.42 ) we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the alignment in the magnetic case can be related to the alignment
in the non-magnetic case as ²¹ ²¹ 21 This equality results from
comparing the statistical equilibrium equations (SEE) for a two level
atom in the magnetic and non-magnetic case. As the SEE are formally
invariant, such expression must hold.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Following similar steps for the emission and absorption terms in @xmath
, we can evaluate the Eq. ( 2.39 ) for Q @xmath I and U @xmath I. In the
weak-anisotropy regime ( @xmath ) holding in stellar atmospheres we can
finally write:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.47a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.47b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the non-magnetic contribution of the fractional atomic
alignment ( @xmath ) generated in the levels of the transition. The
evaluation of Eqs. ( 2.47 ) for different configurations of magnetic
field and LOS is an interesting exercise that shows the behavior of the
scattering polarization in every case.

Particularizing to the configuration in which the LOS and the magnetic
field vector are contained in perpendicular planes ( @xmath ), we obtain
the Eqs (3) and (4) of Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) . If, instead, we
particularize to the forward scattering case ( @xmath ) with arbitrary
magnetic field direction, we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.48a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.48b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Remind that all the terms in these approximated expressions have to be
evaluated at @xmath . Apart from the effect of the limb-darkening
induced anisotropy on the linear polarization (contained in @xmath ),
Eqs. ( 2.48 ) isolate other geometric effects in the polarization of the
saturated Hanle effect. Note that in forward scattering both Stokes
parameters are basically equivalent in their geometrical dependence,
having the same maximum and minimum values. Furthermore, a vertical
magnetic field makes zero the forward scattering Stokes parameters
because nothing breaks the axial symmetry around the LOS when
considering a plane-parallel atmosphere.

Being in forward scattering, we also particularize Eqs. ( 2.48 ) to have
@xmath , which is equivalent to align the positive-Q direction along the
projection of the magnetic field onto the plane of the sky (because
@xmath was set to @xmath ). Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . On the other hand, dividing Eqs. ( 2.48 ) between them, we
arrive to ²² ²² 22 See Collados et al. ( 2003 ) for an observational
application of this equation.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If we set the positive Stokes Q along the x axis (see Fig. 2.4 ), then
@xmath . In this configuration, the azimuth of the magnetic field
defines the direction of maximum polarization for the emerging light
beam (such maximum is given by Eq. ( 2.49 )). We will take advantage of
this fact in Chapter 6 .

##### Zero-field regime

Finally, in the zero-field regime and for any line of sight, the result
would be simpler. Repeating all the procedure, we obtain ²³ ²³ 23
Expression appearing for instance in Trujillo Bueno ( 2003b , 2010 ) .
See also the Appendix for an alternative derivation. :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , and always with @xmath and the positive-Q reference being
parallel to the limb nearest to the scattering point. Here, the
polarization is zero in forward scattering and maximum when looking at
the solar limb.

Note that in any situation the anisotropy of the radiation field is
always affecting the microscopic system in the plasma element through
the factor @xmath . However, the expression of such atomic polarization
into a measurable radiative quantity depends on the observer point of
view ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 If we observe an homogeneuos non-magnetic atmosphere at
disk center (forward scattering geometry) Stokes Q and U are always
zero. Irrespectively of the illumination received at each point along
the atmospheric vertical, different thermodynamical stratifications
alway give zero linear polarization. If there is an inclined magnetic
field, the symmetry breaking produces a linear polarization signal, not
only giving information about the magnetic orientation and strength, but
also about the anisotropy of the radiation field. Thus, the previously
hidden atomic polarization is revealed and the differents MHD
stratifications can be distinguished. . Hereafter, in all the subsequent
chapters, the quantization axis for the angular momentum will be along
the local solar vertical.

#### 2.4.3 Hanle effect at work: two examples.

The cases in which the Hanle effect is commonly employed to measure
solar magnetic fields are illustrated here in two particular geometries:

-   Observation near the solar limb (typically @xmath ). Here, the
    non-magnetic signals are given by Stokes Q due to pure scattering
    (i.e., to the atomic polarization caused by the anisotropy of the
    radiation field). If a magnetic field is present, the Hanle effect
    produces depolarization. To measure the magnetic field we need to
    know the theoretical non-magnetic polarization amplitudes as a
    reference. We could also calibrate theoretically the relative
    response that similar lines have to the magnetic field and use the
    calibration for real measures (line-ratio technique). In the case of
    the Ca ii IR triplet lines that can be observed at the solar limb
    (Fig. 2.5 ), we expect that the relative polarization amplitudes
    observed are due to a depolarizing magnetic field. This case will be
    treated in chapter 5 .

-   Forward scattering at disk center ( @xmath ). In this case, the
    non-magnetic signals are zero because the observer is looking along
    a symmetry axis (assuming a plane-parallel atmosphere). If the field
    is purely vertical nothing changes. If the field is inclined,
    Hanle-induced polarization appears. The more horizontal the magnetic
    field is, the larger the polarization. This case will be treated in
    detail in Chapter 6 .

## Chapter 3 Developed tools and methodology.

In this chapter, we describe some computer programs, procedures and
techniques that we have developed to treat the radiative transfer (RT)
of scattering polarization in dynamic solar models, including software
that we have found very useful to analyze and understand the results of
our investigations. The most important tools to mention are: the RT code
that we have used to synthetize the scattering polarization in the
presence of velocity gradients; an iterative computer procedure to
suitably redistribute the nodes of the numerical spatial grid and
achieve convergence of the RT problem in atmospheric models with strong
height variations; a code to calculate response functions of the Stokes
parameters; a code to perform Principal Component Analysis in measured
and theoretical Stokes profiles; a Python-based software to
interactively analyze the atmospheric models together with the resulting
spectropolarimetric maps; and finally, a series of codes and plotting
routines that use the Mayavi package to visualize and analyze 3D models
of the solar atmosphere interactively.

### 3.1 A RT code for dynamic scattering polarization.

#### 3.1.1 Traviata.

Traviata is a multilevel RT code for the synthesis of the spectral line
polarization that is due to atomic polarization and the Hanle effect in
weakly magnetized stellar atmospheres ( Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ,
2003b ) . The relevant equations that it implements have been already
described in Chapter 2 . A very significant part of this thesis work is
based on the improvements applied to Traviata. The following is a brief
summary of the capabilities of the original program.

The physical assumptions in which the calculations were based are:

1.  Plane-parallel geometry of arbitrary optical thickness.

2.  Complete redistribution in frequency.

3.  NLTE.

4.  Atomic levels can be polarized. Populations imbalances and coherence
    between different magnetic energy sublevels of the same J level can
    exist. The magnetic sublevels of different J levels do not interfere
    (multilevel approximation).

5.  Magnetic fields are weak enough for the splitting of the absorption
    profiles to be negligible (much lower than the thermal width of the
    spectral line).

6.  Impact approximation for collisions.

7.  Stimulated emission is neglected.

To solve the RT of the second kind, Traviata follows the following
numerical approach ( Manso Sainz , 2002 ; Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ,
2003b , 2010 ) :

1.  The equations are formulated within the spherical tensors
    representation of the density matrix and radiation field tensor.
    There are @xmath unknowns @xmath with K even ¹ ¹ 1 Components with K
    odd are zero because it is assumed that no natural sources of atomic
    orientation are present in the atmosphere and the boundaries
    illumination is not circularly polarized. , for each level with
    integer angular momentum J , and @xmath unknowns for each level with
    semi-integer angular momentum J .

2.  The radiative transfer equations for the Stokes parameters are
    integrated along short characteristics using the quasi-parabolic
    DELO method (DELOPAR; see Section 2.2.1 ).

3.  The iterative corrections for the unknowns (the statistical tensors
    @xmath ) are calculated applying a suitable generalization to the
    multilevel atom case of the Jacobian iterative method described in
    Trujillo Bueno & Manso Sainz ( 1999 ) . This implies writing down
    the statistical equilibrium equations taking explicitly into account
    the contribution of the diagonal components of the @xmath operator
    and linearizing according to Eq.( 2.32 ) and the procedure in Sec.
    2.2.3 .

4.  The iterative scheme can be speeded up through polynomial
    Ng-acceleration Auer ( 1987 ) .

When using semiempirical models of the solar atmosphere, the number
density of the ion under consideration is first computed in NLTE. Having
the overall population of the ion and after reading the model variables,
Traviata computes the background continuum opacities. The first
initialization is done calculating the population of the levels in LTE.
In a second step, they are then used as a guess to obtain the population
of the levels in the standard NLTE case without polarization.
Afterwards, it solves the SEE at each point in the atmosphere for the
multipolar components of the atomic density matrix plus the conservation
of particles equation (Eq. ( 2.18 )) to calculate the full excitation
state of the atomic system. Next, it calculates the radiation field at
each point in the model atmosphere for each allowed radiative transition
in the model atom applying the formal integration of the radiative
transfer equations for the Stokes parameters (DELOPAR method). The
radiation field tensors @xmath are calculated and used to obtain the new
excitation state of the atomic system and so on, iteratively, until
reaching the final solution for the @xmath values.

#### 3.1.2 The new version of Traviata

We have extended Traviata to investigate the effect of macroscopic
vertical velocities on the linear polarization produced by scattering
processes in spectral lines, as well as on the circular polarization
profiles caused by the Zeeman effect. Maintaining the previous
characteristics of the code, we have implemented the following
improvements:

1.  Inclusion of the effect of vertical (non-relativistic) velocities in
    the RT.

    The RT problem considered by Traviata is posed and solved in the
    observer’s frame (see Sec. 2.3.1 ). In this strategy, there is a
    unique reference frame fixed in space and all the motions in the
    plasma are related to it. Thus, each plasma element receives an
    spectral illumination that depends on the inclination of the rays
    but also on the relative motion with respect to other plasma
    elements that shift the line profiles by the Doppler effect (more
    details in Chapter 4 ). In this case, the absorption, emission and
    dispersion line profiles depend on position, frequency, spectral
    transition and, additionally, on the inclination of the rays of the
    angular quadrature. It extends to associated quantities such as the
    absorption, emission and dispersion coefficients. The line profiles
    are calculated for each spatial point @xmath by shifting the static
    profiles (see Sec. 2.1.3 ) with the Doppler velocity @xmath , where
    @xmath , @xmath is the inclination of the ray @xmath in the angular
    quadrature, and @xmath is the Doppler shift, in Doppler width units,
    produced by the vertical velocity @xmath at point @xmath . For
    instance, the dynamic absorption profile would be @xmath with @xmath
    the Doppler frequency axis. Upward velocities gives blue shifts. For
    a given model stratification, the maximum effect of the velocity on
    the profiles occurs at the height where the Doppler velocity is
    @xmath .

2.  Redefinition of variables and numerical grids.

    -   [leftmargin=0.23cm, labelsep=0.05cm]

    -   The frequency axis is common and fixed along the whole
        calculation ² ² 2 One advantage of working in the observer’s
        frame is that it is not necessary to perform interpolations or
        involved transformations between different points. . The
        frequency axis is symmetric with respect to line center and has
        now double extension in wavelength than in the static case in
        order to cover the asymmetries and Doppler shifts produced by
        motions in the profiles.

    -   The extension of the frequency axis is larger enough for the
        line coefficients to have a smooth transition to the continuum
        even in the presence of large velocities. This avoids
        imprecisions in the normalization of the profiles to unit area.

    -   The line core region is adaptively built with a resolution
        notably larger than in the wings to correctly sample the
        features of the emergent moving profiles. The wings resolution
        is smaller and quadratically decreasing towards the continuum.
        The minimum frequency resolution at the core must give 2 points
        per minimum Doppler width ³ ³ 3 As the Doppler width varies
        significatively with temperature, we distinguish between
        quantities measured in minimum Doppler units or in maximum
        Doppler units. Thus, the maximum Doppler width unit is given by
        the temperature at the hottest layer and the minimum Doppler
        width unit is given by the temperature minimum. @xmath in the
        atmosphere ( @xmath , in minimum Doppler units). Furthermore,
        the cutoff frequency @xmath setting the end of the core is
        dictated by the maximum expected Doppler shift @xmath (expressed
        here in minimum Doppler units). Then, the core width in Traviata
        is set to the most restrictive case:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (3.1)
          -- -------- -- -------

        where everything is in minimum Doppler units and @xmath is a
        safeguard constant taking into account an extra width due to the
        large profiles width at the hottest layers.

    -   The angular and spatial numerical grids are heavily restricted
        by the presence of velocities and the maximum Doppler shift in
        the model stratification ⁴ ⁴ 4 Note that the maximum Doppler
        velocity @xmath defined before and the maximum velocity Doppler
        shift @xmath (given above in arbitrary units) are not the same
        quantity. The subtle difference is that the former includes the
        Doppler width, so giving the maximum shift relative to the
        actual profile width. But the latter gives the maximum Doppler
        frequency shift in the atmosphere expressed in Doppler units
        (that can be maximum Doppler units, minimum Doppler units or any
        other unity). . If we want the spectral variation of the
        profiles to be well sampled, the change in Doppler velocity
        @xmath in our spatial and angular grid has to be small enough
        (i.e., of the order of half Doppler width) everywhere, not only
        between adjacent points along the same ray but also between
        adjacent points along the same height.

        On one hand, this sets a constraint for the angular grid that
        can be evaluated as:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (3.2)
          -- -------- -- -------

        where @xmath gives the maximum allowed angular step in the
        quadrature. On the other hand, the spatial grid is constrained
        by:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (3.3)
          -- -------- -- -------

        which limits the maximum Doppler velocity gradient between two
        adjacent layers @xmath and @xmath in the atmosphere.

    -   Once the iterative problem is solved for the atomic
        density-matrix elements, the emergent Stokes vector is
        calculated using a very fine frequency grid for capturing with
        precision all the spectral features. The maximum number of
        spectral grid points is limited to @xmath during the iteration
        and to @xmath in the last formal integration of the RT equation.

3.  Inclusion of the variation of the magnetic field with height.

    In semiempirical models like FALC ( Fontenla et al. , 1993 ) , there
    is no description of the magnetic field. Usually, in this case the
    magnetic field is added ad-hoc with constant parameters along the
    whole atmosphere. For Traviata to be able to compute realistic
    models showing variations of the magnetic field strength and
    orientation with height, we have also extended the variables to
    consider such variations.

4.  Calculation of Stokes V in the Zeeman regime (optional choice).

    -   [leftmargin=0.23cm, labelsep=0.05cm]

    -   Under the assumption of the weak field regime, Stokes V is due
        to the longitudinal Zeeman effect while Stokes Q and U are due
        to scattering and Hanle polarization, being the linear signals
        of the transverse Zeeman effect a second-order contribution. In
        such a case, the radiative transfer equations for Stokes Q and U
        decouple from the RT equation for Stokes V to a good level of
        approximation.

        Dynamic Traviata solves the iterative problem for the
        populations of the energy sublevels using the transfer equations
        in the scattering and Hanle regime. At the end, when the atomic
        density multipoles are solved, the total level populations are
        used to solve the Zeeman transfer equation independently for I
        and V along the observer LOS:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (3.4)
          -- -------- -- -------

        The dispersion or magneto-optical terms have been neglected in
        the calculation of Stokes V because their contributions to the
        circular polarization are insignificant in weakly magnetized
        atmospheres. To solve the system of equations we transform it in
        two independent equations:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (3.5)
          -- -------- -- -------

        creating the variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Both
        equations are solved along the LOS using a parabolic
        short-characteristic method to get the emergent @xmath and
        @xmath profiles for each frequency and spectral transition. The
        solution for the original variables is then obtained with @xmath
        and @xmath . There is a slight inconsistency in calculating
        again the intensity with Stokes V while neglecting Q and U, but
        it is justified by the uncoupling between linear and circular
        polarization in weak magnetic fields. The intensity profile
        resulting from the scattering problem is almost the same as the
        one obtained from the Stokes V calculation, being in most cases
        undistinguishable except for a negligible (magnetic) broadening
        in some Zeeman signals.

    -   The Stokes V line radiative coefficients are calculated
        neglecting atomic orientation. This implies that they can be
        calculated at each point from Eqs. ( 2.14 ) and ( 2.15 ), where
        the spectral profiles for the Stokes V coefficients are given by
        Eq. ( 2.11d ). We repeat it here for the sake of clarity:

          -- -- -- -------
                   (3.6)
          -- -- -- -------

        with @xmath the direct angle between the local magnetic field
        vector and the direction @xmath of the given emerging ray
        passing through the considered plasma element. Working in the
        reference frame of the solar vertical, this angle can be
        calculated locally at every point in the atmoshere with:

          -- -------- -- -------
             @xmath      (3.7)
          -- -------- -- -------

        with @xmath and @xmath the angles defining the LOS.

    -   With these modifications Traviata gives the linear polarization
        signals produced by scattering polarization and Hanle effect,
        while additionally delivers the Stokes V profiles resulting from
        the Zeeman effect, always considering the velocity and the
        magnetic field gradients.

5.  Automatization for working with a large number of models.

    The code is launched from an IDL program that provides all the
    initialization settings. This program is adapted to the particular
    model atmosphere under consideration. For the case of a 3D data
    cube, it is considerably sophisticated because a strategy for
    running each model column in a specific order and with an adaptative
    initialization of the density-matrix elements (see next point) is
    needed. The automatization also includes the management and listing
    of models with convergence problems that have to be recomputed with
    other interpolation grid, with other parameter settings or with
    other initializing populations. Finally, the automatization includes
    the compilation process (which is now more complex due to a
    re-modularization and re-organization of the subroutines) and the
    possibility of reading and representing the outputs with additional
    programs.

6.  Initialization of the populations.

    The code has 4 execution modes. In the first mode the code reads a
    file with a given solution of the @xmath elements and directly
    integrate the RTE to obtain the emergent Stokes vector for one LOS.
    In the second mode Traviata solves the full RT problem by
    initializing the iterative process with the overall populations
    given by the atmospheric model (when they are available). In the
    third mode, the code solves the problem initializing with the @xmath
    elements that were previously obtained for an adjacent column in the
    model. This can save some time when running a dataset whose
    consecutive models in the series are similar. Finally, the fourth
    mode is the standard one in which the initialization is done in two
    steps; first, the populations in LTE are obtained, and then such
    populations are used as inputs to solve the NLTE populations that
    finally initializes the iterative problem.

7.  Parallelization.

    The restrictive requirements needed to include the effect of the
    velocity and the aim of computing a large number of models required
    the code to be parallelized. The slowest operation is, with
    difference, the application of the formal solver for each ray and
    frequency to obtain the radiation field tensors. To accelerate it,
    we have implemented a parallelization based on OpenMP directives
    acting directly on the radiative transfer loop.

    OpenMP supports shared memory multiprocessing programming in Fortran
    on most processor architectures and operating systems. It is an
    implementation of multithreading, a method of parallelizing by which
    a master thread (a series of instructions executed consecutively)
    forks a specified number of slave threads that solve a task in
    individual parts. The threads then run independently, with the
    runtime environment allocating them to different processors.
    Scalability is limited by memory architecture.

    OpenMP puts a heavy demand on stack memory ⁵ ⁵ 5 In most modern
    computer systems, each thread has a reserved region of memory
    referred to as its stack. When a function executes, it may add some
    of its state data to the top of the stack. Stack-based memory
    allocation is very simple and typically faster than heap-based
    memory allocation (also known as dynamic memory allocation). Another
    feature is that memory on the stack is automatically, and very
    efficiently, reclaimed when the function exits, which can be
    convenient for the programmer. , which has to be considered when
    programming. In this respect, we have concluded that the stack
    memory has to be free enough for OpenMP to use it efficiently.
    Indeed, stack memory has to be usually enlarged by user commands
    before running Dynamic Traviata because the increment in the number
    of variables and their sizes can easily produce a stack exhaustion.
    Besides that, the use of heap arrays can produce significative
    performance penalties in codes running OpenMP. Again the solution is
    to avoid heap allocation in favor of stack memory, which furthermore
    has a faster access.

    The performance improvement reached after the parallelization when
    executing the code with 8 processors gives a speed up factor of 7,
    approximately. When a dataset of thousands of models is considered,
    it represents a difference between @xmath days and more than 1 month
    of computing time.

##### Computational time

To give an idea of the increase in the computing time when including
velocities in the RT problem with polarization, we made a simple
estimation. Consider @xmath to be the number of points in the atmosphere
where the specific intensity has to be calculated (i.e., the number of
layers @xmath in the planeparallel atmosphere). Let @xmath be the number
of quadrature angles chosen for the numerical calculation of the
radiation field tensor components and @xmath the number of frequencies
at which the RT equation has to be solved. Let @xmath be the number of
iterations needed for reaching the desired precision, which in MALI (and
by extension in DALI) methods is @xmath ( Trujillo Bueno & Fabiani
Bendicho , 1995 ) . Since with the short-characteristics method the
computational time needed for doing a formal solution scales linearly
with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the total computational time @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the estimation for the dynamic case, the main difference with the
static case is the larger number of points due to the more exigent grid
requirements. Thus, on the empirical basis of the experience with
different models, we point out that:

i) due the new requirements in resolution and extension of the frequency
grid, the number of frequencies in the problem with chromospheric
velocities has to be @xmath times larger than in a static problem with
similar characteristics.

ii) the number of vertical points in the spatial grid is increased
around a factor @xmath with respect to the static case. In average, for
the chromospheric models we have used, it usually requires between
@xmath and @xmath points per decade approximately.

iii) the number of points in the angular quadrature for the inclination
is usually a few times larger than in the static case. Typically,
between @xmath and @xmath points for the whole inclination range,
depending on the maximum velocity gradient. If a normal static
resolution is about @xmath points in inclination, we evaluate the
average increment in the dynamic case in a factor @xmath . Then, we
obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is @xmath times more than the static case. This estimation does
not take into account the improvement in the convergence rate achieved
by the Ng method. Estimating it in a factor @xmath , the final
difference between static and dynamic problems is a factor @xmath in
computacional time.

Accounting for the parallelization of the RT loop and using @xmath
processors, we reduce that time in a factor @xmath . Then, the dynamic
problem is reduced to have a computing time of the same order of
magnitude as the static one.

##### Testing the code

We put the new version of the code under scrutiny applying a set of
different tests to confirm its functionality. We reproduced all the
results of Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) in the static case. We
did calculations with a constant ad-hoc velocity field, obtaining the
same results but shifted in wavelength. To test V @xmath I in the
presence of velocity gradients and magnetic field gradients we compared
the outputs with the results of the RH code ( Uitenbroek , 2001 ) . The
agreement in the Ca ii IR triplet lines were satisfactory. The effect of
increasing velocity gradients on the linear polarization signals are
detailed along this work. In all cases, we always put especial care in
setting a suitable number of points in all numerical grids, following
the criteria explained in this section to avoid numerical errors due to
lack of resolution.

#### 3.1.3 A FEM-based optimization method for the spatial grid.

In a finite element method (FEM), the spatial domain of a certain
computational problem is divided in cells (finite elements). In their
interior, the solution is assumed to have a certain simplified variation
that is parameterized by some free parameters ( Süli 2012 , Guo &
Babûska 1986 ). Using the calculus of variations, the method minimizes a
local error function (objective function) defined for each cell as a
measure of quality of the grid, thus obtainig a precise solution for the
problem. These methods are tipically used in boundary value problems
characterized by a set of differential equations and boundary
conditions. Among the different variants, one strategy for minimizing
the objective function is to adjust the position of the grid nodes, then
obtaining the optimal grid that produce a stable solution for the
differential equations ( Díaz et al. , 1983 ) .

In our case, the boundary value problem is to solve the RTE, which is
the equation governing the propagation of light (Stokes vector) along
each ray as well as the origin of instabilities during the iteration. It
would have to be solved for each step of the iterative problem because
the local values of the propagation matrix change accordingly with the
density matrix values resulting from the solution of the SEE. Thus, we
should incorporate the corresponding finite element equations inside the
RT code, changing the discretization of the grid step by step during the
iteration. Other theoretical requirement is that the boundary value
problem should be well-posed ⁶ ⁶ 6 The mathematical term “well-posed
problem” stems from a definition given by Jacques Haddamard ( Parker ,
1989 ) . He believed that mathematical models of physical phenomena
should have these properties:
1) A solution exists.
2) The solution is unique.
3) The behavior of the solution hardly changes when there is a slight
change in the initial condition (topology). . This seems to be confirmed
by numerical experimentation but, to the best of our knowledge, it is
not mathematically demonstrated in RT schemes where the set of SEE are
coupled with the RTE.

Instead of dealing with the discretization problem at each iteration, we
did not include the finite element method in the RT problem, but simply
applied the FEM theory for redistributing the nodes in such a way that
some basic aims were fulfilled. Namely, to generate a new starting
spatial grid that: (a) produces softer variations of the physical
quantities along the model; (b) improves the convergence guarantee; (c)
minimizes the number of grid points; and (d) requires a minimum effort.
Thus, we developed a very simple and fast algorithm that succesfully
creates the adaptative grid by following the next scheme.

For each vertical extension in the atmospheric model, we construct the
finite element approximation of this problem by subdividing the
normalized spatial domain @xmath into @xmath subintervals or finite
elements @xmath , @xmath , by the set of nodes @xmath , where @xmath ,
with @xmath .

We now choose an atmospheric quantity @xmath that will help in our
method for redistributing the nodes. Namely, we chose the vertical
velocity (in Doppler units) because the formal solution is very
sensitive to its variations due to the frequency shifts it introduces in
the absorption profiles (Sections 4.2.3 and 4.3.2 ). Furthermore, when
expressed in Doppler units, it is a measure of the importance of the
macroscopic velocity with respect to the microscopic (thermal and
microturbulent) velocities, giving account for the relative influence of
vertical motions on the profiles. Indeed, if the Doppler velocity
presents larger gradients, the RT calculation will be more unstable and
error prone.

In the standard method, we should first define local piecewise finite
element functions acting as a base in a certain space. And then @xmath
should really be a norm ⁷ ⁷ 7 A norm is a function that assigns a
strictly positive length or size to each vector in a vector space. The
vector norm is the generalization to abstract vector spaces of the
vector modulus in euclidean spaces. measuring the interpolation error
between such local basis functions and the real solution. But we seek
simplification. Our solution is not the solution to the boundary value
problem, but the distribution of nodes in the physical magnitudes that
will give us a quicker convergence. Then, we redefine the problem in two
statements : 1) find the location of the nodes @xmath in order to
equalize a quantity @xmath , under the geometry constraints that the
nodes must maintain a relative location strictly increasing inside the
domain @xmath ; 2) Find the quantity @xmath that roughly bounds the
numerical interpolation error of @xmath along height. After some
experimentation, we define @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being free parameters weighting the length of each element (
@xmath ) and the first and second local derivatives of @xmath ,
respectively. The hat @xmath indicates that the quantities are
normalized to their maximum value in the whole domain @xmath . This is
done for making them comparable in magnitude.

Equalizing the quantity @xmath given by Expression ( 3.10 ) in each
finite element, we are requiring the placing of more discretization
nodes where the first and second derivatives are larger, so covering
zones of @xmath with large gradients (first derivative) and with
pronounced curvature (second derivative). To avoid large distances
between nodes when they move to fill the regions with large derivatives,
the expression also depends on @xmath , which acts as a binding force
(if @xmath were constant, the nodes would be equally spaced). The
formula has an empirical justification because it gives good results
with difficult models that did not converge easily (or at all) with
other spatial grids. Its success can be also understood if we consider
that the redistribution of nodes is better suited to the quasi-parabolic
variation of the source function assumed by the DELOPAR method (Sec.
2.2.1 ). Imagine, for example, a grid point having its left-side
neighbour very close and its right-side neighbour significantly apart,
covering the three a region with a large gradient in velocity. In such
situation there are significant differences between the optical depth
increments, which leads to a source function being far from the
parabolic variation that DELOPAR expects (hence, with larger error
gradient) to transfer the Stokes vector. Instead of changing the DELOPAR
formal solver, we have adjusted the nodes to allow DELOPAR to produce
accurate results.

Technically, we approximate the derivatives with their values at the
geometrical center of each element (the seminodes @xmath ) using a
standar centered finite difference scheme:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.11b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Finally, the nodes can be equally redistributed in @xmath using the
expression of a mass center for each pair of finite elements at both
sides of a node :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the new location of the k th node, and @xmath is the
center of the corresponding finite element in the @xmath th iteration.
The boundary nodes are fixed.

Following this procedure, the grid points are automatically repositioned
in stable places after a short iterative process. The effect is
summarized in Fig 3.1 . We start considering the vertical velocity
sampled at an initial spatial grid (lower panel). Note the large number
of points where there are almost no variations in the velocity, being
scarce where gradients are larger, typically in higher regions.
Following Eq. 3.12 , we illustrate the iterative calculation of a new
grid, which is guided by the weighting function @xmath (middle panel).
Note how the grid nodes are shifted to the upper part of the atmosphere,
and that still the lower parts are well covered, which is important
because most of the plasma mass is there. The final product is a grid
that softly samples the Doppler velocity (upper panel). The expressions
for @xmath could be better, so it would be interesting to investigate
other similar possibilities (e.g., using the coefficients of a series
expansion).

The advantages of this strategy are:

-   1) The computational implementation is easy and fast.

-   2) The procedure is flexible because @xmath can be easily redefined
    and adjusted with the weights @xmath .

-   3) The new grid produces a smooth variation of the physical
    quantities from node to node, which in general tends to diminish the
    corresponding numerical error gradient.

-   4) The radiative transfer equation requirements for the velocity
    gradients (explained in Section 4.2.3 ) are easily accounted for by
    the parameter @xmath .

-   5) The better distribution of points allows a significant reduction
    of the total number of nodes without losing numerical precision in
    the RT solution.

The final income is that we can solve the impossible-to-converge
atmosphere models in less time and with less effort.

When applied in combination with a short-characteristic method, the
results given by the redistribution method depend on the spatial
resolution. Taking that into account, before redistributing the grid we
interpolate to a number of points that depend on the atmospheric
extension in order to get a certain number of points per decade. After
choosing the overall grid points, we redistribute them.

Just to put an example of the application of this method for different
number of grid points, we illustrate the evolution of the Maximum
Relative Change during the RT iteration in 2 different models (Fig. 3.2
). Depending on the number of points per decade ⁸ ⁸ 8 We refer to the
number of points per decade of variation in the optical depth for the K
line. We use it as a measure of the resolution of the model. (p/dec),
the redistribution of nodes has a better or worse effect on the
convergence, in comparison with the case of no-redistribution and high
resolution (red lines in Fig. 3.2 ). In general, @xmath p/dec seems to
be insufficient for most of the expanded models, appearing a delay in
convergence (blue line, upper panel, Fig. 3.2 ) and in many cases a lack
of it. Note that these models can have shocks in higher layers, which
requires more discretization points. On the contrary, in compressed
atmospheres the redistribution with @xmath p/dec can give the best
results (blue line, lower panel, Fig. 3.2 ). Redistribution with a very
large number of points is inefficient in most cases (orange lines very
near the red ones). It happens because redistribution plays a minor role
against the decreased convergence efficiency of the DELOPAR method in
very resolved grids. A trade off is represented by the green lines,
corresponding to the cases with redistribution of @xmath p/dec. With
this choice, we have solved the convergence problems in many highly
variable models redistributing the grid points and using the less number
of them possible. Tuning this procedure for any arbitrary column, we can
obtain an improvement in the computational time.

### 3.2 Response functions in chromospheric solar models.

The response function @xmath measures the sensitivity of a certain
spectral quantity @xmath to local perturbations of the physical property
@xmath in the model atmosphere under consideration ( Landi
Degl’Innocenti & Landi Degl’Innocenti , 1977 ; Ruiz Cobo & del Toro
Iniesta , 1994 ) . It is defined using the following integral expression
( Uitenbroek , 2006 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath can be any function of the emergent Stokes parameters obtained
from the model atmosphere. Equation ( 3.13 ) tell us that the response
functions (RFs) behave like partial derivatives of the spectral profile
( @xmath , or a Stokes profile in particular) with respect to a given
atmospheric physical quantity at a given depth of the atmosphere. Thus,
they provide a measure of the sensitivities of the observed spectral
quantities to the physical magnitudes characterizing the state of the
atmosphere. More precisely, they specify the heights at which a
perturbation produces alterations in the spectral quantity. This is very
important because, under strong non-LTE conditions (i.e., when the level
populations in a transition are controlled by radiative processes or
scattering), the source function at higher and less dense layers can be
controlled by photons created much deeper than @xmath in the atmosphere
or in hot layers well above. As the RFs account for it, they
consequently provide the most reliable estimate of the heights of
formation for a given model.

Due to the linearity of the integral, if the emergent @xmath is
recalculated after perturbing @xmath with @xmath , the variation in
@xmath is :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The application of a suitable perturbation allows us to calculate the
response function @xmath . Following Fossum & Carlsson ( 2005 ) , we
perturb with @xmath , using the step function @xmath , which is @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Substitution of the perturbation into
Equation ( 3.14 ) and subsequent differentiation yields:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Following the previous equations, we have developed a program that uses
Dynamic Traviata to calculate RFs of the polarization profiles in
chromospheric dynamic models. The numerical evaluation of RFs can be
done following these steps:

1.  Synthesis of the desired spectral quantity @xmath in a given
    unperturbed model atmosphere.

2.  Considering a height @xmath : perturbation of the physical quantity
    of interest (temperature, density, magnetic field, velocity,…) from
    the lowest height of the atmosphere to the height @xmath (step
    function) and synthesis (including calculation of the atomic density
    matrix) of the corresponding emergent perturbed spectrum @xmath .

3.  Calculation of the difference @xmath between both spectra.

4.  Repetition of steps 2 and 3 for other height @xmath , starting from
    the bottom upward until the last RT calculation, which is finally
    done perturbing all points in the atmosphere.

5.  Application of Equation ( 3.15b ).

Thus, for a model atmosphere sampled at @xmath heights, the previous
method complete @xmath full radiative transfer calculations, which can
be very expensive depending on the model. An illustrative example is
shown in Figure 3.3 assuming a semiempirical FAL-C model.

It is the response function to temperature in Stokes Q (left) and in
Stokes Q @xmath I (right) for a same static chromospheric model. It can
be seen how the line core is sensitive to perturbations in temperature
at heights far below @xmath (green line). For the @xmath Å line of Ca ii
formed in this model, the largest response takes place where the
chromospheric temperature gradients increase above the minimum of
temperature region. The response functions can be very useful to
understand the line formation in a given model atmosphere and to
characterize such a model. For instance, in Figure 3.4 we show the
difference between calculations in the FAL-C model with variable (lower
panels) and constant (upper panels) microturbulent velocity for the
three lines of the triplet, which gives a quantitative grasp about the
effect of this parameter in the radiative transfer. In this example, the
response functions are computed for perturbations in bulk (macroscopic)
velocity. Note that the velocity has a particularity: if we want to
perturb a static model, we cannot add a perturbation being a
multiplicative factor from the unperturbed model (because @xmath ).
Instead, we have to consider a somehow arbitrary velocity perturbation.
In our case we have simply added a constant velocity perturbation, the
same for all the heights.

Although the RFs depend on the model considered, it is possible to find
similarities and patterns appearing in calculations from different
atmospheric models. Figure 3.5 is an example showing some common
features in the RFs for three models under changes in the velocity
gradient.

### 3.3 Tools for Principal Component Analysis.

Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a statistical technique based on
pattern recognition that is used for dimensionality reduction and signal
processing. It has been applied in diverse fields of scientific
research, from human face recognition ( Turk & Pentland , 1991 ) to the
classification and inversion of stellar spectra ( López Ariste , 2001 ;
Socas-Navarro , 2001 ) . These techniques are based on the intuitive
concept that a certain natural phenomena manifests itself through a
corresponding finite set of basic recognizable patterns. In particular,
PCA assumes that any other measurement resulting from a particular
realization of that natural phenomenon can be modelled by decomposing
the measurement into a linear combination of orthogonal basic patterns.
Finding the most representative ones, we will be able to explain
observations based on the same phenomenon and to discriminate it from
the influence of other phenomena (e.g., observational noise).

Next, we explain the basic operations defining PCA applied to spectral
profiles ( Rees et al. , 2000 ) . We have developed a computer code that
perform these operations and we have used it to analyze RT observations
and theoretical results.

The application of PCA starts with the creation of an initial database
of @xmath model profiles, @xmath , covering in a statistical sense all
possible physical states under which the measured profiles @xmath can
form. Each physical state represents a model profile in the database.
The model profiles can be synthetic when obtained from a physical model
of the phenomenon. But they can also be obtained from a representative
set of observations, so forming an observational database.

If @xmath is the number of sampling wavelengths for the model and
measurement profiles, we first construct the @xmath database matrix
[step @xmath ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the associated @xmath correlation matrix [step @xmath ],

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we have to solve the eigenvalue problem for the correlation matrix
[step @xmath ],

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

using the method of Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). The @xmath
-dimensional singular vectors @xmath ( principal components ) represent
a set of @xmath eigenprofiles in terms of which the profiles @xmath can
be reconstructed exactly. The eigenvalues @xmath in Eq. ( 3.18 ) are
ordered according to decreasing norm (hence, of decreasing
significance), and they estimate the signal variance captured in the
individual principal components. Usually, the first @xmath
eigenprofiles, with @xmath , form a basis that is sufficient to
reconstruct all the model profiles within the typical noise of the
observations. The cumulative fractional variance explained by those few
eigenvectors can be calculated with [step4]:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The basis represents the orthogonal “universal” patterns in which all
profiles corresponding to the physical model adopted can be decomposed
within the observational noise. These eigenprofiles are stored in the
@xmath matrix @xmath [step @xmath ].

If the initial database is actually representative of the reality
(either because the physical model is correct or because the
observations taken to build the database are statistically well chosen),
it is then unnecesary to use more than the PCA basis to approximate any
other measured profile.

Thus, we can project any given measured @xmath on the basis of
eigenprofiles @xmath , obtaining the corresponding projections @xmath
with @xmath [step @xmath ]. Such projections allow us to reconstruct the
observations in the basis subspace by doing [step @xmath ]:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , differing in an error of the order of the observational
uncertainty ⁹ ⁹ 9 The error can be estimated from @xmath . . The finite
size of the initial database implies a discrete coverage of the physical
parameter space, which is the main source of numerical error in the
reconstruction process.

Before performing the previous operations, our program statistically
standardizes the set of model profiles to create the initial database.
This is a common operation in PCA, consisting in normalizing and
regularizing the mean and the statistical deviation of the profiles to
be able to explain the shape of the profiles without worrying about
scale factors. The program can be used to create the basis from
observations of Stokes profiles or from the theoretical results of our
investigation. To test it, we applied the code to spectropolarimetric
observations to clean them from the noise (see figure 3.6 ) and we
reproduced some results of Rees & Guo ( 2003 ) .

### 3.4 The Solar Inspector

To understand the results of a radiative transfer investigation it is
necessary to carry out a combined analysis of both the emergent
radiative quantities (e.g., Stokes profiles) and the physical properties
of the atmospheric model. In order to facilitate the analysis of the 3D
models described in Chapter 6 , we have developed a visual interactive
application (Solar Inspector). It shows the Stokes parameters of all the
considered spectral lines in combination with different maps and with
the stratifications of temperature, vertical velocity and magnetic field
intensity. The Stokes parameters are the result of solving the RT
problem as explained in Chapter 6 . In total, there are @xmath different
maps. Some of them correspond to temperature, magnetic field
inclination, velocity, etc. evaluated at line-center optical depth unity
for every spectral line of the Ca ii IR triplet. Others are maps of
Stokes profiles (or derivatives quantities) for every spectral line.

The maps correspond to the same atmospheric area and are sorted out in a
specific order that allows easy and useful comparisons. The user can
quickly alternate between them (see Figure 3.7 ) using the mouse wheel.
With just a click the scroll step is modified, changing the adjacent
maps to be compared. This simple strategy gives, for instance, a quick
matching between features for the same map in different spectral lines
or between different maps of Stokes parameters for the same spectral
line. Clicking in the pixels of the maps, the corresponding atmospheric
stratifications (regions A, B and C in Figure 3.7 ) and the emergent
Stokes profiles (panels on the right in Figure 3.7 ) for that pixel are
showed. Clicking on the different regions of the screen we can select
different operations, such as overlapping Stokes profiles from different
pixels to be compared or saving the actual image to a pdf file.

The program is built in Python by embedding matplotlib ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10
Matplotlib is a high-quality plotting package for Python that allows to
easily visualize any kind of scientific data, giving a great control to
the user. plots into wxPython GUIs ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Graphical User Interface: it
is the software that serves as user interface to communicate with the
computer operative system (creating the windows, panels, etc). It makes
possible a friendly interaction with an informatic system through the
visual lenguage. This concept is divided in backend (it does all the
hard work behind-the-scenes to make the figures) and frontend ( i.e. the
plotting code used by the user). . This allows a high-quality and
versatile graphical user interface that can work interactively (without
menus) using events handling. To be able to update the plots quicker
while working with a large amount of data, the application have been
programmed using techniques for real-time visualization.

### 3.5 Advanced 3D visualization with Mayavi.

Mayavi is a general-purpose scientific 3D visualization package. It uses
the Visualization Toolkit (VTK), which is by far the best visualization
library available ( Ramachandran & Varoquaux , 2011 ) . Unfortunately,
VTK is not entirely easy to understand and many people are not
interested in learning it since it has a steep learning curve. Mayavi
strives to provide interfaces to VTK that make it easier to use, by
applying the features of Python, a dynamical programming language, to
offer simple APIs ¹² ¹² 12 An application programming interface (API)
specifies how some software components should interact with each other
and can be used to ease the work of programming graphical user interface
components. In practice, most often an API is a library containing
specifications for routines, data structures, object classes, and
variables. .

In short, some characteristics of Mayavi that have been relevant for the
development of this thesis are:

-   Rich multidimensional representation of any object and physical
    magnitudes able to be represented as points, lines, surfaces,
    volumes and fields using vectors, matrices or tensors (see examples
    in Figure 3.8 ).

-   A standalone application for visualization through the so-called
    pipeline interface.

-   Interactive 3D plots from the Python console IPython. The mlab
    module contained in Mayavi provides an easy way to visualize data
    from a script or from an interactive prompt.

-   Visualization engine for embedding in user dialogs box. Mayavi
    allows a relatively easy interaction with other Python applications.
    For instance, we could use it to attach a suitable 3D visualization
    to the Solar Inspector application described in the previous
    section.

When working with solar atmospheric models, importing the dataset to
Mayavi is crucial but non direct. It often involves transformations and
interpolations of the data to a convenient uniformly-spaced data set
that is manageable by Mayavi. Distributing or creating the atmospheric
models in VTK or other similar format suitable for visualization would
avoid such complications. On the other hand, through third-party
packages Mayavi can import IDL save files (from scipy.io.idl import
readsav), which can simplify the issue.

Our experience with Mayavi indicates that it is very suitable for solar
physics research. It seems to be able to create almost any data
representation. In particular, we have used it to represent scalar and
vector fields, surfaces, flux and field lines in a dynamic and
interactive way.

To introduce the radiative information in a 3D visualization we proceed
in the following way. We calculate the heights of the model where the
optical depth in a certain spectral line is unity, which defines a
surface in the 3D space. We plot that surface and colour it with the
value of a given radiative quantity (an emergent Stokes parameter or
similar). Other useful representation is to calculate the line center
optical depth for a given line of sight at each point of the atmosphere
and visualize it using cutting planes, isosurfaces or volumes having a
variable opacity in the plot. This gives a visualization of the main
formation regions for the spectral lines.

## Chapter 4 Scattering Polarization with Velocity Gradients.

In this chapter, we present the effects that gradients in the
macroscopic vertical velocity field have on the non-magnetic scattering
polarization signals, establishing the basis for other cases. We show
that the solar plasma velocity gradients have a significant effect on
the linear polarization produced by scattering in chromospheric spectral
lines. In particular, we calculate the impact of velocity gradients on
the anisotropy of the radiation field and on the ensuing fractional
alignment of the Ca ii levels, and how they can lead to an enhancement
of the zero-field linear polarization signals. This theoretical
investigation remarks the importance of knowing the dynamical state of
the solar atmosphere in order to correctly interpret spectropolarimetric
measurements, which is important, among other things, for establishing a
suitable zero field reference case to infer magnetic fields via the
Hanle effect.

### 4.1 Introduction

Over the last few years it has become increasingly clear that the
determination of the magnetic field in the “quiet” solar chromosphere
requires measuring and interpreting the linear polarization profiles
produced by scattering in strong spectral lines, such as H @xmath and
the 8542 Å line of the infrared triplet of Ca ii (e.g., see Trujillo
Bueno , 2010 ; Uitenbroek , 2011 ) . In these chromospheric lines, the
maximum fractional linear polarization signal occurs at the center of
the spectral line under consideration, where the Hanle effect (i.e., the
magnetic-field-induced modification of the scattering line polarization)
operates ( Stenflo et al. , 1998 ) . Since the opacity at the center of
such chromospheric lines is very significant, it is natural to find that
the response function of the emergent scattering polarization to
magnetic field perturbations peaks in the upper chromosphere ( Ŝtêpán &
Trujillo Bueno , 2010 ) . This contrasts with the circular polarization
signal caused by the Zeeman effect whose response function peaks at
significantly lower atmospheric heights ( Socas-Navarro & Uitenbroek ,
2004 ) . Of particular importance for developing the Hanle effect as a
diagnostic tool of chromospheric magnetism is to understand and
calculate reliably the linear polarization profiles corresponding to the
zero-field reference case.

The physical origin of the scattering line polarization is atomic level
polarization (that is, population imbalances and/or coherence between
the magnetic sublevels of a degenerate level with total angular momentum
@xmath ). Atomic polarization, in turn, is induced by anisotropic
radiation pumping, which can be particularly efficient in the
low-density regions of stellar atmospheres where the depolarizing role
of elastic collisions tends to be negligible. The larger the anisotropy
of the incident field, the larger the induced atomic level polarization,
and the larger the amplitude of the emergent linear polarization.

The degree of anisotropy of the spectral line radiation within the solar
atmosphere depends on the center-to-limb variation (CLV) of the incident
intensity. In a static model atmosphere the CLV of the incident
intensity is established by the gradient of the source function of the
spectral line under consideration ( Trujillo Bueno , 2001 ; Landi
Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) . However, stellar chromospheres are
highly dynamic systems, with shocks and wave motions (e.g., Carlsson &
Stein , 1997 ) . The ensuing macroscopic velocity gradients and Doppler
shifts might have a significant impact on the radiation field anisotropy
and, consequently, on the emergent polarization profiles. Therefore, it
is important to investigate the extent to which macroscopic velocity
gradients may modify the amplitude and shape of the emergent linear
polarization profiles produced by optically pumped atoms in the solar
atmosphere. The main aim of this chapter is to explain why atmospheric
velocity gradients may modify the anisotropy of the spectral line
radiation and, therefore, the emergent scattering line polarization. We
also aim at evaluating, with the help of ad-hoc velocity fields
introduced in a semi-empirical solar model atmosphere, their possible
impact on the scattering polarization of the IR triplet of Ca ii . A
recent investigation by Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) , based on
radiative transfer calculations in static model atmospheres, shows why
the differential Hanle effect in these lines is of great potential
interest for the exploration of chromospheric magnetism.

### 4.2 Formulation of the problem and relevant equations

#### 4.2.1 The atomic model and the statistical equilibrium equations
(SEE)

We assume an atomic model consisting of the five lowest energetic, fine
structure levels of Ca ii (see Figure 1). The excitation state of the
atomic system is given by the populations of its 18 magnetic sublevels
and the coherences among them. We neglect coherences between different
energy levels of the same term (multilevel approximation). Moreover,
since the problem we consider here (plane-parallel, non-magnetic
atmosphere with vertical velocity fields) is axially symmetric around
the vertical direction, no coherences between different magnetic
sublevels exist when the symmetry axis is taken for quantizing the
angular momentum. We use the multipolar components of each @xmath
-level,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is the population of the sublevel with magnetic
quantum number @xmath , and the symbol between brackets is the Wigner
@xmath -symbol (e.g., Brink & Satchler 1968). Due to the symmetry of the
scattering process (no magnetic field, no polarized incident radiation
in the atmosphere’s boundaries), in a given level @xmath , and the
excitation state of the system is described by just 9 independent
sublevel populations. Consequently, odd- @xmath elements (orientation
components) in Eq. ( 4.1 ) vanish for all five levels, and the only
independent variables of the problem in the spherical components
formalism are the total populations of the five levels ( @xmath ); the
alignment components ( @xmath ) of levels 2, 3, and 5; and @xmath of
level 3, whose role is negligible for our problem.

The statistical equilibrium equations accounting for the radiative and
collisional excitations and deexcitations in the 5-level system of Fig.
4.1 are given explicitly in Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) . We
have particularized them to the no-coherence case (only @xmath elements)
in Appendix A.2 . The statistical equilibrium equations for the @xmath
components contain terms that are equal to those appearing in the
statistical equilibrium equations for the populations in a standard (no
polarization) NLTE problem (e.g., Mihalas 1978), plus higher order terms
@xmath (see Eqs. A.9 - A.13 ). The statistical equilibrium equations for
the alignment ( @xmath components) are formally similar to the ones for
the populations with additional terms @xmath accounting for the
generation of alignment from the anisotropy of the radiation field, and
(negligible) higher order terms @xmath and @xmath (see Equations ( A.14
), ( A.15 ) and ( A.16 )). These equations are expressed in the atom
reference frame (comoving system).

Since the radiation field is axially symmetric, just two radiation field
tensor elements ( @xmath and @xmath ) are necessary to describe the
symmetry properties of the spectral line radiation.

Let @xmath and @xmath be the Stokes parameters expressed in the
observer’s frame at a given height @xmath , where @xmath is the
frequency, @xmath and @xmath is the angle that the ray forms with the
vertical direction. Then, the corresponding values seen by a comoving
frame with vertical velocity @xmath with respect to the observer’s frame
are @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath (to first order in
@xmath ). Therefore, the mean intensity at the considered height, can be
expressed from one or another reference frame as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the absorption profile (e.g., for a Gaussian profile, we
would have @xmath , with @xmath the central line frequency and @xmath
the Doppler width) and @xmath , with @xmath for upflowing material.
Analogously, the anisotropy in the observer’s frame:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The important quantity that controls the ability of an anisotropic
radiation field to generate atomic polarization is the line anisotropy
factor for each transition, which can be calculated as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Its range goes from @xmath (for an azimuthally independent radiation
field coming entirely from the horizontal plane) to @xmath (for a
collimated vertical beam).

#### 4.2.2 The radiative transfer equations (RTE)

Due to symmetry, in a non-magnetized plane-parallel medium with a
vertical velocity field, light can only be linearly polarized parallel
or perpendicularly to the stellar limb. Therefore, chosing the reference
direction for positive @xmath parallel to the limb, the only
non-vanishing Stokes parameters are @xmath and @xmath , and they satisfy
the following radiative transfer equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the distance along the ray. The absorption and emission
coefficients are ( Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno , 2010 ) :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.6b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (4.7a)
     @xmath      (4.7b)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the continuum absorption and emission
coefficients for intensity, respectively. Likewise, @xmath and @xmath
are the line absorption coefficients for Stokes @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, while @xmath and @xmath are the line emission coefficients
for Stokes @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The coefficients @xmath and
@xmath depend only on the transition and are detailed in Table ( 4.1
).The subscripts @xmath and @xmath refer to the upper and lower level of
the transition considered, respectively, and @xmath is the Planck
function at the central frequency @xmath of the transition. Note also
that:

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (4.8a)
     @xmath      (4.8b)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total number of atoms per unit volume.

With the total absorption coefficient for the intensity, the line of
sight (los) optical depth for each frequency is calculated by the
following integral along the ray:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 4.2.3 Numerical method

The solution to the non-LTE problem of the second kind considered here
(the self-consistent solution of the statistical equilibrium equations
for the density matrix elements together with the radiative transfer
equations for the Stokes parameters) is carried out by generalizing the
computer program developed by Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ( 2003a ) ,
to allow for radial macroscopic velocity fields (see Sec. 3.1.2 ). For
integrating the RTE, a parabolic short-characteristics scheme ( Kunasz &
Auer , 1988 ) is used. At each iterative step, the radiative transfer
equation is solved, and @xmath and @xmath are computed and used to solve
the SEE following the accelerated Lambda iteration method outlined in
Sec. 3.1.1 . Once the solution for the multipolar components of the
density matrix is consistently reached, the emergent Stokes parameters
are calculated for the desired line of sight, which in all the figures
of this chapter is @xmath . This final step is done increasing the
frequency grid resolution to a large value in order to correctly sample
the small features and peaks of the emergent profiles.

Some technical considerations have to be kept in mind for the treatment
of velocity fields (see Sec. 3.1.2 ). Due to the presence of Doppler
shifts, the wavelength axis used to compute @xmath and @xmath must
include the required extension and resolution, because the spectral line
radiation may be now shifted and asymmetric. In our strategy for the
wavelength grid, the resolution is larger in the core than in the wings,
keeping the same wavelength grid for all heights.

The cutoff wavelength for the core (where resolution is appreciably
higher) is dictated by the maximum expected Doppler shift. Thus, the
core bandwidth is estimated allowing for a range of @xmath around the
zero velocity central wavelength of the lines, with @xmath the maximum
velocity found in the atmosphere (in Doppler units). Apart from that, a
minimum typical resolution for the core is set to 2 points per Doppler
width ( @xmath ). Then, the height with the smallest Doppler width
determines the core resolution, and the height with the maximum
macro-velocity states its bandwidth.

Furthermore, as frequencies and angles are inextricably entangled
(through terms @xmath appearing in the absorption/emission profiles due
to the Doppler effect, like in Eq. ( 4.2.1 )), the maximum angular
increment ( @xmath ) is restricted by the maximum frequency increment (
@xmath , in Doppler units). Thus, it must occur that @xmath . In the
worst case, the maximum allowed angular increment will be smaller (more
angular resolution needed) when the maximum vertical velocity increases.
Besides this consideration, the maximum angular increment could be even
more demanding because of the high sensitivity of the polarization
profiles to the angular discretization.

Finally, the depth grid must be fine enough, in such a way that the
maximum difference in velocity between consecutive points is not too
large, the typical difference being equal to half the Doppler width (
@xmath ). If the difference is larger, the absorption/emission profiles
would change abruptly with height, producing imprecisions in the optical
depth increments ( Mihalas , 1978 ) .

### 4.3 Effect of a velocity gradient on the radiation field.

As we shall see, the presence of a vertical velocity gradient in an
atmosphere enhances the anisotropy of the radiation field and, hence, of
the scattering line polarization patterns. The fundamental process
underlying this mechanism can be simply understood with the following
basic examples.

#### 4.3.1 Anisotropy seen by a moving scatterer.

Consider an absorption spectral line with a Gaussian profile emerging
from a static atmosphere with a linear limb darkening law,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the continuum intensity at disk center, @xmath is the
limb darkening coefficient, @xmath measures the intensity depression of
the line, and @xmath its width. In this approximation we assume that all
the parameters are constant. Now imagine that, at the top of the
atmosphere, there is a thin cloud scattering the incident light given by
Eq. ( 4.10 ) and moving radially at velocity @xmath with respect to the
bottom layers of the atmosphere, supposed static. We will assume that
the absorption profile is Gaussian (dominated by Doppler broadening),
with width @xmath . When @xmath , the incident spectral line radiation
is much broader than the absorption profile (in fact, for @xmath the
absorption profile is formally a Dirac- @xmath function). Then, from
Equations ( 4.2.1 )-( 4.3 ) we can derive explicit expressions for the
mean intensity and anisotropy of the radiation field as a function of
the scatterer velocity (see Appendix A.1 ): @xmath , @xmath , where the
@xmath functions are defined by Equations ( A.1 )-( A.1 ). The behavior
of @xmath and @xmath with the adimensional velocity @xmath (Figure 4.2
), is most clearly illustrated in their asymptotic limits at low
velocities:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 4.11 ) shows that, for an absorption line ( @xmath ), @xmath
is always increasing with the velocity since the coefficient of @xmath
is positive, regardless of the sign of @xmath (i.e., regardless of
whether the scatterers move upwards or downwards); if the line is in
emission ( @xmath ), @xmath monotonically decreases. These are the
Doppler brightening and Doppler dimming effects (e.g., Landi
Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) . An analogous analysis applies to
@xmath (Eq. 4.12 ). Note that, in the absence of limb darkening ( @xmath
), the anisotropy vanishes in a static atmosphere, while the mere
presence of a relative velocity between the scatterers and the
underlying static atmosphere induces anisotropy in the radiation field
—hence, a polarization signal. A real atmosphere could then be
understood as a superposition of scatterers that modify the anisotropy
depending on the local velocity gradient and the illumination received
from lower shells. An interesting discussion on the effect of velocities
with directions other than radial can be found in Section 12.4 of Landi
Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi ( 2004 ) .

Clearly, all the above discussion depends on the Doppler shift induced
by the velocity @xmath normalized to the width of the spectral line,
i.e., on @xmath . A large velocity gradient on a broad line can have the
same effect as that of a smaller velocity gradient on a narrow line.
This is important to be kept in mind since the response of different
spectral lines to the same velocity gradient will be different, what can
help us to decipher the velocity stratification. Even different spectral
lines belonging to the same atomic species may have very different
widths, as for example, the Ca ii IR triplet and the UV doublet studied
in the next section.

#### 4.3.2 Calculations in a Milne-Eddington model.

The discussion above explains the basic mechanism by means of which a
velocity gradient enhances the anisotropy of the radiation field. Now we
can get further insight on the structure of the radiation field within
an atmosphere with velocity gradients from just the formal solution of
the RT equation for the intensity (e.g., Mihalas , 1978 ) . As before,
we neglect effects due to polarization and @xmath and @xmath are
calculated from Stokes @xmath alone. We consider a semi-infinite,
plane-parallel atmosphere with a source function @xmath , where @xmath
is the integrated line optical depth in the static limit (hence, the
element of optical depth @xmath , where @xmath is the ratio of continuum
to line opacity). We begin by considering a vertical velocity field
@xmath (positive away from the star), shown in Fig. 4.3 . Equivalently,
we may express the velocity in adimensional terms by using @xmath (the
width @xmath of the Gaussian absorption profile is assumed to be
constant with depth). The parameter @xmath fixes the position of the
maximum velocity gradient. Note that the wavelength dependence of the
Doppler effect ( @xmath ) is cancelled in the adimensional problem,
where velocities are measured in Doppler units. It is easy to calculate
numerically @xmath at every point in the atmosphere and thus, the mean
intensity and anisotropy of the radiation field (Figure 4.4 ).

The rise in @xmath in higher layers with respect to the static case
corresponds to the Doppler brightening discussed above. Thanks to the
Doppler shifts, the atoms see more and more of the brighter continuum
below, which enhances @xmath . When the maximum velocity gradient takes
place at optically thick enough layers ( @xmath ), @xmath is also larger
than for the static case, but it decreases monotonically with height in
the atmosphere ( @xmath , dotted lines in left panel of Fig. 4.4 ). Note
that the important quantity that modulates the increase in @xmath is not
the maximum velocity but the velocity gradient (difference in velocity
between optically thick and optically thin parts of the atmosphere). The
larger the gradient, the more pronounced the radiative decoupling is
between different heights. An extreme example of such radiative
decoupling could be found in supernovae explosions, where the vertical
velocity gradients are huge.

In our case (vertical motions), the Doppler brightening implies an
enhancement of the contribution of vertical radiation to Eq. ( 4.3 )
with respect to the horizontal radiation, with the latter remaining
almost equal to the static case (no horizontal motions, no horizontal
Doppler brightening). This velocity-induced limb darkening is the origin
of the anisotropy enhancement.

However, note that the maximum anisotropy does not rise indefinitely
when increasing the maximum velocity. If the velocity gradient in units
of the Doppler width is larger than @xmath (see curves for @xmath in
Fig. 4.4 ), the anisotropy at the surface saturates and decreases (even
below the curves corresponding to shorter velocity gradients). It forms
a bump around @xmath when the maximum velocity gradient is taking place
at low density layers ( @xmath ). This behavior can be understood using
Eq. ( 4.3 ). When @xmath , an increment in @xmath entails a rise in
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ) in the upper atmosphere, what
means that the velocity gradients enhance the imbalance between vertical
and horizontal radiation. However, if @xmath is above that threshold,
@xmath and @xmath rise, but the ratio @xmath saturates and diminishes.
The reason is that a large velocity gradient makes the absorption
profiles associated with almost horizontal outgoing rays ( @xmath ) to
be so much shifted that they also capture the background continuum
radiation. Their contributions are negative to the angular integral of
@xmath but positive for @xmath .

Separating the contributions of rays with angles in the range @xmath
(that we refer to with the label @xmath ) and angles in the range @xmath
(that we refer to with the label @xmath ), the line anisotropy can be
written as @xmath . Here, @xmath and @xmath grow always with @xmath ,
but @xmath only grows appreciably when @xmath . Therefore, although
@xmath increases for all velocity gradients, its enhancement is smaller
for large velocity gradients than for smaller ones. This effect occurs
as well when motions take place deeper ( @xmath ) but it is less
important and the anisotropy bump and saturation are reduced.

For the considered velocity fields (with a negligible gradient in the
upper atmosphere), @xmath and @xmath reach an asymptotic value in
optically thin regions. It does not occur if the velocity gradient is
not zero at those layers. In any case, the presence of a large
anisotropy in optically thin regions barely affects the emergent linear
polarization profiles.

#### 4.3.3 Two-level model atom in dynamic atmospheres.

Before going to a more realistic case, a final illustrative example is
considered. In this case, we assume the same parameterization of the
velocities than in the previous example, but now we solve the complete
iterative RT problem with a two-level atom model and a specific
temperature stratification. Consequently, the source function and the
anisotropy are consistently obtained in a moving atmosphere. The
intensity source function is @xmath (e.g., Rybicki & Hummer , 1991 ) ,
with @xmath and the expression for the line source function remains
formally equal to that of the static case, being @xmath , where @xmath
is the imposed Planck function, @xmath is the inelastic collisional
parameter and @xmath is calculated with Eq. ( 4.2.1 ).

The qualitative behavior explained in the previous subsection is
maintained in these two-level atom calculations. For small @xmath values
(large NLTE effects), the source function @xmath shows Doppler
brightening effects and its surface value depends on the maximum
velocity gradient and on the maximum background continuum set by the
photospheric conditions (upper panel in Fig. 4.5 ). The anisotropy rises
proportionally to the velocity gradient until a saturation occurs (lower
panel in Fig. 4.5 ). A similar behavior is found when the maximum
velocity gradient occurs higher in the atmosphere (see Fig. 4.6 ).

In a static atmosphere, the radiation field anisotropy is dominated by
the presence of gradients in the intensity source function ( Trujillo
Bueno et al. , 2001 ; Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) , which
can be modified via the Planck function (equivalently, the temperature).
In the dynamical case that we are dealing with, the slope of the source
function is also modified due to the existence of velocity gradients
thanks to the frequency-decoupling caused by relative motions between
absorption profiles (Doppler brightening). In general, both mechanisms
act together (velocity-induced and temperature-induced modification of
the source function gradient) and the ensuing anisotropy and the
emergent linear polarization profiles are modified accordingly.

It is important to note that the adimensional velocity @xmath depends
both on the velocity and also on the line Doppler width because @xmath ,
with @xmath the Boltzmann constant, @xmath the temperature and @xmath
the mass of the atom. In the photosphere, where velocities are much
lower than in the chomosphere, @xmath is expected to be negligible. In
the chromosphere, plasma motions are important and the temperature is
still comparable to that of the photosphere, inducing @xmath to be
controlled by the velocity field. However, for layers in the transition
region and above, the high temperatures reduce the value of @xmath . In
any case, at these heights, the density is so low that, although @xmath
(and consequently the anisotropy) could have a highly variable behavior,
the emergent polarization profiles of chromospheric lines will not be
sensitive to them.

### 4.4 Results for the Ca ii IR Triplet

Now, we study the effect of the velocity field on a multilevel atomic
system in a semiempirical atmospheric model, within the framework
described in Sec. 4.2 . We consider the formation of the scattering
polarization pattern of the Ca ii infrared triplet in the FAL-C model of
Fontenla et al. ( 1993 ) in the presence of vertical velocity fields (
@xmath , with @xmath the unit vector along the vertical pointing
upwards). We will assume a constant microturbulent velocity field of
3.5 km s @xmath , which is a representative value for the region of
formation that gives a correct broadening of the triplet profiles.

#### 4.4.1 Behavior of the anisotropy in the Ca ii IR triplet

For simplicity, we set linear velocity fields (constant velocity
gradient along z) between @xmath and 2150  km (see Fig. 4.7 ).
Consequently, the adimensional velocity field @xmath has a non-monotonic
behavior due to its dependence on the temperature (upper right panel in
Fig. 4.7 ). In the chromosphere, where the Ca ii triplet lines form,
@xmath is dominated by the macroscopic motions. Here, the velocity
gradients produce variations in the anisotropy of the triplet lines that
agree with the behavior outlined in the previous sections. Namely, an
amplification and a subsequent saturation of the anisotropy factor due
to the significant velocity gradient at those heights (see the lower
panels and middle right panel in Fig. 4.7 ). Above the chromosphere, on
the contrary, the temperature dominates ( @xmath stabilizes and
diminishes) and the anisotropy slightly decreases with height. If the
(adimensional) velocity gradient is negligible where the line forms
(around @xmath ), the anisotropy remains unaffected. Otherwise, if a
spectral line forms at very hot layers, where the absorption profiles
are wider and their sensitivity to the velocity gradients is lower, the
Doppler brightening will not be so efficient amplifying the anisotropy.
This is the case of the anisotropy of the Ca ii K line (middle left
panel in Fig. 4.7 ). Compare how the slope of @xmath is smaller where
the Ca ii K line forms (black line on Fig. 4.7 ) than where the triplet
lines do. Consequently, the enhancement of the line anisotropy through
the presence of velocity gradients in this line is reduced.

All our calculations demonstrate that the anisotropy in the Ca ii IR
triplet can be amplified through chromospheric vertical velocity
gradients. This results suggest that the same occurs with the ensuing
linear polarization profiles.

#### 4.4.2 The impact of the emergent radiation on the polarization.

For investigating the effect of vertical velocity fields on the emergent
fractional polarization profiles we perform the following numerical
experiments. First, we impose velocity gradients with the same absolute
value but opposite signs (top left panel of Fig. 4.8 ). The resulting
emergent @xmath profiles (remaining left panels of Fig. 4.8 ) are
magnified by a significant factor ( @xmath for all the transitions) with
respect to the static case (black dotted line). The linear polarization
profiles have the same amplitude, independently of the sign of the
velocity gradient. Another remarkable feature is the asymmetry of the
profiles, having a higher blue wing in those cases in which the velocity
gradient is positive and a higher red wing when the velocity gradient is
negative, independently of the velocity sign. Note also that the @xmath
profile is shifted in frequency due to the relative velocity between the
plasma and the observer.

As a second experiment, we consider different velocity fields with
increasing gradients (right upper panel in Fig. 4.8 ). In the ensuing
@xmath profiles we see that the larger the velocity gradient, the larger
the frequency shift of the emergent profiles and the larger the
amplitude. In all transitions, one of the lateral lobes of the signal
remains almost constant. Thus, what really changes is the central part
of the profiles, being a “valley” in the @xmath line and a “peak” in the
other two transitions. To quantify these variations, we define @xmath
(peak-to-peak amplitude of @xmath ) as the difference between the lowest
and the highest value of the emergent @xmath signal, which is also a
measure of its contrast. Note that, as expected from the first
experiment, @xmath depends only on the absolute value of the gradient.
Figure 4.9 summarizes these results.

The sensitivity of the linear polarization to the velocity gradient can
be measured approximately as commented in Sec. 4.3.1 , using a parameter
@xmath that accounts for the difference in width of the absorption
profile with respect to the emergent intensity profile. If @xmath in the
main formation region, small adimensional velocities will produce large
changes in shape; if @xmath , much larger @xmath values are needed for
the same effect. In the case of the IR triplet lines, @xmath in the
formation region of @xmath and around @xmath and @xmath in the formation
region of @xmath and @xmath (having wider profiles), respectively. Then,
the former is more sensitive to velocity variations in its formation
region (Fig. 4.9 ). Finally, the K line has @xmath , a low value due to
its wider spectral wings.

The enhancement of the polarization signals are a consequence of the
increase in the anisotropy. Therefore, since this increase is produced
by the presence of velocity fields, the polarization signals of the Ca
ii IR triplet are sensitive also to the dynamic state of the
chromosphere.

#### 4.4.3 Variations on the atomic alignment due to velocity gradients.

In order to get physical insight on the formation of the emergent
polarization profiles, we use an analytical approximation. Following
Trujillo Bueno ( 2003b ) , the emergent fractional linear polarization
for a strong line at the central wavelength can be approximated with
(see Sec. 2.4.2 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The symbols @xmath are numerical coefficients already introduced in Sec.
4.2 . The quantities @xmath and @xmath are the fractional alignment
coefficients ( @xmath ) evaluated at @xmath for the upper and lower
level of the transition, respectively. This is the generalization of the
Eddington-Barbier (EB) aproximation to the scattering polarization and
establishes that changes in linear polarization (for a static case) are
induced by changes in the atomic aligment of the energy levels.

Our calculations show that vertical velocity fields with moderate
gradients ( @xmath in a linear velocity field, as the ones shown in the
figures) do indeed produce variations in the fractional alignment, which
are small for @xmath and significant for @xmath (see Fig. 4.10 ). The
lower level alignment is the main driver of the changes produced in the
analyzed @xmath signals. This is strictly true for the @xmath line,
whose upper level with @xmath cannot be aligned (zero-field dichroism
polarization). In the other transitions of the triplet, a certain
influence of the upper level alignment becomes notable only for large
gradients. The reason of this behavior is that the strong K transition
is dictating the common upper level-5 alignment (Fig. 4.1 ). In fact,
@xmath is driven by the K line anisotropy which, at cromospheric
heights, is almost unaffected for the considered velocity gradients, as
we discussed in Sec. 4.4.1 (Fig. 4.7 ). Thus, the strong H and K lines
feed population to the upper levels and the K line controls the
alignment of the @xmath level (see Fig. 1), while the polarization
signals of the IR triplet change with velocity fields affecting @xmath
(through the anisotropy enhancement).

To illustrate the well-known link between the alignment and the
anisotropy we can follow the next reasoning. For the Ca ii model atom we
deal with in this work, it is posible to derive a simple analytic
expression that relates the anisotropy and the alignments of the @xmath
transition. Making use of Eqs. ( A.12 ) and ( A.13 ) and neglecting
second order terms and collisions, we find that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

As before, we can roughly assume that @xmath in the chromosphere because
it is controlled by the K line. Then, Eq. ( 4.14 ) suggests that, if the
radiation anisotropy increases at those heights, an amplification of
@xmath occurs (note that @xmath is negative for these lines). A more
aligned atomic population produces a more intense scattering
polarization signal.

### 4.5 Conclusions

When vertical velocity gradients exist, the polarization profiles are
always shifted in wavelength, asymmetrized and enhanced in amplitude
with respect to the constant velocity case. The reason is that
increments in the absolute value of the velocity gradient increase the
source function (Doppler brightening) and enhance the anisotropy of the
radiation field (Secs. 4.3 and 4.4 ), that in turn modify the fractional
alignment (Sec. 4.4.3 ) and amplify the scattering polarization profiles
(Sec. 4.4.2 ).

For this very reason, all calculations assuming static models in the
formation region might underestimate the scattering polarization
amplitudes and not capture the right shape of the profiles. In
particular, it must be taken into account that the Ca ii IR triplet
lines form under non-LTE conditions in chromospheric regions, where
velocity gradient may be significantly large due to the upward
propagation of waves in a vertically stratified atmosphere (e.g.,
Carlsson & Stein , 1997 ) . Probably, in photospheric and transition
region lines the effect of velocities on polarization can be safely
neglected (they will be predominantly amplified by temperature gradients
as discussed in Sec. 4.3.3 ), but not necessarily in the chromosphere.
In our study we see that the @xmath line is more sensitive to
macroscopic motions in the low-chromosphere, while the @xmath and @xmath
lines are especially amplified when strong velocity gradients are found
at heights around @xmath and higher in our model.

At the light of these results, it is obvious that the effect of the
velocity might be of relevance for measuring chromospheric magnetic
fields. In particular, the described mechanism might turn out to be
important for the correct interpretation of polarization signals in the
Sun with the Hanle effect. Given that weak chromospheric magnetic fields
are inferred with the Hanle effect using the difference between the
observed linear polarization signal and the signal that would be
produced in the absence of a magnetic field, it is relevant to compute
the reference no-magnetic signal including velocities.

The polarization amplification mechanism that we have discussed in this
chapter is not limited to plane-parallel atmospheres, although its
effect is surely more important in plane-parallel atmospheres than in
three-dimensional ones. The reason is that i) gradients in a
three-dimensional atmosphere are expected to be weaker given the
increased degrees of freedom and ii) significant variations in velocity
direction along the medium mix the spectral contribution of different
layers to the radiative transfer and broaden the emergent profiles,
masking the Doppler features.

## Chapter 5 Scattering Polarization of the Ca ii IR triplet in
Hydrodynamical Models

In Chapter 4 we showed that velocity gradients can significantly affect
the scattering polarization of the IR triplet of Ca ii . Our arguments
were based on radiative transfer (RT) calculations in a semi-empirical
model of the solar atmosphere, after introducing ad hoc velocity
gradients and comparing the computed @xmath profiles with those
corresponding to the static case. Given the diagnostic potential of the
Ca ii IR triplet for exploring the magnetism of the solar chromosphere
(e.g., Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno , 2010 ; De la Cruz Rodríguez et al.
, 2012 ) , and the fact that the region where such chromospheric lines
originate may be affected by vigorous and repetitive shock waves (e.g.,
Carlsson & Stein , 1997 ) , it is necessary to investigate this RT
problem using dynamical, time-dependent atmospheric models of the solar
chromosphere.

In this chapter, we show the results of such investigation. Thus, we
analyze the emergent linear polarization profiles of the Ca ii infrared
triplet after solving the RT problem of scattering polarization in
time-dependent hydrodynamical models of the solar chromosphere, taking
into account the effect of the plasma macroscopic velocity on the atomic
level polarization. We discuss the influence that the velocity and
temperature shocks in the considered chromospheric models have on the
temporal evolution of the scattering polarization signals of the Ca ii
infrared lines, as well as on the temporally averaged profiles. We also
study the effect of the integration time, the microturbulent velocity
and the photospheric dynamical conditions, and discuss the feasibility
of observing the temporal variation of the scattering polarization
profiles with large-aperture telescopes. Finally, we explore the
possibility of using the differential Hanle effect in the IR triplet of
Ca ii to infer magnetic fields in dynamic situations. This chapter is
adapted from Carlin et al. ( 2013 ) .

### 5.1 Description of the problem and the resolution procedure.

We have carried out RT calculations of the scattering polarization in
the Ca ii infrared (IR) triplet. The polarization is produced by the
atomic level polarization induced by anisotropic radiation pumping in
the hydrodynamical (HD) models of solar chromospheric dynamics obtained
by Carlsson & Stein ( 1997 , 2002 ) .

We used two time series of snapshots from the above-mentioned radiation
HD simulations, each one lasting about 3600 s and showing the upward
propagation of acoustic wave trains growing in amplitude with height
until they eventually produce shocks. The first one corresponds to a
relatively strong photospheric disturbance showing well-developed cool
phases and pronounced hot zones at chromospheric heights (see Carlsson &
Stein , 1997 , which will be referred to as the strongly dynamic case) .
The second simulation corresponds to a less intense photospheric
disturbance (the weakly dynamic case given by Carlsson & Stein , 2002 )
. Thus, the thermodynamical evolution of the atmosphere (including the
chromosphere and the transition region) is driven by the bottom boundary
condition that is imposed on the velocity. This realistic boundary
condition is extracted from the measured Doppler shifts in the Fe i line
at @xmath Å. Our description focuses mainly on the strongly dynamic
case, but in Sec. 5.3.5 we compare the results with those corresponding
to the weakly dynamic case.

To characterize the simulations we can use the following quantities. In
terms of the velocity gradients, and using units related to a
representative scale height ¹ ¹ 1 A scale height can be defined as the
typical distance over which atmospheric magnitudes such as the density
vary an order of magnitude. Since the models contain important temporal
variations of such magnitudes, the scale height varies. For this reason
we have defined an averaged scale height as the representative value
used for the characterization of the velocity gradients. @xmath , the
temporal average of the maximum velocity gradient along the atmosphere
is @xmath per scale height (or @xmath ) in the strongly dynamic case and
@xmath per scale height (or @xmath ) in the weakly dynamic case.
Likewise, the temporal average of the minimum of temperature in the
atmosphere is @xmath in the strongly dynamic case, and @xmath in the
weakly dynamic case.

At each time step of the HD simulation under consideration we use the
corresponding one-dimensional stratifications of the vertical velocity,
temperature and density to compute the emergent @xmath and @xmath
profiles through the application of the multilevel radiative transfer
code of Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ( 2003b , 2010 ) , after the
generalization to the non-static case described in Sec. 3.1.2 .
Specifically, we have jointly solved the radiative transfer (RT)
equations for the Stokes I and Q parameters and the statistical
equilibrium equations (SEEs) for the atomic populations of each energy
level and the population imbalances among its magnetic energy sublevels
(equivalently, the multipolar tensor components of the atomic density
matrix, @xmath , with @xmath the angular momentum of each level i). This
is the NLTE radiative transfer problem of the second kind (see Sections
7.2 and 7.13 in Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) . Once the
self-consistent solution of such equations is found at each height in
the atmospheric model under consideration, we compute the coefficients
of the emission vector and of the propagation matrix (see Sec. 4.2.2 )
and solve the RT equations for a line of sight (LOS) with @xmath , where
@xmath is the cosine of the heliocentric angle. This LOS has been chosen
in order to simulate a close to the limb observation, such as that shown
in Figure 13 of Stenflo et al. ( 2000 ) . To account for macroscopic
motions, we have introduced the Doppler effect in the calculation of the
absorption and emission profiles for each wavelength and ray direction
(Sec. 3.1.2 ). The influence of the Doppler effect on the SEE appears
directly because the radiative rates depend on the radiation field
tensor components. Likewise, the RTE is affected because the Doppler
effect modifies the elements of the propagation matrix and of the
emission vector.

Given that the computations reported here are carried out in
plane-parallel atmospheric models, it is necessary to introduce a
microturbulent velocity, which accounts for the Doppler shifts (inducing
an effective line broadening) by moving fluid elements below the
resolution element. In order to estimate a suitable value (assumed
constant with height), we have calculated the emergent intensities at
disk center and compared them with those of the solar Kitt Peak FTS
Spectral Atlas ( Kurucz et al. , 1984 ) . A good agreement is obtained
with @xmath km s @xmath .

### 5.2 Description and characterization of the results.

A standard Fourier analysis of the atmosphere model shows that it acts
as a passband filter for the multifrequency sound waves generated in the
lower boundary. The result is that the predominating periods at
chromospheric heights and higher are around three minutes ( Carlsson &
Stein , 1997 ) . For practical reasons, we divided the temporal
evolution in three-minute intervals so that the beginning of each
interval coincides with the moment in which the shock front in
temperature and velocity is the sharpest in each interval (vertical
lines in figures with temporal axis, like Figure 5.1 ). Given the power
of the three-minute waves, this division turns out to be “natural” and
can be used to mark the most interesting events we see in the emergent
polarization.

Inside each three-minutes cycle we distinguish between compression and
expansion phases. They can be easily identified following the height at
which @xmath , i.e., where the optical depth at line center ( @xmath )
along the LOS equals unity (upper panel of Figure 5.1 ). This quantity
is a good marker of the shock fronts when they cross heights between
@xmath and @xmath Mm. It is because the steep changes in opacity inside
the shocks forces the @xmath region to remain comprised within them. The
line transitions at @xmath Å and @xmath Å (green and red lines in the
upper panel of Figure 5.1 ) follow a clearer periodic pattern because
they form higher, where less frequency components of the velocity waves
can arrive. Compression phases begin when plasma falls down from upper
layers ( @xmath and @xmath decrease in the top panel of Figure 5.1 ),
while simultaneously a new upward propagating wave emerges amplified
into the chromosphere. At the end of this stage a shock wave is
completely developed and the @xmath position is close to @xmath 1200 km
for the three IR lines. The shock waves so created always start in such
region between ² ² 2 It is in this range of heights where the Ca ii IR
triplet forms in typical semi-empirical models 1 and 1.5 Mm. After that,
during what we term expansion phase (heights for @xmath and @xmath
arising in top panel of Figure 5.1 ), the shock fronts travel upward
increasing the plasma velocities as they encounter lower densities.

Figure 5.1 also shows the time evolution of other quantities during the
first @xmath s after the initial transient. In the second row, the
location and value of the temperature minimum are displayed, showing a
clear correspondence with expansion and contraction phases. In the third
row, we show the ensuing variation of @xmath , defined as the
peak-to-peak difference of the Q/I profile for each spectral line. It is
a measure of the linear polarization signal contrast that was used in
Chapter 4 to characterize the polarization amplitude and discriminate
their variations with respect to static cases. In each cycle we see an
amplification of @xmath occurring at expansion phases and an usually
larger amplification during contraction phases. Finally, the time
evolution of the emergent @xmath profile for the @xmath Å line is
illustrated in the lower panel (the vertical axis shows 0.6 Å around the
rest wavelength of the line). Here, we observe two distinct areas
showing amplifications inside each three-minute cycle. The first
amplification is blueshifted, because it happens in an atmospheric
expansion phase (plasma moving toward the observer). It is weaker than
the second amplification, which is redshifted and occurs during the
compression phase (plasma moving down in the atmosphere). This indicates
that the compression phase is more efficient producing a polarization
amplification than the expansion one. The reason is that during
compression we have stronger velocity and temperature gradients along
the main regions of formation. Following the results of Chapter 4 , the
larger the gradient, the larger the enhancement of the linear
polarization signal. The behavior is similar in the other transitions.

There is a clear correspondence between the maximum value of the
temperature minimum (hot-chromosphere time steps) and the largest peaks
of the @xmath signal, taking place just before the maximum contraction
(dotted vertical lines). As the atmosphere is compressed, the
temperature increases at chromospheric heights and the resulting
gradient of the source function produces an increase of the radiation
field anisotropy in the upper layers. This directly leads to an enhanced
emergent linear polarization signal. On the contrary, in
cold-chromosphere models the expansion reaches its maximum and @xmath is
near its minimum value.

Even in such complex situations, we still witness the already known
effects of amplification (with respect to the static case), frequency
shift and asymmetry in the linear polarization profiles due to dynamics.
All of them have been already explained in Chapter 4 , using the
semi-empirical FAL-C model of Fontenla et al. (1993) with ad-hoc
velocity stratifications. The enhancement is produced as a consequence
of the velocity gradients and subsequent anisotropy enhancements.
However, some differences exist from the experiments in semi-empirical
models and the calculations presented in this chapter. First, the
velocity stratification in the HD models is, in general, non-monotonic
and with a non-constant variation with height. Second, the maximum
velocity gradients are located at shocks, with amplitudes that reach
tens or even hundreds of meters per second per kilometer (as a
comparison, in Chapter 4 we dealt with velocity gradients between 0 and
20 m s @xmath km @xmath ). Third, as commented before, we have shocks in
temperature that produce larger source function gradients and additional
enhancement of the radiation anisotropy and of the linear polarization.
Finally, these variations are usually concentrated in the formation
regions of the triplet lines. All these mechanisms act together and
enhance the linear polarization of the emergent radiation with
amplification factors up to @xmath (in the @xmath Åline) and @xmath (in
the @xmath Å and @xmath Å lines), for the instantaneous values of the
@xmath amplitudes with respect to the static FAL-C case. However, if we
consider temporal averages of the emergent Stokes profiles during long
periods, we get amplification factors of about a factor of two
(time-averaged Q/I amplitudes reach @xmath for 8542 Å and 8662 Å lines).

Summarizing, the temporal evolution of the polarization is driven by the
temperature and velocity stratifications, that in turn are a result of
the dynamical conditions set in the photosphere.

### 5.3 Analysis and discussion of results.

#### 5.3.1 The effect of the velocity.

A way of visualizing the effect of vertical velocity gradients on the
emergent scattering polarization is to compare the evolution of the
polarization profiles corresponding to both the static and non-static
case. In the absence of velocities (lower row of Figure 5.2 ), the
maximum of the @xmath profiles is always located at @xmath (i.e., line
center), and its temporal evolution presents a sawtooth shape. When the
effect of velocities is included in the calculations (upper row of
Figure 5.2 ), the maximum of the @xmath signal is no longer located at
the central wavelength and its temporal evolution assumes a different
shape with two peaks every three-minute period (upper right panel).
These wavelength and amplitude modulations are produced by the Doppler
effect of the velocity gradients.

It is interesting to compare the mean @xmath amplitudes obtained in the
HD models with the one calculated in the FAL-C model. They differ
notably (see horizontal lines in right panels of Figure 5.2 ). In the
@xmath Å transition we have mean values around @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath for the HD models with velocities, the HD models at rest and
static FALC models, respectively. The results of these figures have been
obtained using an integration time of @xmath s ( @xmath minutes), the
duration of the temporal interval shown in Figure 5.2 . Neglecting the
effect of the velocity gradients in the HD models, we see that the
resulting temporally averaged scattering polarization signals (which
include the impact of the temperature and density shocks) are similar to
the @xmath profiles computed in the static FAL-C semi-empirical model.

#### 5.3.2 The combined effect of velocity and temperature on the linear
polarization.

In Figure 5.3 we display some relevant magnitudes for three different
situations in the simulation. The first column corresponds to a quiet
time step, with no shocks, zero velocity and without any kind of
amplifications (it is the initial transient phase). The central column
shows a phase of compression , in which shocks are important. Finally,
the last column displays an expansion phase, in which the atmosphere is
expanded and the shocks are already travelling over the transition
region. Furthermore, we distinguish between the solutions when motions
are taken into account (red lines) and the solutions obtained allowing
shocks in all magnitudes but artificially setting the velocity to zero
(black lines).

The normalized velocity @xmath , with @xmath being the Doppler width of
the absorption profiles (which depends on the temperature), c the speed
of light and @xmath the vertical velocity, is the quantity that controls
the importance of the atmospheric motions in relation with the radiation
anisotropy and the scattering polarization (see Sec. 4.3.3 ). Note that
this quantity considers the combined effect of velocity and temperature.
In the HD atmosphere models, @xmath (solid lines in upper panels of
Figure 5.3 ) is only significant in the formation region of the IR
triplet lines ( @xmath region with high velocity gradients, and not very
high temperatures). Although shock waves increase the chromospheric
temperature, the effect of the velocity gradients is predominant. The
contrary occurs over the transition region, where the thermal line width
is much larger than the Doppler shifts.

The expansion and contraction can be identified also in quantities such
as the intensity source function and the Planck function (second row in
Figure 5.3 ). During contraction phases (middle column panels), high
temperatures produce a more efficient population pumping toward upper
levels, increasing the emissivity and, consequently, the source
function. Additionally, during contraction the temperature shock occurs
in optically thick and denser layers (deeper layers below @xmath ),
forcing the source function gradient to increase with respect to the
static case at those heights. Note how in this last case the source
function rises as a whole because of the warming (compare the source
function in the middle panel, the black solid line that has been
obtained neglecting velocities, with the non-dynamic source function in
the left column). If the macroscopic velocity is now considered, we
additionally get a jump in the source function (red lines in middle
column of Figure 5.3 ) caused by the velocity shock that is developed in
this contraction phase. This behavior is accompanied by a significant
Doppler-induced anisotropy enhancement that amplifies the linear
polarization, as shown in the corresponding lower panels of the same
figure.

In the expansion phases, the shock waves move upward and the
chromosphere becomes cooler. This induces a lower source function and
smaller polarization amplitudes (as compared with the contraction
phase). Otherwise, as the density of scatterers is now lower around the
shock (because it moved upward to regions with @xmath ), the temperature
gradients have smaller effects on the polarization profiles than during
the contraction phases. In this expansion time step, the black solid
line representing the static source function is similar to the
non-dynamic source function of the left column. However, once the
motions are introduced, and despite of the fact that the shocks have
already reached upper chromospheric layers, the remanent velocity field
has still a sizable gradient that enhances the source function (Doppler
brightening effect).

#### 5.3.3 Averaged values of the polarization profiles.

In order to compute the average linear polarization signal that one
would observe without any temporal resolution, we average Q and I
(obtaining @xmath ) over @xmath ( @xmath minutes) for four different
cases (Figure 5.4 ). We consider the cases with zero microturbulent
velocity (dotted lines) and a constant microturbulent velocity of 3.5 km
s @xmath (solid lines). For each case, we distinguish between the
results switching off the velocity (black lines) and the results
allowing for macroscopic velocity fields (red lines).

When macroscopic motions are considered, the polarization profiles
become amplified asymmetrically. Furthermore, they are negative ³ ³ 3
This is true most part of the time. Only in some well-defined instants
of the simulation the 8498 Å profiles becomes positive. We study such
sign variations in the next chapter. in the case of the 8498
Å transition and positive in the other two transitions. The asymmetry of
the red profiles is a consequence of the fact that, during the averaging
period, the dynamical situations in which the velocity gradient is
negative (velocity field mostly decreasing with height) dominate over
the situations with velocity gradients that are mostly positive. This
predominance is not because the situations with negative velocity
gradients are more frequent but because such situations are more
efficient on amplifying the linear polarization and thus, their effect
prevails. This happens during the compression phase because i) the
velocity gradients are larger, ii) there is also a shock in temperature
affecting the formation region and iii) the shock fronts are located
just below the @xmath height. The results are qualitatively the same
independently of the microturbulent velocity value, but, when it is not
considered, the amplification of @xmath is larger and the profiles are
narrower.

If we decrease the averaging interval to @xmath minutes, we obtain
profiles that are essentially similar to the ones obtained by averaging
during @xmath minutes (showed in Figure 5.4 ). If we integrate less than
that, significant variations appear in the shape and amplitude of the
emergent profiles. This indicates that, concerning the linear
polarization, there is still reliable dynamic information contained in a
time interval corresponding to a few three-minute cycles.

#### 5.3.4 The velocity free approximation.

An approximation that is sometimes applied to solve radiative transfer
problems in dynamical atmospheres (either taking into account the
presence of atomic polarization or not) is the velocity free
approximation (VFA). It is based on solving the SEE and RTE
simultaneously but neglecting the effect of plasma motions. However,
once they are consistently solved, such plasma motions are included in
the synthesis of the emergent Stokes profiles (along @xmath in our
case). Consequently, the density matrix elements are calculated as if
plasma motions did not affect them, reducing the complexity and
computational effort of the problem since a reduced frequency grid is
used to compute the mean intensity and the anisotropy. The results of
applying it to each time step of our HD evolution is the temporal
average illustrated as the green line in Figure 5.4 . This approximation
is clearly not appropriate in our case, given that the profiles just
become asymmetric (with respect to the static profiles) but without the
amplification. The reason for this lack of amplification is that the
anisotropy controlling the linear polarization is not correctly enhanced
(see Chapter 4 ). On the other hand, the asymmetry is purely due to the
asymmetric absorption with respect to the line center that motions
produce along the ray under consideration. Hence, in order to obtain
reliable results it is mandatory to include the effect of Doppler shifts
in the whole set of equations, and we conclude that the VFA should not
be applied.

#### 5.3.5 The effect of photospheric dynamics.

Given that the small velocity fields appearing in the photosphere are
amplified because of the exponential decrease in the density while the
perturbations travel outward, the properties of the bottom boundary
condition are determinant in the behavior of the emergent Stokes
parameter of chromospheric lines. We compare the strongly dynamic case
that forms the core of this chapter with the weakly dynamic case that
has been already introduced in Sec. 5.2 . Although the mean maximum
velocity gradient is three times smaller in the weakly dynamic case and
the averaged polarization amplitudes are also smaller than in the
strongly dynamic one, we still find comparable or even slightly larger
instantaneous @xmath amplitudes (see Figure 5.5 ). The resulting
averaged polarization profiles are qualitatively the same but they
differ in amplitude (Figure 5.7 ). This is a reasonable result because
in the weakly dynamic scenario the instantaneous velocity gradients are
smaller in general. Differences are especially critical for the 8498
Å line, whose linear polarization profiles can be positive, but also
adopt significant negative values at redder wavelengths (when velocity
gradients are mainly positive with height) or at bluer wavelengths (when
velocity gradients are mainly negative with height). This behavior
produces cancellation effects with integration times larger than a
three-minute period. Furthermore, the central depression produced in the
8498 Å average profile when the velocity is neglected in the strongly
dynamic simulation (solid black line in left panel of Figure 5.7 ) do
not appear in the average profile corresponding to the weakly dynamic
case (dashed black line in the same panel) because of the differences in
the instantaneous temperature stratifications. The sensitivity of this
spectral line to the instantaneous photospheric perturbations and to the
developed chromospheric shocks is larger than in the other two lines.

#### 5.3.6 The effect of the integration time.

In order to detect in the Sun the time evolution of the linear
polarization signals, the observations must have enough time resolution,
signal-to-noise ratio and spatial resolution. A sufficient spatial
coherence is important to avoid cancellations of the contribution from
different regions in the chromosphere evolving with different phases. If
we consider the expected capabilities of the next generation of solar
telescopes (like the European Solar Telescope, EST, or the Advanced
Technology Solar Telescope, ATST), we can aim at observing the emergent
Stokes profiles of Figure 5.6 with a 10 s cadence (upper panel) ⁴ ⁴ 4
Using EST (telescope diameter of 4 m, instrumental efficiency around
@xmath ) and considering a spectral resolution of 30 mÅ, a spatial
resolution of @xmath arcsec and an integration time of 1 s (ten times
better than needed), it would be possible to observe the linear
polarization of the 8542 Å line (line to continuum ratio of @xmath ) at
the level of @xmath with a confidence of @xmath over the noise. .
However, with the present telescopes and instrumentation, we are forced
to integrate in time and/or space to detect the scattering polarization
signals. If we degrade the temporal resolution of our results to an
integration time of 1 minute (middle panel of Figure 5.6 ) and 3 minutes
(lower panel of Figure 5.6 ) we clearly see that the time evolution
becomes more difficult to detect. In the last case, the profiles are
already so smoothed that the original features are completely lost, both
in the spectral and temporal domains. The amplitude of the integrated
signals are lower than in the original 10 s sequence by a factor of
@xmath (see the color scales). However, integration during time
intervals @xmath minute could reveal the amplification/modulation effect
if we capture spectro-polarimetric signals similar to the ones showed in
the middle row panel.

#### 5.3.7 The effect of a decreasing velocity on the averaged profiles.

We also calculated what happens to the emergent averaged profiles in the
strongly dynamic case (with @xmath minutes of integration, emulating an
observation) when we gradually reduce the velocity field by a constant
scaling factor @xmath , keeping the rest of atmospheric magnitudes
unperturbed (see Figure 5.8 ). As expected, we find that the
polarization amplitudes decrease in proportion to @xmath , from the
original case, with @xmath , towards the static case, with @xmath . Note
that the core of the 8498 Å line goes through zero for a certain @xmath
value (near @xmath ). Thus, depending on the magnitude of the velocity
gradients, its linear polarization amplitude will be positive or
negative. This fact suggests an additional way to diagnose velocity
gradients along the line-of-sight. However, it is important to keep in
mind that this sensitivity also depends on the variations in density and
temperature, as shown in Sec. 5.3.5 .

Furthermore, the variation of the @xmath amplitudes is not linear with
@xmath . The change is small for small @xmath , is larger for
intermediate values of @xmath , and again becomes smaller for the
largest @xmath , tending to saturation.

### 5.4 Considerations on the Hanle effect

For magnetic field diagnostics with the Hanle effect it is often
necessary to know the zero-field polarization reference (e.g., Stenflo ,
1994 ; Trujillo Bueno et al. , 2004 ) . That is what we have tried to do
in previous sections, calculating and explaining the temporal evolution
of the linear polarization profiles in chromospheric dynamic
simulations. Ideally, this reference has to be computed under the same
thermodynamical and dynamical conditions than in the real Sun but
without magnetic field. As the Hanle effect often depolarizes the linear
polarization signals, the difference between the observation and the
zero-field calculation can be associated with a magnetic field by
adjusting the magnetic field topology and intensity. The key point is
that the reference amplitude must be as precise as possible. If it is
imprecise, variations in the Stokes profiles can be associated with a
magnetic field when they were really due to uncertainties in another
magnitudes, like the temperature or the velocity field. Due to this
reason, the fact that the solar chromosphere is a highly dynamic medium
brings some complications for the use of the Hanle effect as a
diagnostic tool.

A strategy to avoid the above-mentioned problem is known as the line
ratio technique. It consists in finding a pair of spectral lines whose
thermodynamical behavior is identical but whose sensitivity to the
magnetic field is different in some range of magnetic field intensity or
inclinations (e.g., Stenflo et al. , 1998 ; Manso Sainz et al. , 2004 )
. In that case, the ratio between the polarization amplitudes should
only change due to variations in the magnetic field, thus allowing us to
measure it after a suitable calibration. As shown by Manso Sainz &
Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) , the main magnetic sensitivity difference among
the lines of the Ca II IR triplet is between the @xmath line (which is
sensitive to field strengths between 0.001 G and 10 G) and any of the
@xmath and @xmath lines (which react mainly to sub-gauss magnetic fields
and up to 10 G in the latter spectral line). Unfortunately, while the
line-cores of the @xmath and @xmath lines originate in similar
atmospheric layers, the @xmath line-core originates at significantly
deeper chromospheric layers (see e.g. Fig. 5.1 ). Nevertheless, we have
found useful to plot in Figure 5.9 the time evolution of the following
polarization line ratios:

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (5.1a)
     @xmath      (5.1b)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the super-index indicates the central wavelength of the transition
in Å. These quantities were calculated for each simulation considered
before (weakly and strongly dynamic cases). The more stable they are,
the more useful they will be for inferring the magnetic field.

We obtain that , on average, @xmath and @xmath for the strongly and
weakly dynamic cases, respectively (lower panel in Figure 5.9 ). The
sudden shape variations (including maximum amplitudes passing through
zero) of the 8498 Å line induce large instantaneous excursions on @xmath
. As expected, a more stable line ratio is obtained for the second pair
of transitions, which are precisely the ones that originate at similar
chromospheric heights. We find @xmath and @xmath for the strongly and
weakly dynamic cases, respectively (upper panel in Figure 5.9 ). If we
repeat the calculations setting to zero the microturbulent velocity in
the strongly dynamic case we obtain @xmath and @xmath (dashed black
lines in Figure 5.9 ). These results indicate that the @xmath line ratio
shows a relatively stable behavior against variations of the velocity
and temperature in the solar atmosphere. Consequently, in principle,
@xmath could be used as a suitable line ratio to estimate the magnetic
field from spectropolarimetric observations of the @xmath and @xmath
lines.

Regarding the sensitivity of these lines to the magnetic field and their
applicability for the diagnostic of magnetic fields through the Hanle
effect, several considerations have to be taken into account. First, the
microturbulent velocity has a small influence on the averaged amplitudes
and line ratios. Second, once the magnetic field is included in the
calculations, the Hanle effect typically operates at the line center for
static cases. However, in a dynamic situation there is not a preferred
line center wavelength. As the maximum of the absorption and dispersion
profiles occurs at different Doppler shifted wavelengths, the Hanle
effect will operate in a small spectral region around the line core.
Third, according to the static calculations by Manso Sainz & Trujillo
Bueno ( 2010 ) , for chromospheric magnetic fields stronger than @xmath
G in the “quiet” Sun, the @xmath signal of the 8662 Å line is expected
to be Hanle saturated. Thus, variations between @xmath and @xmath G
could be measured with @xmath , being produced by changes in the linear
polarization of the 8542 Å line. Unfortunately, the fluctuations we see
in Figure 5.9 (exclusively due to the dynamics) have amplitudes of the
same order of magnitude than those expected from the investigations of
the Hanle effect in static model atmospheres (exclusively due to the
magnetic field). More realistic results will be obtained when carrying
out calculations of the Hanle effect of the Ca ii IR triplet in
dynamical model atmospheres. In any case, it is clear that for
exploiting the polarization of these lines, we need instruments of high
polarimetric sensitivity.

### 5.5 Conclusions

The results presented in this chapter indicate that the vertical
velocity gradients caused by the shock waves that take place at
chromospheric heights in the HD models of Carlsson & Stein (1997; 2002)
have a significant influence on the computed scattering polarization
profiles of the Ca ii IR triplet. They show changes in the shape of the
@xmath profiles of the three IR lines and clear enhancements in their
amplitudes, as well as changes in the sign of the @xmath signal of the
@xmath line. Such modifications with respect to the static case are
evident, not only in the temporally resolved @xmath profiles (e.g., see
Figure 5.2 ), but also in the temporally averaged @xmath profiles (e.g.,
see Figure 5.4 ). This is true even with moderate macroscopic plasma
velocities, simply due to the presence of strong vertical velocity
gradients like the ones produced by shock waves. This explains why the
above-mentioned modifications of the scattering polarization profiles of
the Ca ii IR triplet are present also in the weakly dynamic simulation
of Carlsson & Stein ( 2002 ) .

Our investigation points out that the development of diagnostic methods
based on the Hanle effect in the Ca ii IR triplet should take into
account that the dynamical conditions of the solar chromosphere can have
a significant impact on the emergent scattering polarization signals.
This complication could be alleviated with the application of line ratio
techniques. In Sec. 5.4 we have concluded that the ratio between the
polarization amplitudes of the @xmath and @xmath transitions would be
the best line-ratio choice. However, even in the absence of magnetic
fields, the small fluctuations we see in the calculated values of such
dynamic line ratios could be confused with the presence of magnetic
fields in the range between @xmath and @xmath G. Further work is
necessary to clarify this point.

In any case, the fact that realistic macroscopic velocity gradients may
have a significant impact on the scattering polarization profiles of the
Ca ii IR triplet is interesting for the diagnostic of the solar
chromosphere ⁵ ⁵ 5 The physical mechanism is general, but its observable
effects are expected to be significantly less important in broader
spectral lines, such as the Ca ii K line and Ly @xmath . . On the one
hand, it provides a new observable for probing the dynamical conditions
of the solar chromosphere (e.g., by confronting observed Stokes profiles
with those computed in dynamical models). On the other hand, the
exploration of the magnetism of the quiet solar chromosphere via the
Hanle effect in the Ca ii IR triplet (either through the forward
modeling approach or via foreseeable Stokes inversion approaches) would
have to be accomplished without neglecting the possible effect of the
atmospheric velocity gradients on the atomic level polarization.

Some points are still unanswered after this work. First, we need to
investigate the sensitivity to the Hanle effect of the @xmath and @xmath
profiles of the Ca ii IR triplet using magnetized and dynamical
atmospheric models. Second, we have to investigate whether our
one-dimensional RT results remain valid after considering realistic
three-dimensional models, such as those resulting from
magneto-hydrodynamical simulations (e.g. Wedemeyer et al. , 2004 ;
Leenaarts et al. , 2009b ) .

Finally, we mention that these results could be potentially interesting
in other astrophysical contexts. For instance, the mechanism of
polarization enhancement due to the presence of shocks might well be the
explanation for the changing amplitudes of the linear polarization
signals reported in variable pulsating Mira stars ( Fabas et al. , 2011
) .

## Chapter 6 Synthesis of Stokes profiles in a 3D MHD atmospheric model.

In previous chapters we studied the basic effects that the temperature
and the velocity structure of solar models atmospheres have on the
synthetized scattering polarization profiles of the Ca ii IR triplet.
Now we shall consider the action of the magnetic field as well, trying
to obtain information about the influence that the dynamical state of
the atmosphere can have on the diagnosis of cromospheric magnetic
fields. To this end, we present the results of solving the NLTE RT
problem of the second kind in a 3D solar atmosphere model obtained from
a state-of-the-art magneto-hydrodynamical (MHD) simulation. The
investigation focuses on the forward scattering geometry and the linear
polarization signals produced by Hanle effect. To obtain the NLTE
solutions we applied the 1.5D approach with the correct 3D populations
supplied by the model at each point.

In this chapter we will study the spatial distribution and filling
factor of the linear polarization signals affected by the dynamic,
temperature and magnetic fields in a simulated quiet Sun. One of the
aims is to identify the circumstances leading to miss the dynamic
amplifications in the observational linear polarization signals. Are we
actually missing them? Such effects, explained in previous chapters,
have not been clearly captured by the telescopes so far and we want to
know why. Furthermore, we will investigate the spatial patterns that the
magnetic field and the temperature stratification create in the
scattering polarization maps as well as how we could use them for
diagnosis purposes. As an exercise, we will try to infer the magnetic
field topology from the synthetic maps using the Hanle and Zeeman
signals. Finally, we will dedicate a section to evaluate some
spectropolarimetric quantities and observational strategies applied to
signal detection under the physical situation of our models.

### 6.1 Description of the MHD model and the RT calculations.

The atmospheric model used to perform the spectral synthesis correspond
to a snapshot of a radiation MHD simulation of the solar atmosphere
computed by Leenaarts et al. ( 2009a ) with the Oslo Stagger Code (
Hansteen et al. , 2007 ) . This code solves the set of MHD equations
that describe the plasma motion together with the RTE. It employs an LTE
equation of state and includes non-LTE radiative losses using a
multi-group opacity method and thin radiative cooling in the corona and
upper chromosphere. It includes thermal conduction along magnetic field
lines. The model has @xmath grid points and a physical size of @xmath
Mm. But, to our aims, we selected a volume ¹ ¹ 1 The exact portion we
chose from the full cube found in Leenaarts et al. ( 2009a ) spans from
@xmath to @xmath Mm in the @xmath direction, from @xmath to @xmath Mm in
the @xmath direction and from @xmath to @xmath Mm along the vertical.
with @xmath Mm and @xmath grid points. The snapshot has a mean magnetic
field strength of @xmath G at @xmath Km, which is representative of the
magnetization expected in the quiet regions of the solar photosphere (
Trujillo Bueno et al. , 2004 ) .

The (first-kind) 3D RT calculations performed by the Oslo Stagger Code
to obtain the snapshot atmospheric stratifications were done under
complete redistribution in frequency for all the spectral lines. We used
the solutions of the 3D RT problem for the Ca ii level populations as a
guess to solve the scattering polarization problem. The electron density
was computed assuming LTE ionization for all relevant species.
Photoionization by hydrogen Lyman lines was not taken into account.

The hydrogen number density was not available in the supplied model and
we had to compute it. To this end, we considered the stratifications of
temperature, density and electron number density and we solved the
chemical equilibrium and ionization equations for all the relevant
atomic species, including hydrogen, as explained in Asensio Ramos ( 2004
) .

We then solved the full RT problem for the Stokes vector by treating
each model column as an independent planeparallel atmosphere (1.5D
approach), neglecting the effect of horizontal inhomogeneities. The
technical details of the core calculations and the computer program
developed for performing them are described in Chapter 3 .

Finally, as done in previous chapters, we add a constant microturbulent
velocity @xmath to fit the calculated average of the @xmath line
intensity of the model with the emergent intensity provided by a solar
atlas ( Kurucz et al. , 1984 ) .

#### 6.1.1 Pre-processing the models.

The selected data cube contains @xmath columns (hereafter, columns or
models). In order to decrease the computational load, we adaptatively
truncated the colums in height. We estimated the column heights where
@xmath (setting the lower boundary position) and @xmath (setting the
upper boundary position). Thus, we could run the RT calculations with
less grid points but without appreciable loss of accuracy in the
obtention of the density matrix elements and the Stokes vector. In other
words, the boundary conditions (optically thin outside and optically
thick inside) are still fulfilled for all the spectral lines.

To obtain the iso-surfaces of optical depth we calculated the line
optical depth along the ray with @xmath , at a given frequency, and for
each vertical stratification of the data cube, with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

approximating the total absorption coefficient as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the absorption coefficient for the continuum calculated
with the same background opacity package we shall use for the RT
calculation. The second term on the right hand side of Eq. ( 6.1 ) is
the line absorption coefficient at line center, with @xmath the overall
lower level population of the considered transition and @xmath is the
thermal witdth of the spectral line. This second term is taken equal to
zero when calculating @xmath . Along this chapter we shall always use
the line center optical depth (instead of the integrated optical depth)
in order to estimate formation heights.

We also modified the vertical resolution of the model spatial grid. The
spatial resolution of the model is key for obtaining an accurate
solution, especially in highly dynamical situations. In the previous
chapter, the time-dependent models we used were supplied with an
adaptative sampling, so the pre-treatment of the data was almost direct
and we did not find any issue during the convergence of the RT
calculations. However, that is not the case with the 3D snapshot under
study. Here, we have to interpolate along the columns for obtaining a
smaller variation of the physical quantities from point to point and
thus achieve the convergence of the iterative method.

The way we interpolate will inevitably affect the iteration process. As
is well known, radiative transfer methods based on accelerated @xmath
-iteration suffer from a degradation in the convergence rate when the
discretization of the atmosphere is very fine ( Trujillo Bueno & Fabiani
Bendicho , 1995 ) . The following dichotomy has to be considered:
increasing the number of discrete points along the vertical produces a
more precise solution of the RT problem but it also increases the
computational time. Due to the large number of columns, a trade off
between both effects must be reached.

Initially, we chose the option of adding the minimum number of points in
order to fulfill the requeriments imposed by the velocity gradients
(Section 3.1.2 ). However, in regions where velocity gradients are
large, the total number of points in the vertical direction can still be
too large after the interpolation. To avoid the presence of too many
points, we tried to decrease their number in the atmospheric regions
with smooth physical variations, typically in the plateau around the
minimum of temperature. A code (called Doppler Inspector) was written to
do this before applying the RT code.

With the Doppler Inspector we can identify atmospheric regions with
small velocity gradients and remove there alternate points if necessary
(Fig. 6.1 , upper panel). We can also identify places where the velocity
gradient exceeds the threshold of @xmath Doppler units (see Section
4.2.3 or 3.1.2 ) and add there as many points as necessary (Fig. 6.1 ,
lower panel). We employed linear interpolation to introduce new grid
points.

In this approach to a better interpolation grid we face one of the
limitations of working with non-adaptative discretization methods. In
general, the procedure that we have explained leads to convergence in
most of the models but not in all of them. However, in some models
convergence cannot be obtained, regardless of the number of
interpolation points. When the grid is not locally adapted to the
physical conditions, there will be a gradient of numerical error along
each ray or characteristic. To mantain the stability of the iterative
process, such error has to be similar everywhere in the atmosphere or,
at least, to vary smoothly. Otherwise, the (always existing)
imprecisions deriving from any integration method for the RT equation
can increase without control. These imprecisions in local values of the
specific intensity and source function propagate through the numerical
domain and eventually develop discontinuities that do not fit into the
polynomial variation assumed by the short-characteristics scheme. To
alleviate this problem we can improve the interpolation approach of the
formal solver (using higher-order polynomials) but, as the grid is not
adaptative, the numerical error gradient still exist. In the worst case,
convergence will not be attained. In the best case, the solution is
achieved, but the time to reach the convergence will never be optimal
because the iteration process is hampered and delayed by the errors
resulting from the use of a non-adaptative grid. None of the options
(including oversampling) is satisfactory, specially with the high number
of RT problems that we have to solve in the 3D cube.

These problems can be overcome in several ways. Using multigrid methods,
for example, we can minimize the number of iterations and assure
convergence by putting a heavier weight on the grid-related calculations
at each iterative step ( Hackbusch , 1985 ; Wesseling , 1995 ) . Since a
formal implementation of such methods is out of the scope of this
thesis, we developed a computationally cheaper option inspired by the
finite elements methods (FEM) to obtain a better performance and
convergence. A detailed explanation about it was given in Sec. 3.1.3 .

#### 6.1.2 Description of physical quantities in the model.

In the selected data volume we can observe a number of interesting
features associated to the variations in temperature, velocity and
magnetic field. A good representation of the data set is provided by the
temperature stratification. In Fig. 6.2 we visualize the deep layers of
the model photosphere, with the isosurface of @xmath K enclosing the
hotest part of the granules. The background planes reveal the vertical
variation of the temperature until the corona (white region). In them,
we identify dark regions as bubbles of minimum temperature (cool
bubbles), followed by the variable chromosphere and the abrupt
temperature increase of the transition region located at the beginning
of the white region. The isolated tubes appearing in Figure 6.2 like
trapping a granule correspond to some selected velocity field lines.
Their colors indicate the local temperature. They show how just above
the granules the photospheric plasma gets cooler and turns downdraft
through the intergranules. The magnetic field lines near the Y-Z plane
also have colors indicating the temperature.

In Fig. 6.3 , we draw some portions of the isosurfaces of optical depth
unity for the IR triplet lines. These corrugated surfaces are being
modified at each point by the vertical velocity field (whose modulus is
indicated with the color of the surface). We see that there is not a
fixed height associated with the chromosphere, but a vertical range in
which the plasma has the values of density, temperature and magnetic
field that we identify as chromospheric layers. This region is
constantly bubbling up and down as a consequence of the upward motions
originated from the photosphere and amplified by the density gradient
along the chromosphere. The increment of the vertical velocity is thus a
result of the conservation of energy in the fluid. So, the macroscopic
motion pass to be temperature-activated in the photosphere and below
(granular convection) to density-enhanced from the chromosphere upward,
leading to an expansion and a radiative cooling. The process is
continued by gravity during the chomospheric downflows, in which the
potential energy is transformed into kinetic and internal energy,
arising temperature again. The model is a snapshot of that process.

The maximum velocity in the photosphere is around @xmath . The velocity
stratification patterns are similar to the ones in the time-dependent
models of Chapter 5 , but they differ notably in the maximum values and
their statistical ocurrence. They do not have to coincide because one
model is a temporal evolution and the other is a spatial mapping.
Furthermore, we also have to realize that the LOS chosen in these new
calculations is @xmath , while the calculations in previous chapters
were for @xmath . Because of it, the emergent spectral lines will be now
more sensitive to lower layers than they would be for a limb observation
² ² 2 Observations done at the limb ( @xmath ) capture more strongly the
behavior of higher layers because the optical path along a LOS towards
the photosphere is always larger than for a disk center observation (
@xmath ). . Among other things, this means that the vertical velocities
in the formation region of the spectral lines will tend to be smaller
and the magnetic fields will tend to be stronger. Normalized histograms
of chromospheric velocity allow a comparison between both set of models
(fig. 6.4 ). The maximum velocity in the upper chromosphere reaches
@xmath , but such large values are scarce in its spatial distribution,
being a value of around @xmath more representative. With these
velocities we would not expect significant linear polarization
amplifications induced by dynamics. However, we also have to take into
account that the velocity component along the line of sight will be
larger now because we look at disk center, directly in the direction of
the motion.

Computing the emergent intensity and comparing with observations, the
authors of the atmospheric model ( Leenaarts et al. , 2009a ) extract
some relevant conclusions that we reproduce here. The standard deviation
of the central wavelength of the @xmath Å intensity profiles with
respect to the central wavelength of the average intensity is @xmath
less than in real solar observations. On one hand, this means that there
is a lack of macroscopic dynamics in the model, something to remember
when analyzing the polarization profiles. But they also point out that
the main reason of the difference is that the individual profiles are
already narrower than in the Sun, implying that the real chromosphere is
also more dynamic on scales not resolved by the simulation. Hence, the
added microturbulent velocity is again justified in our calculations.

Concerning the magnetic field, Fig. 6.5 illustrate a detail of the
general topology of the magnetic field lines and intensities.
Photospheric intergranular regions with high concentrations of magnetic
flux and different polarities are the source of magnetic loops crossing
the cromosphere. The magnetic intensities have typical values of a quiet
Sun region.

A good way of grouping much of this information is drawing the main
physical quantities (Fig. 6.7 and Figs. A.1 , A.2 in Appendix A.4 ) at
the approximated formation heights for each line. The heights at optical
depth unity are shown in Fig. 6.6 .

In the next section, we will need to clasify each model into three
simple thermodynamic categories: static FALC-like models, which are an
intermediate reference, having a hot chromosphere from the minimum of
temperature to the TR, but without extra heatings like shocks and
compressions and without extra cool or extended plateaus of minimum
temperature; hot models, typically more compressed and hotter than FALC;
and cool models, typically more expanded and cooler than the others.
They are very poor representations of the large variability found in the
dataset but have to be understood as extreme cases where some of the
features we describe in the following sections happen very frecuently.
Each of these categories can have a chromosphere significantly moving
upward, significantly moving downward or without a significant movement.

### 6.2 Synthetic polarization profiles in forward scattering.

In forward scattering geometry at disk center, the Hanle effect can
create polarization in presence of inclined magnetic fields (Section 2.4
). The symmetry breaking produced by such magnetic fields then gives us
access to the thermodynamic and magnetic state of the plasma through the
Hanle-induced Stokes Q and U signals and the effect that the anisotropic
illumination has in the atomic system. In the following, we analyze the
results of synthetizing the Stokes profiles in the 3D atmospheric models
under such circumstances.

#### 6.2.1 Individual profiles.

From each pixel/column of the model we obtained a Stokes vector
(I,Q,U,V) as a function of wavelength for each spectral line of the
atomic model. The variety of these spectral profiles is wide. A first
classification of the emergent Stokes profiles can be done according to
the inclinations of the magnetic fields producing them. The set of
Stokes vectors with significant linear polarization is caused mainly by
a predominantly horizontal magnetic field (say, with @xmath ). They
define what we will call Horizontal Field (HF) regions, which have
magnetic field lines with the Van-Vleck inclination at their frontiers
and are located between areas whose magnetic vectors are mainly
vertical. Some examples of the profiles in the HF regions are shown in
Fig. 6.8 . Here, in areas with enough magnetic field inclination in the
chromosphere, the pixels showing higher Doppler shifts have also larger
amplitudes and qualitatively reproduce some features of the
Doppler-induced modulations analyzed in previous chapters. The
complementary regions will be called Vertical Field (VF) regions because
the chromospheric magnetic field is there predominantly vertical. They
are characterized by Stokes vectors with small Q and U but large V.

In general, the profile shapes in the HF regions resemble the ones
analyzed in previous chapters (see Fig. 4.8 ). However, the shape of the
linear polarization profile that was frequently associated with the
@xmath Å line appears now interchanged with the shapes of the @xmath Å
and @xmath Å profiles in many pixels of the snapshot models. Namely, the
@xmath Q @xmath I signal resulting from FALC had always a valley ³ ³ 3
As in Chapter 4 , with valley we refer to the double-peak pattern with a
valley in the middle. A negative or positive single peak is simply a
peak . at line center and the @xmath Å and @xmath Å had always a single
peak. Now, the shapes are often interchanged, with the @xmath and @xmath
Å lines presenting a valley and the @xmath line presenting a peak (black
curves in Fig. 6.8 ).

Such changes are not intrinsically produced by the velocity because they
are also present when the calculation is repeated in static regime. As
we explain next, the variations appear when passing from limb
observation to disk-center observation, but are not always visible
because the Doppler shifts and the thermodynamic effects on the
anisotropy also play a role.

With Fig. 4.10 and Eq. ( 4.13 ), we can understand such intrinsic shape
changes related with the LOS. In that figure, the vertical variations of
the upper and lower level fractional alignments are fixed by the
anisotropy of the radiation field, which is intrinsic to the model and
does not depend on the LOS. Then:

1) When the inclination of the LOS varies, the main height of formation
also does, so it can be above or below the cross point where the curves
of the upper and lower level fractional alignments intersect (hereafter,
the alignments intersection).

2) The key point is that the emerging fractional polarization at each
wavelength is the result of a competition between upper and lower level
alignments, whose net contributions at different layers can be positive
or negative. A simplification of such competition is given by Eq. 4.13 ,
which only considers the layer at @xmath . Thus, at layers below the
alignments intersection, the net contribution of both levels alignment
to the emergent polarization has a certain sign. But above the cross
point, such contribution has opposite sign.

3) If most of the layers contributing to the emergent spectral
polarization in the formation region are well above (or well below) the
cross point, their contributions to the fractional polarization will
have the same sign everywhere. The net result will be a profile shape
monotonic from the continuum to the line center. Hence, a single peak
profile.

4) However, if the height of formation is near the alignments
intersection, the contributing layers situated just above this point and
the ones immediatly below will have opposite signs (they somewhat cancel
out). Since they form the spectral line core, the result is a depression
in the emergent linear fractional polarization at line center, hence, a
valley .

In conclusion, the shape (two peaks versus one peak) of these spectral
lines is modified by the relative position of the main region of
formation with respect to the height of the alignments intersection.
This fact could be used to evaluate the realism of the model atmospheres
or to compare among them in certain observational configurations of
reference, with the caution that the velocity gradients (or any other
modifier to the anisotropy) are able to add their own effects.

In addition to the linear polarization, we can study the Stokes V
profiles generated by the Zeeman effect of the longitudinal field
component (Fig. 6.9 ). Their variability is also rich. It is frequent to
find V profiles with two antisymmetric lobes whose signs depend on the
sign of the longitudinal magnetic field component. The asymmetries they
show are due to the coexistence of vertical velocity and magnetic field
gradients, as is well-known from previous works ( Sánchez Almeida et al.
, 1989 ; Landi Degl’Innocenti & Landolfi , 2004 ) . More complicated
patterns arise in the shape of Stokes V (red profiles in Fig. 6.9 ) in
the presence of velocity gradients (intensity shape very assymetric) or
heatings in the plasma (intensity in emission).

#### 6.2.2 Slit profiles.

Simulating the profiles along a spectrograph’s slit, we can take a quick
look to many spectral profiles at the same time. In Fig. 6.10 , we show
the synthetic map of the Ca ii @xmath intensity at line center, with
coloured lines representing two slits. The corresponding slit profiles
in the adjacent panels are identified with the coloured line at central
wavelength. We have analyzed their main features using the Solar
Inspector tool (see Sec. 3.4 ).

The intensity spectra of Fig. 6.10 show regions with emission in the
wings and in the core, not always coinciding both features in the same
profile. These intensity increments have different origins. The extra
emission in the wings are due to heating by photospheric compression
(sometimes associated with a photospheric bright point). In such a case,
the downward plasma is compressing the photospheric layers while most of
the low chromosphere and the temperature minimum region are almost at
rest. When a pixel is associated with a bright point there is an
additional increment of the magnetic field strength in lower atmospheric
regions that produce large Stokes V signals. That is the case at @xmath
and @xmath in the blue slit.

The extra emission in the line core (e.g., at @xmath ) is linked to
Doppler shifts produced by motions in the chromosphere. In expanding
atmospheres with motions located at the lower chromosphere, the blue
shifts produced in the spectral radiation make those layers more
transparent at line center wavelengths. Consequently, the excess of
photons in upper layers produce medium and faint extra emissions in the
intensity core. If medium/large velocities are compressing and shifting
the chromosphere downward the effect is similar, but additionally the
compression heats the plasma and can make the intensity to be completely
in emission.

In pixels where the temperature gradient along the chromosphere is high
enough, we also can appreciate reversal peaks at both sides of the line
core intensities in the strongest IR lines ( @xmath ). These features
are similar to the K2 and H2 reversals appearing in the solar H and K
lines ( Linsky & Avrett , 1970 ) forming at top chromospheric layers in
the Sun, but do not appear in solar observations of the @xmath and
@xmath Å lines. Their presence in our results can indicate an
unrealistic temperature stratification in the models (or a lack of
temporal and spatial resolution in the observations). Other option is
that they appear in our calculations because the microturbulent velocity
is constant with height. Effectively, a variable microturbulent velocity
at heights where the source function decouples from the Planck function
can mixes the contributions from different layers and suppresses the
reversals.

Some profiles with many of the mentioned features are shown in the blue
slit panel of Fig. 6.10 , at @xmath . It corresponds to a region over a
bright point. We see intensity emission in the core as well as in the
wings. Accordingly, the atmospheric stratification shows a photospheric
heating by compression (downward velocities below the temperature
minimum) with upward velocities in the lower chromosphere that produce
blue shifted radiation. A relatively intense vertical magnetic field at
the upper photosphere is producing a notable Stokes V signal. Let us
remind that the response function to the magnetic field in Stokes V is
larger in lower layers for the @xmath Å line. On the other hand, the
abrupt change of sign in Stokes Q and U at @xmath has nothing to do with
the previous reasons. It is indeed due to a weak magnetic field inclined
almost horizontally in the chomosphere, whose azimuth changes from one
pixel (showing @xmath for example) to the next one (showing opposite
sign). Thus, one Stokes vector can give clear information about the main
physical magnitudes both at the chromosphere and the photosphere.

The largest linear polarization signals in such “slits” of Fig. 6.10 are
mainly due to velocity gradients ocurring at places with a chromospheric
magnetic field that is significantly horizontal. For instance, in the
blue-slit panel, this happens at @xmath and @xmath . The difference
between the LP features at those points is that the latter corresponds
to a compressive atmosphere and the former to an expansive one, which is
less efficient increasing the anisotropy of the radiation field, but has
in this case a strong velocity. In these pixels, the magnetic field
strength is weak ( @xmath ) at the chromosphere but also at the upper
photosphere, which explains the absence of circular polarization.

### 6.3 Maps of radiative quantities.

In this section we describe in more detail the spatial variations of the
scattering polarization amplitudes taking into account different maps.
Let us remind that in the forward scattering geometry we are considering
in this chapter, the Stokes Q and U signals produced by an inclined
deterministic magnetic field allow us to estimate the azimuth @xmath of
the magnetic field. Setting the orientation of the LOS along the y axis
( @xmath ) in Eq. ( 2.50 ) we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Hanle effect in forward scattering produces linear polarization
along the projection of the magnetic field vector on the solar surface
or along the perpendicular direction. In our calculations, we have
chosen the positive reference for Q and U as indicated in Fig. 6.11 ,
positive Q lying along the x axis (horizontal) and positive U inclined
at @xmath degrees from the x axis. The directions of negative reference
are perpendicular to the positive ones. As polarimetry is differential
photometry, Stokes Q and U will be the difference between the number of
photons oscillating in the corresponding positive axis and the number of
them oscillating perpendicularly.

#### 6.3.1 Maps of polarization amplitudes.

Figure 6.12 illustrates the maps of maximum Stokes Q and U separately
for the @xmath Å, @xmath Å and @xmath Å lines, following Eqs. ( 6.3 ).
Line @xmath Å is not shown here because it is very similar to @xmath Å.
For making these maps, the choice of other wavelengths (typically the
line center) different from the ones corresponding to the maximum
amplitudes results in notable signal losses in areas with substantial
velocities.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.3a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.3b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In general, areas with significant linear polarization (LP) have always
a magnetic field notably inclined (HF regions). Out of those areas, the
LP amplitudes are always below @xmath of their maximum in the map.

In many pixels, the amplitudes have the same order of magnitude as those
calculated by Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) in semiempirical
models but, where we find velocities above @xmath in the chromosphere,
we see relative enhancements that reach one order of magnitude in the
amplitudes of the @xmath Å and @xmath Å lines ⁴ ⁴ 4 Here, we find an
association between larger velocities and larger velocity gradients. .
This is also true for the @xmath Å line only if the model is not too
cool. In sufficiently cool models, the @xmath Å line always presents
tiny linear polarization amplitudes (low-temperature patches in Fig. A.1
coincide with places of almost-zero polarization in both Q and U). The
largest LP amplitudes in this line appear in Stokes Q and U in the
absence of large velocities (Fig. 6.12 , patches over @xmath Mm) and are
twice larger than in the FALC model. Thus, the @xmath Å anisotropy is
affected by the velocity but seems to be dominated by temperature in the
current models.

The differences between the Q and U maps are understood with Fig. 6.11 .
When the magnetic field existing in a region experiences a change in its
azimuth, the polarization patches stand out in Q and attenuate in U or
viceversa, so giving us an idea of the likely approximate directions of
the magnetic field just by comparing regions. Patches with large Stokes
Q and low Stokes U indicate that the field is chiefly oriented along
some of the reference axes for Q (vertically or horizontally in the
maps). If the opposite holds, the field is then mainly oriented in
directions lying at @xmath degrees. If Stokes Q and U have similar
amplitudes, it means that the field is in between the previous four
directions.

The total linear and circular polarization are shown in Fig. 6.13 . In
that figure we see the spatial distribution of the maximum values (that
is, at the wavelength of the maximum in each pixel) of the total
fractional linear polarization (left panels) and fractional circular
polarization (right panels) for the same three spectral lines. The
places of negligible circular polarization are the ones where the
magnetic field is almost horizontal at the heights of formation of the
corresponding spectral line. The same region has larger linear
polarization in the left panels (HF region). The strongest linear
polarization patches in the @xmath Å line are where the temperature is
larger. However, the strongest linear polarization patches in the @xmath
Å line are where the vertical velocity is larger. The circular
polarization in the @xmath Å line is specially sensitive and clear
marking the vertical magnetic field concentrations. Its value at each
pixel is roughly twice the corresponding ones in the K line.

#### 6.3.2 The Hanle Polarity Inversion Lines.

In the maps of Stokes Q and U (Fig. 6.12 ) we observe something
interesting: the lines of zero linear polarization in Hanle forward
scattering. They are groove-like regions whose emergent Stokes Q and/or
Stokes U are virtually zero. They encode the topology of the magnetic
field pervading the solar model.

We identify three kinds of Hanle Polarity Inversion Lines (Hanle PILs)
produced by three different sources that can act together. Eqs. ( 2.48 )
evaluated in the frame of reference of Fig. 6.11 (and using @xmath for
the LOS ⁵ ⁵ 5 This is chosen for maintaining the consistency with the
close-to-limb observational configuration that will be mentioned later
on. ) give a mathematical support for the following analysis in forward
scattering:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.4b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with all the r.h.s. quantities evaluated at @xmath . Remind that these
expressions are valid for a line in the saturation regime of the Hanle
effect, which holds for the @xmath line in our dataset and very likely
in real quiet Sun regions. If the field is weak but still strong enough,
the other scattering signals of the triplet can also be saturated
(especially @xmath ). Then, their geometrical dependence will also be
described by Eqs. ( 6.4b ).

The first kind of Hanle PILs are due to the inclination of the magnetic
field. They are the same in Stokes Q and U (hence also in the total
linear polarization) because they are independent of the magnetic field
azimuth. They can be found delimitating regions in which the magnetic
field is mainly horizontal (i.e., bordering areas with null longitudinal
Zeeman polarization in Stokes V) or placed where the magnetic field is
mostly vertical. Namely, they are always where @xmath , as confirmed by
Eqs. ( 6.4 ). When at @xmath (magnetic field forming Van Vleck angles
with the vertical), they are the frontiers between HF and VF regions ⁶ ⁶
6 Remind, we already have defined the horizontal field (HF) and vertical
field (VF) regions in Section 6.2.1 . For this reason, we call them Van
Vleck HPILs. They connect pixels with the same inclination. As the
magnetic field emerges in bipolar structures at all scales, the Van
Vleck HPILs have to form a closed line surrounding one of the magnetic
poles.

The second kind will be called azimuthal HPIL. Namely, a Hanle PIL
appearing in a map of Stokes Q (or Stokes U) is of azimuthal type if it
does not appear in the same place for Stokes Q than for Stokes U.
Clearly, they depend on the azimuth of the magnetic field in the chosen
reference system (terms in @xmath in Eqs. ( 6.4 )). In pixels defining
an azimuthal HPIL in Stokes Q, the magnetic field vector is lying along
the positive or negative reference directions for Stokes U. And
viceversa, the pixels defining it in Stokes U have a magnetic field
vector lying along the positive or negative reference directions for
Stokes Q (see Fig. 6.11 ). Note that following an azimuthal HPIL, we
connect pixels with the same magnetic field azimuth ⁷ ⁷ 7 In our
definition, an azimuthal HPIL always begins and ends in an intersection
of azimuthal HPILs. Thus, after such intersection, the continuation of
the null line is always another azimuthal HPIL that can correspond to
another azimuth. . Note also that, when two or more of them intersect,
the cross point must have a magnetic field completely vertical.
Consequently, they have a radial nature, beginning in an area of
concentration of photospheric magnetic flux and ending in another one.

Finally, a third possible origin of a HPIL is a particular configuration
of the anisotropy of the radiation field persisting across a region in
the maps. They are thermodynamically induced HPILs and appear at the
same time in the Q and U maps for a spectral line, as the Van-Vleck type
ones. To grasp some feeling about the conditions in which they form,
note that the thermodynamical HPILs gives zero linear polarization
because the non-magnetic factor @xmath in Eqs. ( 6.4 ) is negligible.
Thus, we can pose the expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the simplest case, given by the line @xmath Å, it yields the
condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

How can such a condition be fulfilled?Let us suppose we have identified
a thermodynamic HPIL, which appears at the same time in Q and U maps for
the @xmath Å line. Thus, consider the case in which Eq. ( 6.6 ) is
satisfied in that region ⁸ ⁸ 8 In principle, the region associated to a
thermodynamical HPIL might not be a line in the map, but we still term
it HPIL for consistency. . It happens when the alignment @xmath tends to
zero, or when the overall population @xmath increases or when both
things happen at the same time. A larger level-2 population can be
achieved with an increment of temperature in the upper parts of the
chromosphere. Such increment strengthens the Ca ii H line intensity
emission (forming at the top), which illuminates lower chromospheric
layers from above. The extra illumination arriving at chromospheric
layers immediately below (where the @xmath Å line originates) increases
the population pumping from level 1 to level 4 which, in turn, produces
an extra population in level 2 by spontaneous emission (see Fig. 4.1 ).
Higher temperature thus means more population in higher energy levels
(levels 4 and 5) and more emission (at @xmath Å) produced by electrons
falling from level 4 to level 2. Furthermore, if at the same time the
formation region of the @xmath Å line is meaningfully cool, the
absorption of electrons from level 2 to level 4 will vanish, so
retaining the population in level 2 (absorption to level 5 can be also
neglected). If the absorption is very reduced from level 2 to level 4,
the @xmath Å line cannot be polarized because its polarization can only
be generated by dichroism (selective absorption).

On the other hand, to have an almost null alignment in level 2 we need a
formation region illuminated with a radiation field that cancels out the
component @xmath . Outside LTE, it can occur in very especific
situations, when the contribution of the mainly horizontal illumination
equals the contribution of the vertical one in the evaluation of the
anisotropy at those layers. We can show that it happens in pixels that
separate areas where the formation region is significatively cool from
areas having a formation region at relatively large temperatures. If,
furthermore, the HPIL is in a place without significant velocity
gradients, the low existing alignment will not be enhanced by dynamics.

The previous explanation for Eq. ( 6.6 ) seems to be correct in the
borders of a cool chromospheric plasma bubble appearing in the solar
models. There, the polarization in Q and U is zero. To examinate this
observation, we first identified the location of the thermodynamical
HPIL in the Stokes maps. Then, with 3D visualizations (see stereographic
view in Appendix A.5 ), we verified that the cool bubble has a singular
stratification at its enclosing verticals. In the interior of the
bubble, the chromospheric temperature is as cool as @xmath K and the
anisotropy is dominated by vertical radiation coming from above the
bubble and also from the photosphere. On the contrary, the plasma at the
external surroundings of the bubble is much hotter in the formation
region of the spectral line. Consequently, the horizontal radiation
dominates, changing the sign of the alignment with respect to the
interior of the bubble. In the middle of both regions (the bubble’s
frontier), a line where the net alignment is zero must exist because it
is positive at one side and negative at the other ⁹ ⁹ 9 There is also a
correspondence with the velocities. The bubble interior is typically
produced by an expansion cooling down the atmosphere (upward velocities)
and the bubble exterior is usually a contraction (downward velocities).
Thus, in the HPIL the velocity is almost zero or insignificant. . That
is a thermodynamical ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 As the anisotropy can be modified by the
velocity, we also will talk about dynamic HPILs. Hanle PIL and it has
been induced by spatial differences of temperature.

An example of cool bubble is found around @xmath Mm in the upper-right
panel of Fig. 6.7 . The corresponding HPILs appear in Stokes Q and U
maps of the @xmath and @xmath Å lines, surrounding the region. For
example, a part of the null line is connecting the points @xmath and
@xmath Mm. We conclude that a way of distinguishing a thermodynamic HPIL
from a Van-Vleck HPIL is searching the former around cool patches.

The HPILs could give us extra information. For example, the contrast and
width of a Hanle PIL gives information about the variation with height
of the magnetic field along the formation region of the considered
spectral line. The differences in width between HPILs pertaining to
spectral lines forming at different heights complement that information.
Besides that, a histogram of the mean size of the regions enclosed by
the HPILs could be a quick way of measuring the variability of some
magnetic field parameter (helicity, inclination, azimuth) in a map. It
could be used as a fine tester to a model atmosphere in order to compare
the polarization fingerprints it produces with the ones in
high-sensitivity solar observations. In Section 6.6 , we will explain
some criteria based on HPILs in order to infer the magnetic field
topology.

In principle, we see two objections to the observational potential of
the HPILs. First, the practical application of these ideas is very
difficult given the current polarimetric sensitivity. And second,
diffuse light due to internal reflections in the optical system
preceding the detector can play a role in masking the HPILs because it
diminishes the contrast between regions with and without polarization.

We conclude that the Hanle PILs in the Ca ii IR triplet are true
fingerprints encoding the orientation of the chromospheric magnetic
field. Perhaps more than that, the HPILs could offer new diagnostic aids
to capture very specific circumstances of the thermodynamical state in
the atmosphere. Overcoming the technical impediments, we see possible to
deduce the three-dimensional topology of the chromospheric magnetic
field from 2D maps of the Stokes vector (Sec. 6.6.2 ). Some extra
calculations (Sec. 6.5.2 ) suggest that these structures with null
polarization could likely be distinguished for the first time with the
coming instrumental solar facilities (Zimpol 3, EST, Solar-C). The HPIL
concept leads to an interesting question: can we get a precise magnetic
field mapping using the spatial locations where the polarization
amplitudes cancel?

#### 6.3.3 Maps of the Polarization Degree.

The degree of linear and circular polarization of the Stokes signals
measure the total amount of linearly and circularly polarized light for
a whole spectral line. They are calculated by integrating the
contributions of photons in a certain spectral window in order to
increase the signal to noise ratio. The expressions we have used to
calculate them are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.7b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the wavelengths @xmath and @xmath delimit the width of the filter
considered in the integration.

We have obtained these quantities for our dataset in three different
square filters placed at line center: the filter A ( @xmath Å), which
reaches wavelengths in the far wings of the line; the filter B ( @xmath
Å), which selects the core and near wing of the line; and the filter C (
@xmath Å), which only captures the core of the line, where the linear
polarization is more significant. The results for the @xmath Å line are
shown in Fig. 6.14 . In Fig A.3 we show similar results for the K line.

The filter C is the most suitable because it allows a clearer contrast
between regions with and without polarization. Filters A and B produce
lower fractional polarization signals because the wings intensity
contribution in the denominator of Eqs. ( 6.7 ) is much larger than the
integrated polarization at those wavelengths. We have to reach a trade
off between signal gains by integration and signal losses by the
excesive number of non-polarized photons at the wings. Note also that in
general the resulting numbers for the polarization are not
representative of the real maximum polarization amplitude. This is
because the Eqs. ( 6.7 ) are not linear in the Stokes parameters. Thus,
the advantage of calculating the polarization degree maps is mainly to
get a better signal to noise ratio, so showing structures with more
contrast and definition than the fractional polarization at one
wavelength.

#### 6.3.4 Maps of polarization contrasts.

In this section we show that the identification of drivers and
situations changing the linear polarization signs may allow us to infer
extra information about the solar atmosphere. It also helps us to deduce
correctly the direction of the magnetic field, for what it is previously
necessary a discrimination of all the drivers affecting the polarization
sign (polarity) at each pixel. To that end, the maps of polarization
contrasts (Fig. 6.15 ) are useful to determine the main regions where
the different drivers have to be disentangled as well as the
polarization sign in those regions. We remind that the polarization
contrast is basically a peak-to-peak amplitude with an artificial sign
indicating whether the largest peak is positive or negative ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 In
this chapter we apply that definition to each pixel. In Chapter 5 (see
Figure 5.1 ) we applied the same, but with a slight difference. There we
multiply by @xmath the @xmath Å signal because most part of the time
sequence its maximum elongation was negative, but now we multiply it by
the corresponding maximum sign in each pixel independently, not by the
predominant sign in the map. The important point is that the
polarization signal can change its sign in certain situations that we
always specify in the text. .

The first thing we note in Fig. 6.15 is that the significative patches
are highlighted in the HF region (to identify the HF ¹² ¹² 12 Reminder:
the horizontal field (HF) and vertical field (VF) regions have been
defined in Section 6.2.1 region see lower left panel in Fig. A.8 for
instance). This is because the polarization contrast, being a
peak-to-peak measure, has more dynamic range than the absolute value of
the polarization. Thus, for a similar color palette, the polarization
contrast is more efficient (than the maximum polarization) highlighting
the larger linear polarization signals, which are always in the HF
region.

##### Reference signals in the saturation regime

To understand and “diagnose” the changes of sign in the polarization
patches of Fig. 6.15 , we will need to define a reference model
atmosphere that: (a) is static, (b) has a hot FALC-type chromosphere,
(c) has no extra heatings due to shocks or compressions, and (d) has a
horizontal magnetic field in the saturation regime of the Hanle effect
that lies parallel to the reference direction for @xmath and to the x
axis ( @xmath ). The LOS is set along the y axis ( @xmath ). This
configuration of reference gives the maximum LP amplitude for a
horizontal magnetic field both in forward scattering and in a
close-to-limb observation. The calculations done in such model will
hereafter define a reference for the signs of the LP in the IR triplet
lines.

From Eqs. ( 2.47 ), it follows that both the @xmath and @xmath
polarization amplitudes resulting from such a reference configuration
are a half of the maximum possible amplitude (given by the non-magnetic
case in a limb observation):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.8a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.8b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In our forward-scattering case in which the polarization amplitude is
roughly given by Eq. ( 6.4a ), note that the reference sign of a Stokes
Q signal resulting from the above configuration is the sign of the
thermodynamical factor @xmath of Eqs. ( 6.4 ). That is still true in any
atmospheric model with @xmath and with a @xmath corresponding to the HF
region.

##### Polarization signs as physical references

Now, we explain Fig. 6.15 and some differences of sign found between the
spectral lines analyzed. First, the linear polarization (LP) patches in
the maps of @xmath (and @xmath ) have opposite sign to the corresponding
ones for @xmath , which is a typical behavior in the IR triplet when the
calculations are done for disk center. Such signs difference holds in
almost all pixels. It suggests that the difference of signs between the
@xmath and @xmath Å lines is a essential and robust feature primarily
set by the atomic coefficients contained in @xmath , but not
significantly influenced by anisotropy variations.

On the contrary, the difference of signs between the @xmath Å line and
the K line does vary between polarization patches. Sometimes, both lines
share the same sign, sometimes not. In standard FALC-like models they
should show the same sign, however. The reason of the change is not the
magnetic field direction because it varies slowly between the
medium-high ( @xmath Å line main formation region) and the top
chromosphere (K line main formation region). We associate such change
with strong spatial differences of temperature between both heights. It
happens, for instance, in the cool chromospheric bubble around @xmath Mm
(see Sec. 6.3.2 ), which was formed after the ascension of a shock. In
that area, the LP maps show a patch with different signs in the @xmath Å
line and the K line. Thus, we identify the LP sign as a simple marker of
strong chromospheric temperature gradients. Concretely, patches changing
their sign between the @xmath Å map and K line map indicate a large
difference in temperature between the very top and lower parts of the
chromosphere. This fact allows to estimate that the cool bubble reaches
a height located between the medium-height and the top chromosphere.

With respect to the reference case, there are four basic drivers that
alter the polarization sign of these IR triplet lines: the inclination
of the LOS; some very specific circumstances for the temperature
stratification (Sec. 6.3.2 ); the magnetic field; and the velocity
gradients (Chapters 4 and 5 ).

Concerning the line of sight , when passing from the solar limb to the
disk center, the signs of the @xmath Å and @xmath Å lines usually change
because all the main contributing formation heights shift downward,
below the level alignments intersection (recall Section 6.2.1 and Fig.
4.10 ) and it modifies the sign of @xmath . Thus, in our reference
FALC-like model described previously, the Stokes Q sign for these lines
would be @xmath at @xmath and @xmath at @xmath . The @xmath Å line
already had low formation heights that do not change their net
contribution to the polarization because they shift yet below the
alignments intersection (towards even lower layers) when passing to
forward scattering. Hence, this line does not change its polarization
sign, which would be @xmath for both LOS in the reference FALC-like
model.

Concerning the temperature stratification , the results of Manso Sainz &
Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) in FALC models and forward scattering suggest
that the IR triplet lines change their polarization signs between hot
and cool models with the same magnetic field orientation. As already
commented, that is also valid in our results. For example, the pixel at
@xmath Mm and the one at @xmath Mm (see Stokes U in Fig. 6.15 ) have
opposite linear polarization signs in the triplet lines because one
pixel has a FALC-like chromosphere and other has an almost completely
cool chromosphere. They have the same magnetic field orientation and
negligible velocity. A similar situation occurs in the surrounding
pixels, resulting in two patches with opposite polarization contrasts.
Another example is the patch at @xmath Mm (hot) compared with the one at
@xmath Mm (cool). Such behavior is less visible for the @xmath Å line
because its polarization tends to vanish in very cool chromospheres.

The reference model in a forward scattering geometry yields emergent
Stokes-Q signals whose reference signs are @xmath for the @xmath Å
lines. Then, under similar circumstances but in cool-chromosphere
models, the result is @xmath . An example of such reference case is the
blue patch at @xmath in Stokes Q @xmath (Fig. 6.15 ). Effectively, this
patch is an almost static FALC-like region with an almost homogeneous
chromospheric magnetic field that is parallel to the x axis (note the
absence of Stokes U).

The explanation for the sign reversal is the dependence on the radiation
field anisotropy on temperature. In a cool chromospheric model, the
vertical radiation is more intense than the horizontal (positive net
contribution to the anisotropy). In a hot model, with or without a
temperature shock or heating in the formation region, the contrary
holds: the net contribution to the anisotropy is negative. The @xmath Å
line is more sensitive to these changes because it forms lower (nearer
the minimum of temperature and the alignments intersection), and when
the plasma is cool there, its emission vanishes. The other lines of the
model are mainly created nearer the transition region, for what they
necessitate a cool stratification along the whole chromosphere (cool
bubbles) to reverse their polarization signs.

Concerning the magnetic field , the azimuthal dependence in Eq. ( 6.4 )
allows us to deduce the expected polarization signs for other field
azimuths without calculations, just following Figure 6.11 . To do it, we
must note that: for a hot FALC type model in the HF region, the signs of
the emerging Stokes Q and U in the @xmath line for any magnetic field
azimuth are always opposite to the signs of the corresponding Stokes Q
and U axes that are nearest to the projection of the magnetic field
vector in Figure 6.11 .

For instance, if the reference FALC-like model had the magnetic field
exactly along the +U axis, the signs for Stokes U would be @xmath with
zero Stokes Q. If it were along -Q, Stokes Q would be @xmath with zero
Stokes U. If such hot model would have the transverse component of the
magnetic field in between the @xmath Q and the @xmath U axes, Stokes Q
would be @xmath and Stokes U @xmath . Besides this, the so-given LP
signs can furthermore be modified by changes in temperature and
velocity.

This is helpful. For example, consider the positive U patch around
@xmath Mm in the LP contrast map of the @xmath line (Fig. 6.15 ) and
suppose we only know it is a hot (FALC-like) model in the HF region (as
it is). We then see that the patch has @xmath and @xmath . Following the
references, that configuration is only compatible with a magnetic field
along the @xmath U axis, which is correct. If the chromosphere model
were cool, @xmath should be along @xmath U. In addition to that, we
recall that the LP signs in the K line core and in @xmath can help to
establish the presence of “cool bubbles” and large temperature gradients
after a shock wave that has crossed the chromosphere. All together gives
a “zero-order” diagnosis based on LP references.

Concerning the vertical velocity , we need to find out how it modifies
the signs with respect to the static case. On one hand, we know that the
velocity gradients can efficiently modulate the radiation field
anisotropy (Chapter 5 ). In the case of the Ca ii IR lines, it directly
enhances the lower level aligment at heights just above @xmath (see Fig.
4.10 ). On the other hand, we have evidences suggesting that the
profiles with a valley at line center are prone to change their signs
with a velocity gradient, while the single-peak ones do not (e.g., see
Figure 4.8 ). These results suggest that a velocity gradient in the
formation region of a spectral line can alter the balance between the
upper and the lower level alignments that control the fractional
scattering polarization. Thus, depending on the sign of the alignment at
those layers (and on the intrinsic atomic polarizability coefficients,
which have a certain sign), the line will have amplitudes enhanced or
diminished with respect to the static results. The larger sentivity to
this effect in valley-like profiles is because their formation regions
are very near the alignments intersection. We have investigated this
behavior in each model.

For example, in the calculations done in dynamic non-magnetic 1D models
at @xmath (Chapter 5 ), the @xmath Å line was the only one that changed
its linear polarization sign in expanding or compressing atmospheres ¹³
¹³ 13 We know its sign was positive only in totally expanded models
(just before starting the compression) or well in static FALC-like
models . We concluded that such changes in sign were possible due to a
strong dynamics and to the proximity of the @xmath formation heights to
the level alignments intersection, which furthermore made its LP
profiles to vary their essential shape. In the current 3D models, the
synthetic LP profiles of the @xmath Å line in @xmath very rarely exhibit
a valle-shape and we do not see clear indicatives of significant
Doppler-induced amplifications in this line. This can be understood with
the lower degree of dynamism (see Fig. 4.8 ) and a lower height of
formation (see Sec. 6.2.1 ). On the other hand, the other two lines of
the triplet can now exhibit a valley shape, and we wonder whether they
can also reverse their polarization sign in presence of a velocity
gradient as the @xmath line did at @xmath . However, it seems that the
proximity of the point of alignments intersection to the main heights of
formation is not enough to produce a polarity reversal. In principle,
the effect of a velocity gradient in these lines in the 3D models is
only a modest variation of the amplitudes of Stokes Q and U with respect
to the static case. It makes the resulting azimuth estimated from Eq. (
6.2 ) to vary with respect to the real azimuth.

This last conclusion is relevant because it means that Eq. ( 6.2 ) can
fail in the inference of the chromospheric magnetic field azimuth in
situations where the vertical velocities are significant (dynamic
fibrils, mottles and spicules).

General rules as the ones above and the specific situations breaking
them are of interest for developing chromospheric diagnosis methods
based on polarization. Thus, starting from a reference situation ¹⁴ ¹⁴
14 Reminder: hot FALC-like, with @xmath along the +Q axis and @xmath in
the HF region: @xmath , we can try to simplify the variation of the LP
signals referring them to some simple qualitative changes in the
reference models. Thus, in models with a weak dynamic ( @xmath ), the
basic behavior of the LP signals in the IR triplet can be summarized
with Table 6.1 .

### 6.4 Effect of the vertical velocities.

We have computed the maps of polarization contrast, the maps of
polarization amplitudes, histograms of total linear polarization and the
spectral profiles again, but setting the velocity to zero in all points.
With this information we analyze the influence of the dynamic on the
linear polarization by paying attention to the amplitudes, to the sign
of the maximum amplitude in each pixel and to the shape of the profiles.

Statistically, the effect of the velocity in the maximum amplitudes of
the LP resulting from the 3D snapshot is small in comparison with the
effect of the magnetic field and the temperature gradients. The maximum
LP polarization value of the distribution of velocities (histograms in
Fig. 6.17 ) changes from @xmath to @xmath when adding the velocity,
which is a typical amplification in the light of the results from
previous chapters. It indicates that the modulation produced by dynamics
in the profiles has a certain influence. However, the histograms in Fig.
6.17 show that such effects are measurable in a low number of pixels,
whose LP values “migrate” from lower to upper parts in the histogram
(orange excesses in the distribution tails of Fig. 6.17 ). One reason
for this relatively small number of LP signals with strong
amplifications is that the velocity gradients in the formation region
are not as large as in the time-dependent models. Indeed, the dynamic is
comparatively much more reduced in the MHD models (Fig. 6.4 ). It has to
be taken into account that we should expect stronger dynamic effects in
the Sun ( Leenaarts et al. , 2009a ) . On the other hand, we have to
consider that a small filling factor of enhanced signals does not
necessarily mean a lack of significative effect along time.

In a non-negligible number of pixels, the “static” polarization
amplitudes are already larger in the 3D dataset than in static
semiempirical models . The results in FALC models ( Manso Sainz &
Trujillo Bueno , 2010 ) establish maximum LP amplitudes around @xmath in
forward scattering, but we find pixels with LP values reaching @xmath ,
an order of magnitude larger. In fact, most pixels in the HF region have
amplitudes above the FALC values (Fig. 6.17 , right panel). These
amplitudes are a consequence of the larger chromospheric temperature
gradients with respect to the FALC model. Since the linear polarization
is a response to the anisotropy of the radiation field, a local
variation of the limb darkening law produced by the temperature can
effectively explain the new amplitudes seen in these static cases.

Irrespective of the amplification factors, the effect of the velocity
gradients in forward scattering are always a modulation of the LP
signals with respect to the static case. As has been anticipated, the
forward scattering geometry gives decreased amplitudes in many pixels
due to the proximity of the formation region to the height where the
upper and lower level fractional alignments become equal (Sec. 6.2.1 ).
This makes the @xmath and @xmath Å lines alter their responses with
respect to the @xmath -degree scattering case, behaving similarly to the
@xmath Å line at limb observations. More explicitly, when the velocity
gradient starts to increase, the LP signals become systematically more
asymmetric with a decreasing amplitude and tending to become
antisymmetric . If the velocity continues increasing, the signals are
enhanced in amplitude but with a sign that is typically the opposite of
that of the static case (reversal amplification: see Fig. 4.8 , second
right panel from the top). Therefore, if the velocity gradient is not
very strong, the amplitude of the scattering signals can be smaller than
in the static case. This behavior makes them more unpredictable because
such signals are not limited to only one sign.

We already know (see Section 6.3.4 ) that a good tracer of such process
is the polarization contrast (difference between the maximum and minimum
value of the signals). The reason is that the contrast is always
modified (generally enhanced) because the velocity gradients generate
asymmetries whose total peak-to-peak excursions are usually larger than
the static amplitudes. The artificial sign we add to the contrast
corresponds to the maximum peak of the signal and help us to identify if
a reversal amplification is being produced. Thus, comparing the static
and dynamic maps of polarization contrasts we have seen that the signs
of the maximum amplitudes at each pixel are never reversed. The only
change is an increment of the contrasts that strengthens the patches in
Fig. 6.15 . That is why we conclude that the velocity gradients in the
analyzed MHD models are not strong enough for putting the LP profiles in
their amplification phase ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Interestingly, a bit more of dynamic
will do it because the contrasts are in many cases almost twice the
static amplitudes, indicating that if the velocities were a bit
increased, the LP amplitudes would start to be effectively enhanced with
respect to the static case. . This calculation confirm that the
polarities of Stokes Q and U are not altered by the velocity (preliminar
conclusion of Sec. 6.3.4 ). The stability of the polarities also allows
to extend the validity of the reference signs in Table 6.1 to the
dynamic case, which is correct for the present models but will not be
true in situations with stronger dynamics.

A visual summary of the situation can be given following Fig. 6.18 . The
labels A, B, C, D, E and F identify the panels corresponding to some
“static” pixels. The panel immediatly below each static case corresponds
to the respective dynamic case for the same pixels. Only the F panels
show the behavior of the LP in @xmath , the other panel are for @xmath
(the conclusions for this line are extended to the @xmath Å line). The
figure illustrates the following:

  A  

    In some pixels, the @xmath Å line behaves like in previous studies:
    it increases monotonically with the velocity (static and dynamic A
    panels). This would be the case of the pixels corresponding to the
    orange excesses in the histograms.

  B  

    But a much more frequent behavior appears for these models:
    double-peaked profiles become asymmetric and decrease in amplitude
    in presence of velocity gradients (static and dynamic B panels).

  C  

    Both behaviors in panel pairs A and B are part of a same process
    that is clearly observed between adjacent pixels like being
    different timesteps of a similar temporal evolution (dynamic C
    panels).

  D  

    The larger the amplitudes in absence of velocity, the larger the
    velocity gradient necessary to reverse the profile polarity. Thus,
    in our MHD models, the dynamic is usually insufficient to reverse
    the sign of the relatively large signals created by the temperature
    gradients. It results in the predominance of asymmetries and
    variable amplitudes (static and dynamic D panels).

  C, D, E  

    In comparison with a limb observation, the larger velocity component
    along the LOS when looking at disk center can produce larger
    spectral shifts and broadened signals (dynamic panels in C, D and
    E).

  E  

    Furthermore, the rich variability of the atmosphere produce
    extraordinary situations that can limit the amplification of the LP
    signals in the presence of significant velocity gradients. For
    instance, when there is a dense cloud or bubble with an homogeneous
    motion over a region with large gradient, its opacity softens the
    impact of the Doppler-induced anisotropy on the emergent
    polarization. So, in such accumulations of material (more usual
    above stronger magnetic fields) we see broader spectral signals but
    not necessarily large amplifications (static and dynamic E panels).

  F  

    The @xmath Å line follows a similar behavior. It also has larger
    amplitudes than in the FALC model due to the temperature, but it is
    poorly amplificated by the low- chromosphere velocities (static and
    dynamic F panels).

A remarkable difference in the @xmath Å line with respect to the other
spectral lines in the IR triplet is the longer distribution tail in the
histograms of Fig. 6.19 . The maximum amplitudes are produced by
temperature, not velocity, and reach @xmath , which is not very
different to the @xmath obtained in FALC and forward scattering. The
statistical effect of the velocity in the LP histograms for the @xmath Å
line is an increment in the number of pixels with lower amplitudes.

We conclude that, due to the small spatial filling factors, the effects
of dynamics on the linear polarization at the solar disk center can only
be detected in solar observations with large resolution and sensitivity.
If the Sun were similar to our models, the temperature would be
predominantly influencing the LP profiles and the action of the velocity
would be practically anecdotic at disk center. The observational
difficulty is to capture the temporal evolution of those small LP
patches in the solar surface, specially when having place during
repetitive, short and explosive propagations of shock waves along the
chromosphere. Even theoretically, with only one snapshot of the
atmoshere we loose the real relevance of such events. In the case the
observational issues were solved, the velocity can be crucial to explain
the chromospheric observations in these spectral lines.

### 6.5 Synthetic observations.

The solar chromosphere has traditionally been observed in @xmath and the
Ca ii H & K lines. But their use for diagnostic suffers from significant
drawbacks. The Ca ii H & K lines have wavelengths in the violet part of
the spectrum, where we have a dropoff in the Planck function (decreased
photon flux) and a low filter telescope transmission. Furthermore, there
is an additional degradation of the chromospheric signal in the Ca ii K
filtergrams due to reduced atmospheric transparency, decreased detector
efficiency and the worsening of the atmospheric seeing at shorter
wavelengths. Although the chromospheric contribution of the Ca ii H & K
is limited to a narrow core of less than @xmath nm wide, all the imaging
has been performed with much broader filters, having FWHM passbands in
the range of @xmath to @xmath nm (0.1 nm FWHM being relatively broad).
Such broad filters lead to significant low-chromospheric line wing
contributions, which makes the detection of small chromospheric
structures difficult, and long exposure times worsing the spatial
resolution (e.g. Reardon et al. , 2009 ; Vecchio et al. , 2007 ) .

Because of the previous issues, the on-disk images obtained in the H and
K lines with relatively broad filters are always significantly different
from the appearance of the chromosphere in the other prominent
chromospheric line, @xmath . Observations in this line, even with broad
filters show a highly structured environment including fibrils, mottles,
and filaments across the full solar disk. This is consistent with the
growing dominance of the magnetic field and the velocity at increasing
heights in the atmosphere. Most of the images taken in the Ca ii H & K
lines, instead, do not typically show such structuring by the magnetic
field (see, however, Pietarila et al. , 2009 ) . In addition to the
observational issues, the Ca ii H & K lines are subject to partial
redistribution (PRD) effects, which complicates their proper modeling.
The linear polarization they show can be correctly approximated only at
line center but the wings polarization is purely due to PRD effects,
specially at the limb. Because of that, in this section and in the
Appendix we have found useful to show some calculations for the K line
at line center to offer a comparisson with the linear polarization
amplitudes and the spatial structure of the triplet lines.

Like @xmath , the Ca ii IR triplet lines are subordinated, but whereas
the lower level of @xmath is coupled to the hydrogen ground level via
the very strong @xmath radiative transition, the lower level of the
triplet lines is metastable and only coupled to the Ca ii ground level
via electronic collisions. This makes the interpretation of the IR lines
easier than that of @xmath (e.g., compare the radiative transfer
investigations of Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno , 2010 ; Ŝtêpán &
Trujillo Bueno , 2010 ) .

Observationally, the use of the IR lines provides several significant
advantages with respect to H and K, including a typically better
response of digital detectors in the red, a reduction in the seeing, and
a higher photon flux. Indeed, in recent years, the use of the IR triplet
for solar studies has increased notably ( Socas-Navarro et al. , 2006 ;
Judge , 2006 ; Uitenbroek , 2006 ) , although studies combining spatial
and spectral high resolution over extended fields of view (FOV) are
still scarce. Observations can be done with narrow filters and short
exposure times, yielding a clean and high-resolution view of the
chromosphere. Furthermore, in the Ca ii IR triplet lines, nonequilibrium
and PRD effects are much less important for its formation ( Uitenbroek ,
1989 ) . This makes them an excellent choice for diagnostic, both from
the observational and modeling points of view, although at a lower
diffraction-limited resolution than the Ca ii H & K and the @xmath
lines. In the triplet, the @xmath Å line is the less used in polarimetry
because it exhibits a lower scattering polarization signal and that is
the reason why the @xmath and @xmath Å are usually preferred.

The studies done by Cauzzi et al. ( 2008 ) and Vecchio et al. ( 2009 )
in observations of the Ca ii 8542 Å line established the suitability of
imaging spectroscopy in this line for high-resolution investigations of
chromospheric diagnostics. A central finding of the former work was the
nearly ubiquitous occurrence of fibrilar structures. They originate from
even the smallest magnetic elements, and appear to fill large portions
of the chromospheric volume, even in “quiet” areas. Their presence
indicates that even at the chromospheric heights sampled by the Ca ii
8542 line, the atmosphere is already highly structured by the pervasive
magnetic fields, entirely consistent with the picture provided by @xmath
images. Thus, the picture provided by Ca ii 8542 reflects the true and
essential nature of the solar chromosphere.

Despite the goodnesses of the 8542 Å line in intensity, the forward
scattering observation of its predicted scattering polarization ( Manso
Sainz & Trujillo Bueno , 2010 ) is still challenging in the quiet Sun.
To obtain a good sensitivity with low integration time, instrumentation
pertaining to a new generation is needed. In this section, we do the
exercise of degrading the polarization maps as if we were observing with
the capabilities of the satellite Solar-C for simulating a real future
observation. We also explain some problems and possible solutions faced
when measuring polarimetric quantities that are non-linear combinations
of the Stokes vector components.

#### 6.5.1 The space telescope Solar- C.

The Solar-C mission is a project leaded by JAXA to study magnetic energy
transport and dissipation governing the dynamic solar atmosphere. The
mission consists of the launching of a satellite (Solar-C) with three
advanced telescopes that will achieve for the first time high spatial
resolution, high throughput, high cadence spectroscopic and polarimetric
observations seamlessly covering the entire atmosphere (photosphere,
chromosphere, transition region and corona).

Solar-C has the Solar Ultra-violet Visible and IR Telescope (SUVIT), a
diffraction-limited telescope with a @xmath m aperture in diameter. It
has potential to resolve structures with @xmath arcsec ( @xmath
arcsecs/pixel in the focal plane) for the first time in history of space
observations. Thus, it can reveal dynamical behaviors of the solar
atmosphere through elementary magnetic structures and key physics
responsible for energy transfer and dissipation, with emphasis on
chromospheric magnetic fields and dynamic. SUVIT covers a wide
wavelength region from the UV ( @xmath Å) to the near infrared ( @xmath
), in which there are several of the best spectral lines suitable for
diagnosing dynamics and magnetic fields in the chromosphere as well as
the photosphere. He i @xmath Å and Ca ii @xmath Å spectral lines are
prioritized as the best lines for diagnosing chromospheric magnetic
fields.

The instrumentation attached to SUVIT will allow to perform precise
spectroscopic and polarimetric measurements (to determine temperatures,
velocities, and magnetic fields) as well as imaging of intensities and
magnetic fields with high temporal cadence (to capture dynamical
behaviors). A narrow-band imager is planned for polarimetric and Doppler
measurements at limited number of positions in spectral lines, while a
broad-band imager will provide high spatial monochromatic images of the
chromosphere and the photosphere. The spectropolarimeter will reach a
sensitivity of @xmath in exposures times of @xmath s with spatial
sampling of @xmath per pixel, allowing the detection of the forward
scattering Hanle effect in chromospheric structures (see Fig. 6.20 ). It
supplies a spectral sampling of @xmath mÅ at @xmath Å ( @xmath ).
Following the calculations carried out in this thesis, Solar-C should
allow the first clear detection of amplifications in the linear
polarization signals produced by inclined magnetic fields and
chromospheric shock waves in the Ca ii transitions. As a consequence, we
may have a suitable observable for capturing the dynamics and the energy
transfer between the photosphere and the corona mapped by the variations
of the Hanle signals.

#### 6.5.2 Degraded and restored maps of Polarization Amplitudes.

We have applied a procedure of degradation and posterior reconstruccion
to the linear polarization signals for imitating a real Solar-C
observation (Figure 6.21 ). We followed the next steps:

-   First, we calculated the total linear polarization applying Eq. (
    6.9 ) to the Stokes vector components resulting from our RT
    calculations, whose original spatial resolution is @xmath . We show
    the results for the @xmath Å and the K lines in the left panels of
    Figure 6.21 .

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   Second, we simulate the observation with a telescope, so that we
    degraded the quality of the signals by convolving the original maps
    of I, Q and U with a spatial PSF with @xmath , a spectral PSF with
    @xmath , making a binning of 2 square pixels to emulate a detector
    pixel of @xmath (slightly lower than the pixel size in Solar-C in
    spectropolarimetric mode) and adding a gaussian noise that gives a
    sensitivity of @xmath for an observation with 9 seconds of exposure
    time (worst case). Such operations were done in that order to
    imitate the real physical degradation at the satellite. With the
    resulting maps we calculated again the quantity of Eq. ( 6.9 ). The
    results are shown in the middle column panels in Figure 6.21 .

-   Finally, we integrated photons to improve the signal to noise ratio
    as if we were treating the observed signals. Thus, we averaged each
    2 pixels along the x axis ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 We did not integrate along y
    because the aim is to integrate the minimum possible for avoiding
    loss of resolution. We preferred to integrate just 2 pixels along a
    row instead 2 pixels square. , doing it separately for the degraded
    I, Q and U maps. We preserved the pixel size avoiding binning in the
    operation (each pair of pixels integrated together share a common
    pixel with the next pair along the row). With the resulting maps we
    calculated again the quantity Eq. ( 6.9 ). The results are in the
    right column panels of Figure 6.21 .

The first thing we note in the resulting maps are the dark red patches
in the K line “observations” (Figure 6.21 ). They are a product of the
low number of photons that we have in the emerging core intensities of
this spectral line, especially in cool chromospheric areas. Such low
levels of intensity in patches of cool temperatures are able to produce
spurious signals much larger than the ones observed in the true maps.
The pixel integration with the aim of recovering the signals is not
enough to reverse that situation to acceptable levels, even when using
larger pixel sizes in the integration (pixels as large as @xmath were
considered) . In any case, high resolution is required to resolve the
fine chromospheric structure. As a positive counterpart, we think we
could use these noise patches in the K line as indicatives of a cool
chromosphere. The @xmath Å line is also susceptible of the noise in
those areas but we easily recover the Hanle signals after the simple
integration. However, note that the higher signal levels in strong
polarization patches (red areas in the bottom left panel) are never
recovered. We see here why the Doppler-induced amplifications studied in
previous chapters are so elusive in the solar observations available in
Ca ii . Basically, the small characteristic size and the apparently
elongated shape of these highly dynamic structures avoid a coherent
spatial detection. The characteristics times associated with the passage
of the shock waves through the region of formation are also too short to
be visible in wide areas during a single snapshot. Probably, these
signatures are actually everywhere, but impossible to observe with our
current instrumentation given the small spatial and temporal filling
factor. In the @xmath Å maps, we are able to restore all the LP patches
in the HF region with their approximated amplitudes in most cases. We
also identify the Van-Vleck HPILs in the half of the map where the
horizontal field strength is larger.

#### 6.5.3 Degraded and restored maps of the Linear Polarization Degree.

We repeated the same steps than in Section 6.5.2 , but applying Ecs. (
6.7 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- --
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

with the filter C ( @xmath Å) used in Sec. 6.3.3 to get the maps of
total linear and total circular polarization degree. We have used the
same instrumental parameters than in the previous section. Since these
maps are the result of integrating along wavelength, their signal to
noise ratio is much better and the structures and HPILs appear clearly.
In all the LP degree maps, the largest amplitudes are in places with
larger field strengths and insignificant velocities, and not in areas
with the largest velocities as it happens in the maps of the maximum LP
of Fig. 6.21 . Concerning Stokes V, the spatial, spectral and noise
degradation barely affects the results, making it unnecessary to sum
pixels.

#### 6.5.4 The practical disadvantages of the typical
spectropolarimetric quantities.

Disregarding the horizontal inhomogeneities, the only thing breaking the
symmetry in a disk center observation is an inclined magnetic field. In
that situation, Stokes Q and U can reach similar amplitudes irrespective
of the reference for @xmath . Thus, to measure the total linear
polarization (LP) with a single quantity, a geometrical average of Q and
U is usually applied. Furthermore, it is common to use the fractional
polarization, referenced to the intensity, which gives a measure that is
relative to the total number of photons. Since such mathematical
operations are not linear, the effect of the instrumental noise in real
observations can be artificially amplified when calculating the total
polarization. Then, is any of the following ways of computing the total
linear polarization preferred in terms of robustness to noise?

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.11b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.11c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

If we are interested in precisely defining the weakly polarized
structures (as the Hanle polarity inversion lines defined in Sec. 6.3.2
), then we need a lot of photons and consequently a quantity that adds
the contributions from all the wavelengths, like the linear polarization
degree (LPD). But the non-linearity of the LPD makes the way we add the
different wavelength contributions important. None of the Eqs. ( 6.11 )
are valid to do it because of two reasons. First, the physical meaning
of the total linear polarization has to be preserved, in such a way that
the sum operations have to be applied to photons in the same
polarization state, and not to combinations of them or to derived
magnitudes. For instance, the sum of fractional contibutions in Eq.(
6.11a ) has not the same physical meaning that the concept of
“fractional polarization” in the sense it is not referenced to a maximum
value of @xmath . And second, considering measures with gaussian noise
(e.g., Q), their derived unsigned quantities (e.g., @xmath or @xmath )
have Rayleigh noise. When summing the Rayleigh contributions for each
wavelength, the noise is added and not cancelled out (as in the gaussian
case). Then, Eqs. ( 6.11b ) and ( 6.11c ) are not valid either.

The remaining basic solution would be the Eq. ( 6.7 ). However, it has
the disadvantage of suffering from signal cancellations in lines whose
profiles have mixed polarities, as it can happen with the antisymmetric
profiles produced by the velocity gradients in the LP signals of the
@xmath Å line. Other disadvantage is the dependence of Eq. ( 6.7 ) on
the passband chosen to perform the integration (see Sec. 6.3.3 ). This
is because it tends to zero as the bandwidth is enlarged, instead of
tending to a fixed value proper from the LP in the line.

On the contrary, in order to capture the effects of dynamics in the
polarization amplitudes, we need quasi-monochromatic quantities. In that
case, the polarization maps of Q @xmath I and U @xmath I should be
calculated at the wavelengths of the maximum amplitudes at each pixel,
which also gives a better signal-to-noise ratio. If we use the line
center wavelength, the polarization amplitudes will appear decreased in
map areas with chromospheric motions, avoiding the detection of dynamic
amplification effects on the LP.

The quantity we chose to calculate Fig. ( 6.21 ) is given by Eq. ( 6.9
). The polarization patches in the “restored” map (right panel) of the
figure are a product of the noise in the faint core intensity emerging
from cool- chromospheric areas. There, the LP is usually larger and the
intensity is minimum, making the unstable quotients of Eq. ( 6.9 ) to
diverge. A possible solution is using the median (instead of the max
function) to define the measure:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the medians are calculated in a small passband ( @xmath ) of a few
wavelength points chosen around the common maximum for Q and U ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17
The maximum can occur at a different wavelength for Q and U if the
magnetic field azimuth varies significantly with height along the
formation region. In that case, the maps do not vary too much, but at
those places we would note a loss of LP signal when calculated with Eq.
( 6.12 ). . Since the median of several points around the maximum is
less affected by high- frequency excursions due to the noise, it
estabilizes the results without loosing the signal information at the
maximum. Using three points of bandwitdh as the best choice, we got the
maps of Fig. ( 6.23 ). To calculate them, we repeated similar steps than
in Sec. ( 6.5.2 ), with the same instrumental parameters, but applying
Eq. ( 6.12 ).

In the case of the @xmath Å map (lower panels in Fig. 6.23 ), the result
of using the median is perhaps a bit better than using the maximum value
(lower panels in Fig. 6.21 ) because we obtain a slightly better
contrast in areas with low polarization levels and recovered amplitudes
that are more similarto the ones in the original map. For the K line
(upper panels of the same figures), the results are also a bit better,
but still unsatisfactory to distinguish between the signal and the noise
in cool areas.

Increasing the level of noise one order of magnitude ( @xmath ), we do
not get images with good quality for any line (see Fig. 6.24 and A.6 )
or any method. In the more favorable case of the @xmath Å line, even the
LPD does not allow us to distinguish the signals from the noise in a
large area of the map (lower right panel in Fig. 6.24 ). We would need
to integrate more in time or space, so losing the required resolution
and the possibility of capturing the fast and small chromospheric
events.

#### 6.5.5 Reconstruction with PCA methods.

We have seen that the instrumental noise can easily prevent the
detection of the chromospheric linear polarization (LP) features in the
Ca ii IR triplet lines. In the past, Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
has demostrated to be effective in denoising maps of Stokes profiles
with much lower resolution than the ones that the Solar-C satellite and
the future instrumentation will produce ( Rees et al. , 2000 ) . It can
be useful when the method is applied to a large set of correlated
signals (e.g., Stokes profiles in a map) that are masked by uncorrelated
spurious signals (e.g., Gaussian noise). In this section, we evaluate
the application of PCA to our synthetic observations of the LP in order
to find out whether it is possible to effectively clean them from the
noise. We experiment with two different strategies.

In the first strategy, we obtain the PCA basis with the theoretical
database of scattering polarization signals resulting from our RT
calculations in the weak field regime. Our working assumption is that
they can be used to explain high-sensitivity observations of the solar
chromosphere as well as to validate the physical model adopted in our
calculations. Later on, we use this basis to filter the noise in our
synthetic observations.

Thus, we focus on two datasets of profiles for the @xmath Å line: the
dataset @xmath contains only half of the Stokes Q map calculated from
the MHD models; the dataset @xmath contains all the synthetic profiles
in the Stokes U and Stokes Q maps after degrading them to mimick a
Solar-C observation (as we did in previous sections). We use the dataset
@xmath (i.e., the well-resolved non-degraded original profiles) as the
initial PCA database ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Note that there are other similar
posibilities. We could also create the database from U, or mixing Q and
U, or even combining the Q and U of more than one spectral line, which
would increment the precision and “universality” of the subsequent PCA
basis. At disk center, Q and U should be display a very similar bahavior
because their mathematical dependences only differ in a phase factor.
Similarly it should be a good idea to put together the lines @xmath and
@xmath Å in order to increase the database size because their formation
physics are similar. This is good because a larger database usually
increases the precision of PCA (see Section 3.3 ) . Selecting only a
half of the map in Stokes Q to build the database, we can see if it is
enough to explain other regions in the map and also the Stokes U
signals. This database has @xmath profiles.

We use our codes (see Section 3.3 ) to calculate the PCA basis from the
profiles database. We obtain a set of @xmath eigenvectors, which explain
@xmath of the variance of the dataset @xmath . Next, we project the
“measured” profiles (dataset @xmath ) into the basis formed by the first
@xmath eigenvectors (the more representative ones) and we reconstruct
the Q and U signals with them. We repeat the procedure for the intensity
and we use the outputs to calculate the maximum linear polarization with
Eq. ( 6.9 ). The results, comparing the original synthetic map with the
PCA-reconstructed one, are shown in Figure 6.25 .

In similar circunstances, the reconstructed map is cleaner and more
precise than any other one shown in the previous sections. We also
obtain a clear reconstruction of the more significant amplitudes in the
individual Stokes parameters, with very small noise variability from
pixel to pixel (see Figure 6.26 ). Contrarily, the maximum linear
polarization, although good, still presents noisy variability. This
means that, despite the effective PCA cleaning done in each Stokes
parameter, the non-linear combination of them in fractional quantities
still induces imprecisions in the amplitudes. The application of PCA
directly to a fractional quantity, @xmath for instance, does not fix the
problem because the noise is still amplified before correcting it. In
that case, the reconstructed maps are worse. We remark that the PCA
treatment on individual Stokes parameters also shows a correct
discrimination of the sign of the LP profiles in most pixels (Figure
6.26 ), which is relevant to our discussion about the orientation of the
magnetic field (see Table 6.1 ).

The signs discrimination is done from just an approximated
reconstruction with regular fits to the signal shapes, as illustrated by
Figure 6.27 . In it, we can see the specific shape of the profiles and
compare different stages during the signal processing. It is interesting
to note the combined effect of the spectral, spatial and thermal
degradation in the profiles (compare blue and black lines in Fig. 6.27 )
and the effect of applying PCA (red profiles in the same figure). Note
that the blue profiles can never be obtained because they represent the
ideal case before detection.

Our second PCA experiment consists of generating the database from the
noisy synthetic observations, which are emulated from the synthetic
profiles (current spectropolarimetric observations still lacks
resolution and sensitivity). The procedure is similar than before. We
have also used half of the map in Stokes Q (now degraded) to build the
database. The result is that the so-obtained “observational” PCA basis
also permits a similarly good signal reconstruction that matches
acceptably with the original amplitudes. The PCA basis contains noise in
the first eigenvectors, which is normal because our database is finite.
Despite of that, from Figure 6.28 we conclude that both strategies to
create the PCA basis give a similar accuracy to reconstruct the maximum
amplitudes. The use of a theoretical non-degraded database (first
strategy) has been however better to fit the profile shapes and to
obtain a more accurate LP sign in the reconstructions.

PCA seems to be able to model variable and asymmetric profiles resulting
from dynamic solar models. For this conclusion to be extended to real
observations when using a theoretical PCA basis, it has to be proved
that our physical model is a good representation of reality. It is then
necessary to have a sufficiently large number of pixels covering most of
the possible physical circumstances in the atmosphere. As the dynamics
introduces more degrees of freedom, we expect such initial database to
be larger than in the static case. On the other hand, for PCA to be
useful in dynamic circumstances when using a true observational
database, the number of observations has to be large enough for the
noise in the first eigenvectors of the basis to tend to zero.

Although PCA is not much better than the mere spatial integration to
reconstruct the fractional polarization profiles, it gives the best
results while simultaneously maintaining the spatial and temporal
resolution of the dataset. Furthermore, it seems to assure a good fit to
the LP signs and amplitudes. PCA provides a promising way of testing the
physical models adopted in our calculations just by projecting a
high-quality chromospheric observation into our theoretical PCA basis,
which offers a simple feedback for the development of MHD models and the
physics of polarization. Our study can be a useful anticipation for
treating the analysis of well-resolved dynamic observations that the
future solar facilities will provide.

### 6.6 Spectropolarimetric inference of the magnetic field.

In this section, we use the Hanle and Zeeman effect for trying to deduce
as much information as possible about the orientation, inclination and
strength of the magnetic field in our synthetic quiet regions at disk
center. The aim is to show some issues relevant to the inference process
in the Hanle regime and how the thermodynamics and dynamism of the
atmospheric plasma may affect this inference problem.

Determinations of the vector magnetic field in the solar atmosphere are
essential for understanding solar magnetic structures in general, and
specifically for quantifying or even predicting solar activity. Vector
magnetic fields are inferred from the Stokes parameters, I, Q, U, and V
(e.g., see Socas-Navarro et al. , 2000 ; Asensio Ramos et al. , 2008 ) .
However, the component of the field that is perpendicular to the line of
sight (transverse component), as inferred from observations of linear
polarization produced by the Zeeman effect in magnetically sensitive
spectral lines, has an inherent @xmath ambiguity in its azimuth ( Unno ,
1956 ) . To fully determine the transverse component of solar vector
magnetograms inferred by the Zeeman effect, this ambiguity must be
resolved.

Calculation of electric currents, magnetic energy and helicity budgets
and most techniques of coronal magnetic field extrapolation rely on
disambiguated vector magnetograms. The azimuth ambiguity (e.g., Harvey ,
1969 ) continues to be an open research topic today. Nowadays, vector
magnetograms are routinely provided by the ground-based Vector
SpectroMagnetograph (VSM; Henney et al. , 2009 ) of the Synoptic Optical
Long Term Investigations of the Sun (SOLIS) facility ( Keller et al. ,
2003 ) and by the space-based SpectroPolarimeter of the Solar Optical
Telescope (SOT Tsuneta et al. , 2008 ) onboard the Hinode spacecraft.
Vast amounts of seeing-free full-disk vector magnetograms are also
delivered by the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI Scherrer et al. ,
2012 ) on board the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) mission.

Having these facilities, numerous efforts have been made toward solving
the @xmath ambiguity problem of the Zeeman polarization signals. There
is no known method for resolving the ambiguity through direct
observation using the Zeeman effect. Hence, to resolve the ambiguity,
some further assumption on the nature of the solar magnetic field must
be made. Typical assumptions focus on the spatial smoothness of the
field or on minimizing the divergence of the field. A number of
different algorithms have been developed to resolve the ambiguity, each
making various assumptions on the character of the solar magnetic field.

For magnetograms obtained with photospheric or chromospheric lines (
Leka & Metcalf , 2003 ) azimuth disambiguation is not a trivial problem
problem because the height derivatives ( @xmath ) of most of the
parameters are needed but unknown. While tackling this problem, methods
have evolved gradually from a simple comparison between observed and
extrapolated fields to computerized automatic procedures. These methods
can be classified as “reference field” ( Allen Gary & Hagyard , 1990 ) ,
“multistep process” ( Moon et al. , 2003 ) , “interactive”, such as the
AZAM utility ( Metcalf et al. , 2006a ) , “automated minimization” (
Metcalf , 1994 ) , “vertical current minimization” ( Georgoulis , 2005 )
, “noniterative analytical” ( Skumanich & Semel , 1996 ; Cuperman et al.
, 1993 ) , and “spectroscopic” ( Landi Degl’Innocenti & Bommier , 1993 )
, this last one being inapplicable for disk-center and limb
observations. Except for the spectroscopic method and the non-iterative
analytical methods by Cuperman et al. ( 1993 ) that were tested with a
MHD model, all the other methods are routinely applied to observational
data by individual researchers. Some years ago, Metcalf et al. ( 2006b )
provided an overview of nearly all existing algorithms for resolving the
@xmath ambiguity problem when applied to synthetic data at a single
height level.

The assumptions underlying each method are the ones ultimately
responsible for the quality of the disambiguation results. Precisely and
self-consistently disambiguating a vector magnetogram is a challenging
problem, especially when considering complex magnetic structures with a
multipolar, stressed, and sheared photospheric boundary. For that
reason, the application of a proper authomatized disambiguation
procedure and the practical issues deriving from the previously
commented techniques are out of the scope of this work.

We restrict this section to clarify and illustrate some new results of
this problem in the case the linear polarization is dominated by
scattering processes and the Hanle effect, which is suitable for
studying quiet regions of the Sun. The dependence of the linear
polarization on the magnetic field azimuth is governed by the Hanle
effect, but we show how the thermodynamic alters the inference, making
the problem more complicated but more interesting. We focus on
disk-center observations and highly-resolved quiet regions of the
chromosphere by using the polarization of the Ca ii IR triplet lines we
have calculated in the 3D MHD model. The use of these spectral lines may
give us information about the three-dimensional topology of the
chromospheric magnetic field.

#### 6.6.1 The Zeeman effect and the weak field approximation.

A useful observable to infer information on the longitudinal component
of the magnetic field is the Stokes V profile produced by the Zeeman
effect. In the weak field regime, the Zeeman splitting ( @xmath , with
@xmath the effective Landé factor ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 The Ca ii IR triplet lines
@xmath have @xmath . ) is small in comparison with the thermal width (
@xmath ) of the line profiles (see Sec. 2.1.3 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath u.m.a for calcium. The condition ( 6.13 ) is fulfilled at
all the heights where the lines form in our models. In the weak-field
regime, and assuming the absence of atomic orientation and that the
longitudinal magnetic field component is constant along the formation
region, we can approximate Stokes V at disk center with:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the inclination of the magnetic field ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Away from
disk center, the cosine of the angle between the LOS and the magnetic
field vector would not be @xmath but @xmath with respect to the LOS and
@xmath gives the spectral profile of the emergent intensity. Note that,
assuming a LOS with @xmath , a line in absorption under a magnetic field
with @xmath gives a Stokes V profile that is antisymmetric with a
positive lobe at blue wavelengths and a negative one towards the red.
The sign of the lobes will be the opposite when the magnetic field
points away from the observer or the line is in emission. Since @xmath
is linear in B, Stokes V is proportional to the longitudinal component
of the magnetic field.

Taking into account the discussion about that HPILs in Section 6.3.2 ,
we can use the regions of null linear polarization across a map to
distinguish the lines where the magnetic field has an exact inclination
@xmath (Van-Vleck HPILs).

#### 6.6.2 Magnetic Field Direction and Ambiguities in the Hanle regime.

In order to estimate the magnetic field azimuth it is necessary to apply
Eq. ( 6.2 ). However, the inverse tangent is only defined from @xmath to
@xmath when applied to positive angles measured from the x axis of Fig.
6.11 . This is called the inverse tangent problem, because it is not
directly possible to recover an angle between 0 and 360 degrees from the
ratio between the two spatial vector components defining a direction in
the plane @xmath . That is exactly what we seek when applying Eq. ( 6.2
) to obtain the magnetic field azimuth. The problem results in the
appearance of two ambiguities in the magnetic field azimuth: the @xmath
ambiguity is produced when an azimuth @xmath gives a ratio U/Q
undistinguishable from the one given by @xmath ; and the @xmath
ambiguity is produced when an azimuth @xmath gives a ratio U/Q
undistinguishable from the one given by @xmath . To solve the @xmath
ambiguity we need the specific signs of each component (Q and U), and
not only the ratio. Thus, the calculation of the azimuth depends on such
signs as follows:

Whenever the signs of Q and U do not change by other factors different
than the magnetic field azimuth (basically field inclination and
thermodynamics) or whenever we can trace such changes back, the @xmath
ambiguity can be solved. However, as the argument of the tangent in Eq.(
6.2 ) is @xmath (and not @xmath ), this procedure cannot solve the
@xmath ambiguity. This is because ²¹ ²¹ 21 Mathematically, it is because
@xmath always in Eq.( 6.2 ), no matter the signs of Q and U. the light,
being an electromagnetic wave, oscillates in both senses along its
direction of polarization in such a way that the information about the
magnetic field orientation is missed. To deduce it, we should recall all
the methods and the problematic around the resolution of this ambiguity.
However, the sense of the chromospheric magnetic field can also be
determined with the magnetic polarities at both ends of the magnetic
field lines crossing the pixel of interest. To obtain such field lines
we need to consider a map (not only one pixel) and the sign of Stokes V.
We have to identify the field line crossing each pixel, just by
calculating the transverse field directions given by Eq. ( 6.2 ) and
connecting them between adjacent pixels from a positive polarity region
(Stokes V with positive blue lobe and negative red lobe) to a negative
polarity region (Stokes V with opposite sign) or viceversa. We do not
see major impediments in doing this, at least in our dataset, where we
deal with smooth chromospheric structures with no significant noise
added. With such topological procedure we could solve the @xmath
ambiguity.

The application of Table 6.2 to our LP signals has some crucial remarks
that have to be clarified. In order to solve the correct azimuth, we
have to know the Q and U signs. Since they do not only depend on the
magnetic field azimuth, we have first to discriminate all the elements
(drivers) acting on the polarities and deduce the signs that would be
given only by the magnetic field orientation. Considering a
Hanle-saturated spectral line and a forward scattering gemetry, the
possible drivers are:

1) The term @xmath depending on the inclination of the magnetic field
with respect to the vertical in Eqs. ( 6.4 ). It contributes with
negative sign to both Q and U when the pixel is in the HF region (when
the inclination is @xmath ). That makes the signs for (Q,U) in Fig. 6.11
to jump together between states: @xmath or @xmath . The effect is always
a sudden @xmath shift in the inferred azimuth angle when crossing the
Van Vleck HPILs (when passing from the HF to the VF region or
viceversa). This is usually called Hanle ambiguity, and affects the
inferred magnetic azimuth due to the magnetic inclination. We can avoid
it by two means. First, with the above-mentioned topological method.
This is, using the circular polarization in a map as a marker to
discriminate the correct magnetic field direction between the two
ambiguous perpendicular magnetic field azimuths. Second, using only one
pixel, but knowing the theoretical reference sign (see Table 6.1 ) for
the model that better represents that pixel and discriminating the
drivers affecting it.

2) The temperature. To account for it, we classify the models in simple
categories: FALC-like, cooler, hotter and so on. Thus, we associate the
specific states of the linear polarization with those general
macroscopical states (again Table 6.1 ). Once we know the theoretical
behaviour of the polarization signs in a range of temperatures, we can
use that information as a reference. In this case we need to know the
sign of the thermodynamic factor @xmath in static cases.

3) The velocity gradients. We concluded in Section 6.4 that the velocity
could affect the LP signs in the Sun or in more dynamic models, but not
in our MHD models. In any case, the existence of a velocity gradient
does not produce just a sign reverse and a discrete azimuth jump as it
happens with the variation of the magnetic field inclination. Instead,
it induces gradual alterations of the Q and U amplitudes that are
translated in imprecisions when estimating the magnetic field azimuth
with Eq. ( 6.2 ). Only when the velocity gradient overcome a certain
threshold, such gradual change also leads to a reversal in the linear
polarization (e.g., see Fig. 5.8 ). That was a common behavior for the
@xmath Å line forming in the time-dependent models of Chapter 5 . On the
contrary, the lines @xmath and @xmath Å are unable to change their signs
when they have a one-peak shape because in that case the velocity
gradient always produces a positive amplification (Chapter 4 ). Instead,
if they show a valley shape at line center, a change of polarity is
possible due to the contribution of the lower level alignment producing
the valley.

Our discussion on the ambiguities focuses on the saturated Hanle regime
under the weak field approximation. If the field is stronger, the
transverse Zeeman effect signals predominates as the sources of the
linear polarization (Zeeman regime). On the contrary, if the field is on
the order of a few gauss weaker, the Hanle polarization amplitudes in
these lines can vary significantly with the magnetic field strength and
introduce a different angular dependence in the equations.

##### Ambiguities in inclination with ambiguous azimuth.

The previous explanations introduce the ambiguities in azimuth without
specifying the corresponding values of magnetic field inclination that
can produce the same Q and U. To do that, we pose the problem in a more
analytical way as follows.

The lack of knowledge about the azimuth and the inclination of the
magnetic field produces spectroscopic ambiguities. It means that
different magnetic field orientations yield the same Q and U, making the
field topology undistinguishible. To see the exact magnetic field
configurations that can be mixed up, let us consider a fixed
thermodynamical stratification and answer the following question: which
two different magnetic field orientations, @xmath and @xmath , are
undistinguishable when only Stokes Q and U are used to infer them?

Considering that the angular depedencies of the Stokes U profile are
well described by Eq. ( 6.4b ), the answer to the question can be
obtained making @xmath . It yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ambiguities in inclination are associated with the existent
ambiguities in azimuth. Thus, for the azimuthal @xmath ambiguity, the
corresponding ambiguous inclinations @xmath and @xmath are obtained when
@xmath is substituted in Eq. ( 6.15 ). Note it gives the same as when
the azimuth is considered as solved and fixed ( @xmath ), indicating
that both situations are spectroscopically equivalent. Then, it yields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solutions give the relations between the ambiguous inclinations
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same reasoning and results are obtained using Q. These solutions (
@xmath ambiguity case or solved azimuth case) are represented by the
black curves in Fig. 6.29 . Thus, a value @xmath (vertical axis in Fig.
6.29 ) can produce the same U (and Q) than other inclinations @xmath
(horizontal axis), which are obtained by tracing a horizontal line that
crosses in several points the black curve. We see that a value lying in
the HF region (coloured region in Fig. 6.29 ) does not have ambiguities
(does not cross any curve) in the range @xmath . That means that
near-horizontal fields in that range of inclinations produce ambiguities
only due to azimuth and/or thermodynamics, so highlighting the HF areas
as the preferred ones to be used for estimating inclinations from Q and
U. If the inclination is out that range but still in the coloured
region, a horizontal line in the figure yields four ambiguities, two at
a right branch and two at a left branch. Finally, if the inclination is
in the VF region (white area), there are only two ambiguities, one at
each branch.

In the case of an azimuth @xmath not distinguished from @xmath (Hanle
ambiguity), Eq. ( 6.15 ) changes to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solutions are the same as Eq. ( 6.17 ) but with a minus sign after
the number @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new solutions are represented by the blue curves in Fig 6.29 . Thus,
under this azimuthal ambiguity, the inclination @xmath (vertical axis)
is also ambiguous because it cannot be distinguished from @xmath , but
now it is only true in the VF region because the blue curves do not
exist outside of it.

When the @xmath ambiguity in azimuth is not solved, the black and the
blue curves together give all the ambiguities in inclination. When the
@xmath ambiguity is solved (using Table 6.1 ), the “blue solutions” do
not hold and only the “black ones” leave. In that case, the remaining
ambiguities in inclination could be eliminated with just knowing if the
pixel is in the HF region or not. The reason is that the black curves
always connect inclinations @xmath in the HF region with inclinations
@xmath in the VF region and viceversa. In other words, if the pixel is
clearly in one region (VF or HF), the magnetic field inclination in that
pixel cannot pertain to the other region. In practice, to take advantage
of that, the division between the HF and VF regions has to be located by
identifying the Van-Vleck HPILs, which can be easily done calculating
the degree of total polarization (see Figure 6.14 ).

The above discrimination is not valid in the blue curves because they
connect inclinations in the same area. We would need to divide the VF
region in more subregions to avoid ambiguities. Indeed, if we were able
to identify other inclination ranges spectroscopically (having acces to
other LOS, for example) we could repeat this strategy of segmentation to
differentiate other inclinations and then fit inclination curves between
@xmath and @xmath in further steps.

Note that the mere fact of interpreting the results in a map give some
extra help to solve the ambiguities. We can use physical methods as the
ones introduced by other authors or use topological arguments
(connecting azimuth field lines, identifying regions in a map) together
with spectroscopical measurements (HPILs, signs of V, Q and U, value of
@xmath ). Without the Van-Vleck HPILs and the Stokes V profiles, the
magnetic field inclination can never be univocally obtained from Q and
U.

In conclusion, the calculation of the magnetic field azimuth depends on
the LP signs that are modified mostly by the temperature and the field
inclination. Knowing the temperature regime (cool or hot), we only need
to identify the Van-Vleck HPILs separating inclination regions (VF or HF
²² ²² 22 HF and VF regions at both sides of a Van-Vleck HPIL can be
identified using the strip of null Stokes V in Fig. 6.13 and the areas
with intense Stokes V in Fig. 6.13 ) to get the correct azimuths with
Table 6.2 . At the same time, the distinction of those regions
eliminates the @xmath ambiguities in azimuth and the corresponding
ambiguities in inclination (blue curves, Fig. 6.29 ), leaving only the
@xmath ambiguity in azimuth and selecting the correct inclination as the
one pertaining to the region in which the pixels is. To know if the
field is pointing towards or away the observer (which is equivalent to
select between right or left branches in Fig. 6.29 ) we can use the
polarity of Stokes V in the pixel. Finally, to know the sense of the
magnetic field vector we estimate possible to solve the @xmath ambiguity
in azimuth using a topological method based in connecting all the field
lines from positive to negative magnetic emergence patches (Fig. 6.30 ).
In any case, we remark that in a wide inner part of the HF region the
azimuths are unaffected by inclinations, and inclinations itself do not
show any ambiguity. All the discussion is based on that we can
discriminate the non-magnetic factors altering the polarity signs, which
have been presented after theoretically calculating the reference
polarities in realistic maps of the solar chromopshere.

#### 6.6.3 The disambiguation process.

We have provided some ideas for deducing the general topology of the
magnetic field. Now, we want to get the map of the magnetic field
azimuth without ambiguity. To do it, we will explain the map of magnetic
field azimuth in Figure 6.31 and the steps followed to create it. These
steps are based only on the information provided by the “observed”
Stokes vector.

1) The first thing we need are the maps of maximum Stokes Q and U at
each pixel for a Hanle saturated spectral line (both @xmath and @xmath Å
lines are good options). In order to apply Eq. ( 6.2 ) and estimate the
field azimuth, some authors (e.g. Jefferies et al. , 1989 ) integrate
the spectral profiles of Q and U along a certain filter width. However,
the most precise way of inferring the magnetic field azimuth at optical
depth unity is to consider the narrowest spectral width possible,
ideally only at the wavelength where the Stokes Q and U amplitudes are
maximum. If not, we will mix contributions coming from different layers
or we will produce signal cancellations due to asymmetric profiles
induced by velocity gradients. The central line wavelength is not a good
choice because the resulting spatial maps would show some empty patches
in the atmospheric regions where the velocity gradients are
considerable.

2) Following table 6.2 , we calculate the azimuth of the magnetic field.
But that is not the final azimuth because we have first to consider
other factors affecting the signs of Q and U. Note that in Fig. 6.31 the
original magnetic field direction (blue segments) and the azimuth
calculated from Q and U exclusively (red segments) are equally oriented
in many patches but they differ in a non-negligible part of the map
(obviously, where the red segments are visible). Most of those wrong red
segments are rotated @xmath from the correct directions. The reason of
this almost exact and discrete shift is that either the temperature
stratification or the magnetic field inclination or both at the same
time are modifying the signs of both Q and U (see Sec. 6.6.2 ). If we
perfom a @xmath rotation in the red segments, the map is almost entirely
correct. Thus, the major problem to calculate the precise magnetic
azimuth in those pixels is the LP sign, not the amplitudes.

3) The next step is to identify the Van-Vleck HPILs in the maps of total
linear polarization (Fig. 6.13 ) or in the maps of linear polarization
degree (Fig. 6.14 ). With these lines (gray lines in Fig. 6.31 ) we
separate with precision the HF region (strip of null Stokes V in Fig.
6.13 ) from the VF region (coinciding with intense Stokes V in Fig. 6.13
).

4) Since we know that the magnetic field lines go from the negative flux
regions (blue areas in right panel of Fig. 6.30 ) to the positive ones
around @xmath , the correct direction of the segments can be identified
just connecting them from one polarity to the other. This argument of
contuinity constitutes a topological inference method that can be
automatized. At least, it seems feasible for our chromospheric synthetic
results.

For spectral lines forming in the chaotic photosphere it would be
unsuitable because the derivatives of the magnetic field with height are
larger.

5) As we have been introducing in previous sections, other way of
inferring the correct direction for the red segments is by using
reference signs for Stokes Q and U. The simplest way to do it is by
identifying a patch inside the HF region in Fig. 6.15 whose linear
polarization signal is mostly in Q or in U and whose thermodynamical
stratification can be catalogued as one of the column cases in the Table
6.1 . The example we put in the previous section was the U patch around
@xmath Mm. It is a good option because the corresponding intensity map
is in emission there (Fig. 6.10 at @xmath arcsec), so it is a model with
a clear hot temperature stratification, and has almost null Q signal.
Then, looking the corresponding contrast map (Fig. 6.15 ), we see that
@xmath . As indicated by the third column and fourth row in Table 6.1 ,
it is compatible with a magnetic field along the @xmath U axis. So, the
red segments corresponding to that patch in Fig. 6.31 are wrong due to
the temperature and have to be rotated @xmath . A similar inference can
be done when both Q and U are not zero, just searching the projections
of the magnetic field vector on the reference axes of Figure 6.11 and
applying Table 6.1 . This is also a procedure that can be automatized.

6) Once we know the correct azimuth directions in only one patch
(reference patch) we can deduce others from it. Different regions appear
clearly differenciated around such reference patch when the inclinations
jumps between HF and VF regions or when the thermodynamic structure
changes significatively ²³ ²³ 23 Note that once we have estimated the
magnetic field azimuth with the Table 6.1 , the abrupt changes in the
estimated azimuth between patches are not real. Just by continuity, they
can not be produced by the magnetic field but by other factors. . Thus,
moving in the HF region, the patches adjacent to the reference patch
appear necessarily only when having a very different kind of temperature
stratification. If the reference patch has a FALC-like (or hotter)
structure, the adjacent patch has to be cool, what means a simultaneous
sign reversal in Q and U, and consequently a @xmath shift in the
azimuth. As a reference FALC-like patch already has a @xmath rotation in
the HF region (with respect to the correct azimuth), a cool patch in
that region produces a double sign reversal and makes the Eq. ( 6.2 ) to
yield the correct azimuth. This can be observed in the Fig. 6.31
comparing with the temperature map below: the patches associated to cool
temperatures deliver a correct inferred azimuth in the HF area. We see
that the cooler, the more precise match between red and blue segments.

7) Now, we analyze the VF region. Basically, the signs inside the VF
region are opposite than in the HF region for the same thermodynamic
patch, as expected, just because the inclination term. Consequently, in
the VF region, the hottest patches show the best alignment between the
estimated and the real magnetic field vectors. For instance, note how
the VF region around @xmath Mm contains all the possible directions of
the magnetic field and that we recover them almost exactly with the
exception of some small imprecisions where the temperature is a bit
cooler. It seems that a temperature between @xmath and @xmath K at
@xmath produces these imprecisions in several parts of the map. They
become directly a @xmath inversion when the temperature goes down below
@xmath K at some point around @xmath . An example of this is the arc-
shaped region with low temperature passing by @xmath Mm.

8) The effect of the vertical velocity gradients is also to diminish the
precision in the estimation of the magnetic field azimuth, similarly as
ocurred in the regions with medium temperatures between @xmath and
@xmath K at @xmath . In all these cases, the inferred azimuths oscillate
around the correct values but without producing an abrupt @xmath
rotation. Thus, the thermodynamical and dynamical fluctuations are
encoded in small angular variations of the magnetic field azimuth.

Despite the previous observations and procedures are still preliminar,
we think that they give a satisfactory explanation to the polarization
behavior in these models, being in consonance with the results and the
theory exposed along this work.

We think that the effect of the vertical velocities in the estimation of
the magnetic field azimuth has to be relevant in the dynamic fibrils ²⁴
²⁴ 24 There is generalized lack of a clear filamentary topology in all
the emergent intensity maps resulting from the current theoretical
models (e.g., Figure 6.10 ). That is the reason preventing a proper
computational study about such phenomena. permeating the solar
chromosphere becase of the same reasons by which we obtain azimuth
discrepancies in Figure 6.31 where the velocities are large enough. A
possible evidence of this imprecisions could have been found by de la
Cruz Rodríguez & Socas-Navarro ( 2011 ) when trying to measure the
magnetic field orientation in fibrils ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 The question is: how are
the transverse Zeeman signals modified by the dynamic? . If our result
is extensible to regions with more magnetic activity, we would have a
possible explanation for the discrepancies explained by those authors
between the fibrils orientation and the inferred magnetic field azimuth.
On top of that, Hansteen et al. ( 2006 ) explains that the fibrils are
basically driven by magnetoacoustic shocks. Indeed, they seems to play a
crucial role in shaping the chromospheric dynamics, in particular
producing a strong reduction in the oscillatory power at periods around
three minutes, correlated with the absence of chromospheric acoustic
shocks ( Vecchio et al. , 2007 ) . From those conclusions, we propose a
possible estrategy to avoid the wrong azimuth estimations. First, we
distinguish between the bright and dark fibrils contrasting at the line
core intensity of 8542 in most solar observations. Then, interpreting
the results of Vecchio et al. ( 2007 ) we understand that the bright
fibrils appears where the photospheric acoustic power is effectively
transferred from the photosphere to the chromosphere (in presence of
more vertical magnetic field lines and stronger vertical velocity
fields) while the interlaced dark fibrils correspond with areas that do
not transfer acoustic shocks into the chromosphere (either showing more
horizontal or stronger magnetic fields or well an absence of shock
waves). If this were correct, just inferring the magnetic field azimuth
from the dark fibrils we would get a correct result.

#### 6.6.4 Magnetic field intensity.

In principle, we could not measure the magnetic field intensity in the
model from our results. The reason is that we have assumed so far that
we are in the saturation regime of the Hanle effect because we know,
after inspecting the models, that the field strengths at @xmath are much
larger than the expected critical Hanle fields for the relevant atomic
levels (see ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 In principle, the region with lower magnetic field
strength ( @xmath G) in the map is the most suitable to be sensitive to
the Hanle effect because its magnetic field strength is nearer the
critical Hanle field. However it has an almost completely vertical
magnetic vector, for what the non-saturated Hanle effect is not of
practical application in that area. Figure 6.32 ). But, from an
observational point of view, how could we assure that? We would need to
estimate the field strength with Stokes V and Eq. ( 6.14 ). However,
with that equation we only can obtain reliable values for the
longitudinal magnetic field component. To get the corresponding magnetic
field intensity we have to know the magnetic field inclination. This can
be done by identifying the Van-Vleck HPILs. Along them it is sure that
@xmath and the magnetic field strength is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

with B in Gauss, wavelengths in Amstrongs and @xmath the wavelength
where Stokes V is maximum. Thus, in the weak-field regime with the Hanle
effect in saturation, we can measure with precision all the magnetic
field parameters along the Van-Vleck HPILs (assuming we have a detector
with enough polarimetric sensitivity).

The field strengths in those points can give us an answer about whether
the Hanle effect is saturated or not, but not in all the map, so the
doubt can still remain in other regions. On top of that, Stokes V mainly
responds to the magnetic field in significantly low chromospheric layers
(usually having larger magnetic field strengths). This is known by mean
of the response functions. Thus, we would tend to infer wrongly a field
intensity closer to saturation.

If the Hanle effect were not saturated, the dependences of Eqs. ( 6.4 )
would not hold and the amplitudes of Stokes Q and U would also depend on
the magnetic field intensity. To measure the magnetic field strength in
this regime we would need a reference calculation for each possible
configuration of temperature, magnetic field direction and velocity. The
work of Manso Sainz & Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) is along that line, so the
solution would be to repeat it including the effect of the velocity.
Similarly, we can remake the calculations of this chapter but
artificially decreasing the magnetic field intensity by a constant
factor in the whole cube (so considering a “more quiet” Sun).

Finally, the last option is to characterize the Stokes line ratios
between the @xmath and @xmath Å lines and see whether they are sensitive
enough to the magnetic field intensity. To do that, note that the
zero-field line ratios obtained in Chapter 5 can not be used because we
are now in a disk center observation and the linear polarization would
be zero in absence of magnetic field. The equivalent solution is to
repeat those reference line ratios for a magnetic field configuration
which maximizes the linear polarization at @xmath : this is, for a
horizontal magnetic field pointing for simplicity along the @xmath Q or
@xmath U axes, as in the reference model defined in Sec. 6.3.4 . In that
case, the stronger the field strength, the more effective the symmetry
breaking (and consequently the emergent linear polarization), reaching
the limit in the saturation regime. Then, we conclude that, if the
calculations presented in this chapter are really in the saturation
regime, the results for the pixels where the field is horizontal
directly give us useful references for the line ratios in a forward
scattering geometry. In other words, these results would be the
reference line ratios that can be used for measuring the magnetic field
in the non-saturated case.

##### Does the Hanle sensitivity depend on temperature?

For the upper level of any transition, its lifetime can be estimated
with the Einstein coeffient @xmath of the transition, which is
independent on the atmospheric model. In our atomic model, the only
polarized upper level is the level @xmath (see Fig. 4.1 ), which yields
a Hanle critical field of @xmath G for the @xmath Å line. This value is
not directly dependent on temperature.

However, the lower-level critical Hanle field given by Eq. ( 2.36 )
depends on the mean intensity, and the mean intensity could change
significantly with the temperature stratification. In a model atmosphere
we can directly get the number of photons per radiation field mode
@xmath , which give us the lifetime of the level:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

But usually we can not access the radiation field for making
estimations, during an observation for instance. For those cases, let us
define a radiation temperature @xmath that yields a Planck function
value @xmath equals to the mean intensity @xmath . Equivalently,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In LTE, @xmath is the temperature of the plasma but in NLTE it is only a
representative number that serves as an upper limit to the local plasma
temperature ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 In general, the temperature delivered by the Planck
function for a black body is lower than the temperature for a body with
net radiation energy losses. . Then, a change in temperature could
produce an effective shift in the magnetic field regime making the
polarization to be sensitive to the Hanle effect. For instance, to
obtain a critical Hanle field of @xmath G producing a saturation around
@xmath G, we would get from Eq.( 6.21 ) a radiation temperature @xmath
kK for the @xmath Å line and @xmath kK for the @xmath Å.

We see that larger temperatures are compatible with larger critical
fields, what changes the range of validity of the Hanle effect. For this
change to occur, the temperature increment has to be in the formation
region, where the density of Ca ii is significant. The calculated large
temperature values could be possible in the the upper parts of extra hot
chromospheric stratifications or inside very hot plasma bubbles (the
analyzed models show such anomalous bubbles in a few regions). At least
in the latter case, the population of Ca ii is unsignificant because the
ions have been abruptly ionized to Ca iii . Other trigger suspicious of
being able to bring the Hanle effect into its non-saturated regime is a
shock wave. When passing through the chromosphere, it would make the
emergent polarization suddenly sensitive to the magnetic field
intensity. This kind of sudden Hanle effect could contribute to the
small azimuth shifts appearing in the Fig. ( 6.31 ), in hot regions with
relatively large velocities. Apart from that, a shock wave also means an
increment in the density and an approach of those atmospheric layers to
behave as a black body (see second row from the top in Figure 5.3 ). In
such case, the radiation temperature values would be more representative
of the local plasma.

The estimation of the Hanle critical field in the above discussion
should actually consider the transition rates of all the lines connected
to the considered atomic level. For the upper level of the @xmath Å
line, we should apply Eq. ( 2.36 ) summing the three Einstein emission
coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , one per transition decaying
from level @xmath . In that case, we get @xmath G (which sets the
maximum detectable field strengths around @xmath G).

However, it seems to be more precise to estimate the critical field
considering only @xmath ( @xmath is negligible). This way we get @xmath
G and a better agreement with the Hanle curves calculated by Manso Sainz
& Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) for FALC models, where the upper value for the
detectable field strength is @xmath G.

##### Hanle diagrams and magnetic field intensity.

More investigation is needed to contrast the previous hypothesis.
Meanwhile we can try to deduce something more about the saturation of
the Hanle effect through the Hanle diagrams (Figures 6.33 , 6.34 above
and A.9 , A.10 and A.11 in the appendix). By comparing the Hanle
diagrams resulting from our calculations in the @xmath Å line (Figures
6.33 and 6.34 ) with the corresponding ones of Manso Sainz & Trujillo
Bueno ( 2010 ) (Figures 14 and 15), we try to know whether this line is
really affected by the magnetic field intensity.

First, consider the four regions in the upper panel of Figure 6.33 , all
of them with considerable magnetic field inclination (HF region); the
small Region 1 has an expanding chromosphere with significant velocity;
the region 2 has a cool area with patches in different states of motion:
static, upward and downward (having a supersonic downflow); the region 3
is composed by a cool compressed bubble and an elongated fringe of
pixels with expanding hot atmospheres; finally, the big and hot region
4, not significantly dynamic and with a strong horizontal magnetic
field.

We have included information about the vertical velocity and the
temperature at @xmath in the corresponding Hanle diagrams in order to
offer an aditional clarifying perspective that can not be achieved
observationally (see footnotes in Fig. 6.33 and Fig. 6.34 ). The colours
in the diagram help to identify the different subregions in each region.

After studying these areas and their corresponding Hanle diagrams, we
conclude that the Hanle effect is efectively saturated, consistently to
what has been assumed in previous sections. To support it, we have shown
that the variations in Q and U shown in the Hanle diagrams of Figures
6.33 , 6.34 (and similar ones in Appendix) can be understood without any
variation of the magnetic field intensity ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 Aditionally, the
comparison with the Hanle diagrams in the K line (Fig. A.11 ) suggest
important differences with the triplet ones. The reason is that the K
line is not Hanle saturated, showing a totally different dependence
whose origin is the variation of the magnetic field intensity. .

Consider that the expressions for @xmath and @xmath appearing in Eqs. (
6.4 ) can be seen as curves in polar coordinates (Eqs. 6.24 a and b),
where the radius depends on the inclination of the magnetic field and on
the thermodynamic factor @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.23a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.23b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Assuming first a constant @xmath , we stablished simple (linear)
ligatures between the azimuth and the inclination of the magnetic field
through Eqs. ( 6.24 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.24a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.24b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where K is a free parameter. The ligature tights the initial and final
values of the magnetic field azimuth @xmath with the corresponding
initial and final inclination values @xmath of the topologic lines that
connect two chosen initial and final points in the spatial maps (see
Figs. 6.33 and 6.5 ). In the following, consider that such points are at
both frontiers of the HF regions (in the Van-Vleck HPILs), in such a way
that the initial and final values of the magnetic field inclination are
given by Eq. ( 6.24b ). Then, choosing different initial and final
values for the azimuth in those two points and fixing the number K, we
can fit different curves in the Hanle diagrams that correspond to
different ‘‘topologic’’ lines ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 We term topologic lines to the
pixels in the maps that follow a well- established path in the Hanle
diagram. Defining and solving them we can reconstruct the magnetic field
topology not only in azimuth but also in inclination. crossing the
formation region in HF areas of the spatial maps (Fig. 6.35 ). Then, the
magnetic field lines can be inferred from those topologic lines using
the magnetic field azimuth in the map. We leave the details for future
works.

Note that for a constant azimuth, Q and U only can vary radially. In
that case, the topologic lines in the spatial maps would be represented
by dots radially aligned in the Hanle diagrams (see Regions @xmath and
@xmath showing those radial dependencies). For the dots to describe a
loop in the Hanle diagram, it is needed an azimuthal variation along the
topologic lines in the spatial maps. The ligature in Eq. ( 6.24 ) is
thus needed to tie the variation in the azimuth relative to the
variation in inclination (or in @xmath ), and the parametrization is
used to adjust such variation to the different cases. The study of the
effect of the parameter K seems to be very effective to discard magnetic
lines with impossible or improbable topologies. Only a few possibilities
give qualitative fits to the Hanle diagram curves. Note that, as we can
match the points in the Hanle diagram with the pixels they represent in
the spatial maps, we can literally trace the possible magnetic field
lines in the HF region. More than that, we can infer the inclination of
the field along them. This procedure is facilitated by the knowledge of
the location of the main Van-Vleck HPILs because they are placed where
the magnetic field topology can be determined with more precision, so
acting as boundary conditions.

Some examples of the theoretical curves that explain the loops and bows
of the Hanle diagrams can be compared with Fig. 6.35 . The narrow bows
(e.g., red curve) can be explained with small differences in azimuth
between the beginning and the end of a field line. Allowing the action
of the thermodinamical variations we can explain the modulation in
amplitude of the loops (as shown by the lines in the legend C of Fig.
6.35 ). In this case, it is specially clear the signature of the strong
velocity gradients. When they are present, the polarization is
significatively amplified in a small region where the azimuth can not
vary at the same rithm, so generating characteristic radial excursions
of the points in the Hanle diagrams (Regions 1 and 2 in Fig. 6.33 ).
Choosing larger K values (but below K @xmath ), we can explain topologic
lines with larger longitudes in the spatial map, corresponded with wider
loops in the Hanle diagrams (e.g., blue curves). Finally, the effect of
reducing the boundary magnetic field inclinations is a truncation of the
loops that result in arcs (again reproduced in the legend- C lines) as
the ones appearing in the left upper corner of Region 2 panels in Fig.
6.34 for instance. This latter case is interesting because it would
allow us to identify the magnetic field lines that enter in the
chromosphere with lower inclinations, which is a marker of lines
starting to emerge from the photosphere. There are similar combinations
that seems very promising for measuring the topology of the magnetic
field, at least in the synthetic maps.

For the moment, we conclude that the Hanle diagrams are a possible
solution to observationally distinguish the saturation of the Hanle
effect. Furthermore, they can be also a valuable tool for fitting the
magnetic field inclinations in chromospheric quiet regions and for
studying the precise topology of the magnetic field in observations with
good resolution. Results deriving from this ideas will be tackled in
future works.

## Chapter 7 Conclusions and future work

In this thesis we have carried out a detailed radiative transfer
investigation of the linear and circular polarization signals of the Ca
ii IR triplet lines produced by scattering processes and the Hanle and
Zeeman effects in a variety of dynamical models of the solar
chromosphere. The investigation has focussed on the effect that the
macroscopic vertical velocity fields and the shock waves of the
chromospheric models have on the linear polarization (LP), but taking
into account also the combined influence of the thermodynamic and
magnetic field topology. The thesis has been complemented with the
development of radiative transfer, visualization and analysis tools. Our
results will help to confront several chromospheric models of the quiet
Sun with real observations through the synthesis of Stokes profiles.

### 7.1 Goals achieved

The main goals of this thesis have been the following ones:

-   We have extended the RT code developed by Manso Sainz & Trujillo
    Bueno ( 2003b ) to treat a large number of atmosphere models,
    including the effect of the macroscopic vertical velocity fields on
    the scattering polarization signals.

-   We have shown, quantified and explained the effects that the
    macroscopic vertical velocity fields can have on the scattering
    polarization signals, pointing out some unknown diagnostic
    capabilities of the Ca ii IR triplet lines for studying the solar
    chromosphere.

-   We have calculated temporal series of scattering polarization
    signals including the effect of the chromospheric velocity fields
    and temperature shocks on the atomic polarization of the Ca ii
    levels.

-   We have calculated spatial maps of scattering polarization signals
    including the impact of the atomic level polarization, macroscopic
    vertical velocities and the Hanle effect in forward scattering
    geometry.

-   We have obtained theoretical LP references for the amplitudes of the
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath Å lines in dynamic solar model
    atmospheres. First, in close-to-limb observations, the references
    are given by the non-magnetic situation. Second, in forward
    scattering, the reference polarization is given by the maximum
    amplitudes obtained with a horizontal field in the saturation regime
    of the Hanle effect. These references can be used to estimate
    magnetic field strengths using the line-ratio technique.

-   We have pointed out a new strategy that can be useful for
    chromospheric diagnostics (Hanle Polarity Inversion Lines,
    references for the LP signs, magnetic field inference in forward
    scattering).

-   We have studied the relevance of temperature and macroscopic
    vertical velocity fields on the calculation of the chromospheric
    magnetic field orientation, in the presence of the @xmath and @xmath
    ambiguities of the Hanle effect.

-   We studied the feasibility of using Solar-C and EST to detect the LP
    features found in our calculations.

-   We have calculated a synthetic PCA basis of scattering polarization
    signals produced in dynamic chomospheric models. Among other things,
    it can be used to explain real observations in the Ca ii IR triplet
    lines.

### 7.2 Conclusions

The main conclusions that have been obtained in this work are:

-   When macroscopic vertical velocity gradients are considered in our
    model atmospheres, the resulting polarization profiles of the Ca ii
    IR triplet lines are asymmetrized, shifted in wavelength, and
    modulated in amplitude with respect to the constant velocity case.
    We remark that these effects depend on the velocity gradient. Thus,
    larger velocities do not mean larger variations in the LP if no
    significant velocity gradient is located in the line formation
    region.

-   The fundamental mechanism explaining the LP signals under dynamic
    circumstances is that increments in the absolute value of the
    velocity gradient increase the source function (Doppler brightening)
    and enhance the anisotropy of the radiation field at some heights.
    The result is a subsequent enhancement of the atomic alignment of
    the upper and lower levels controling the linear polarization
    profiles of the line transition under consideration (Doppler-induced
    modulation).

-   A second mechanism explains why sometimes the variations in the
    anisotropy produce an amplification of the LP signals and why
    sometimes they produce a reduced amplitude or a sign reversal. The
    emergent LP is the result of the atomic alignment values of the
    lower and upper levels of the line transition at every height in the
    formation region. The variation with height of such atomic aligments
    is such that they are equal at a given chromospheric layer in the
    formation region. The atomic alignment of one of the line levels
    dominates the LP above such intersection layer, while the one of the
    other level dominates below. Then, the relative location of the
    levels’s alignment intersection with respect to the heights where
    the anisotropy has been enhanced makes the alignment of one of the
    line levels to be preferentially increased. The details of this
    situation alter the shapes, amplitudes and signs of the LP profiles.

-   The shapes, signs and amplitudes of the LP signals of the IR triplet
    lines change significantly with the line of sight, because the
    height of formation moves with respect to the alignment intersection
    height.

-   In general, the modulation of the LP signals produced by macroscopic
    vertical velocity fields does not have the same importance for all
    atomic transitions. Strong spectral lines with wide absorption
    profiles (e.g., with large thermal widths) require larger vertical
    velocities than weaker spectral lines in order to experiment the
    same amplitude variation in their scattering polarization signals.
    Some spectral lines (e.g., the Ca ii IR triplet) forming in
    chromospheric layers (where the velocity gradients are significant)
    and whose atomic levels can be polarized are expected to be
    sensitive to Doppler-induced modulations in their LP profiles.

-   The quantitative variations of the LP signals produced by velocity
    gradients depend on the strength of the model dynamics. In highly
    dynamic chromospheric models, the variations of the LP in
    close-to-limb observations give clear patterns characteristic of the
    presence of shocks in the models.

-   The close-to-limb synthesis carried out in the considered 1D
    time-dependent models show that the velocity gradients produce a
    significant size variation of the scattering polarization signals.
    In this case, the maximum enhancement factors of the emergent linear
    polarization are @xmath (in the @xmath Å line) and @xmath (in the
    @xmath Å and @xmath Å lines), for the instantaneous values of the
    @xmath amplitudes with respect to the static FAL-C case. If we
    consider temporal averages of the emergent Stokes profiles during
    periods of several minutes, we get amplification factors of about a
    factor of two (time-averaged Q/I amplitudes reach @xmath ) in the
    @xmath Å and @xmath Å lines, and a sign reversal with antisymmetric
    profiles in the LP signals of the @xmath Å line. The lack of spatial
    or temporal coherence and resolution in the low-chromosphere
    dynamics could make the @xmath signals to cancel out due to its
    variable polarity.

-   The velocity-free approximation is not valid to calculate the
    emergent scattering polarization signals in the presence of velocity
    gradients because it does not capture the effect of the dynamics on
    the atomic level polarization. Such approximation gives polarization
    amplitudes that are not enhanced with respect to the static case.

-   The forward scattering RT calculations carried out in the considered
    MHD models ( Leenaarts et al. , 2009a ) show a sparse spatial
    distribution of pixels with amplitudes significantly larger than in
    the static case. On the one hand, the reason is that the considered
    MHD model is significantly less dynamic than the 1D dynamical models
    we have analyzed. On the other hand, the variations in the radiation
    field anisotropy induced by the temperature gradients of the MHD
    model result in LP amplitudes that are often significantly larger
    than in the semi-empirical model considered by Manso Sainz &
    Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) .

-   In principle, the inference of chromospheric magnetic fields with
    the Hanle effect can be affected by the dynamic state of the
    atmosphere because the LP amplitudes of the Ca ii lines are
    modulated by the vertical velocities. In order to give a precise
    magnetic field estimation of the quiet solar chromosphere it is then
    necessary to consider the polarization amplitude variations sourced
    by the dynamics of the chromosphere. However, we expect this effect
    to be small in low-resolution chromospheric observations.

-   We propose the so-called Hanle Polarity Inversion Lines (HPILs) as
    features that can help to deduce the magnetic field vector in quiet
    Sun chromospheric maps of the LP signals in IR Ca ii lines. They
    give useful references to constrain the orientation of the magnetic
    field as well as its variation with height (when analyzed
    simultaneously in more than one spectral line).

-   The thermodynamic HPILs are sensitive to very specific
    stratifications of the radiation field anisotropy; they allowed us
    to find the location of cool chromospheric bubbles of plasma using
    the LP signals.

-   The Van-Vleck HPILs in the Ca ii IR triplet lines give the locations
    where the chromospheric magnetic field has an inclination of @xmath
    or @xmath .

-   The behavior of the scattering polarization signals in the weak
    field regime makes the stratification of temperature, velocity and
    magnetic inclination to influence the inference of the magnetic
    field azimuth from Stokes Q and U. To illustrate and quantify these
    dependencies we have simulated the process of magnetic field
    inference from spatial maps of the Stokes vector. This study could
    be considered as an extension to the work of Manso Sainz & Trujillo
    Bueno ( 2010 ) in more realistic atmospheric models.

-   Studying the scattering polarization signals under dynamic
    situations, we have given a table of signs of reference for the LP
    signals of the Ca ii IR triplet lines in the most important physical
    circumstances describing the considered MHD models. These references
    can be used to break the @xmath magnetic field ambiguity existing in
    the weak field regime. They can also be used to diagnose the basic
    physical state of the chromosphere in pixels showing those LP signs.
    The LP signs are compatible with the results of Manso Sainz &
    Trujillo Bueno ( 2010 ) .

-   The dependence of the analyzed scattering polarization signals on
    temperature, velocity and magnetic field stratification has allowed
    the identification of some simple diagnostic techniques based on the
    signs of the LP profiles of the Ca ii IR triplet under different
    physical situations.

-   Our calculations show that the real relevance of the chromospheric
    vertical velocity fields is missed with the current instrumental
    sensitivities and telescope apertures. This explain that we cannot
    observe such effects until more powerful instrumentation is
    developed.

-   Our calculations point out that the Solar-C telescope and perhaps
    the European Solar Telescope should be able to capture the behavior
    of the scattering polarization signals that we have described in
    this thesis for the IR triplet of the Ca ii . The best strategy to
    improve the signal-to-noise ratio of such measurements without
    losing spatial and temporal resolution is a combination of short
    temporal integrations and PCA postprocessing.

### 7.3 Future work

The MHD models of the solar atmosphere are evolving more quickly than
the radiative transfer codes with capabilities to treat the scattering
polarization. Thus, despite the fact that the synthesis of Stokes
profiles is limited by the realism of MHD models, the very first
technical limitation is the intrinsic difficulty of the detailed RT
problem with polarization: its highly non-linear and non-local nature,
the demanding spatial and angular resolution that it requires and the
involved physics to solve it. A giant leap is required in the way we
solve these problems. I plan to continue the research on new methods
that allow a faster resolution of three dimensional radiative transfer
problems. This will allow a natural extension of this thesis to treat
the more general problem in which the horizontal macroscopic flows are
included.

Using state-of-the-art MHD models, I would like to continue exploring
the spectropolarimetric characterization of chromospheric solar
structures. This alternative seeks to identify spatiotemporal
polarization patterns (in synthetic or real profiles), such as those
identified in Chapters 5 and 6 (e.g., shocks fingerprints in temporal
series and Hanle PILs in spatial maps).

An important step after this thesis will be however to carry out
spectropolarimetric observations and to try to interpret them applying
the results of this work. It would be of great interest to detect LP
features confirming our results in the solar chromosphere as well as to
apply the proposed diagnosis methods to real observations. However, the
current instrumentation does not have enough sensitivity to capture the
dynamic effects on the scattering polarization. In the future, with the
arrival of the new solar facilities, such as SOLAR-C, ATST or EST, a new
world of possibilities will be opened.

Meanwhile, we could try to validate our results in stronger spectral
lines whose scattering polarization could also be affected by shocks and
motions (e.g., the Na i D lines or the Ca i @xmath Å line). In
particular, the Ca i @xmath Å line can be a good candidate to follow up
the ideas of Chapter 6 , which explored the forward scattering geometry
as a way of inferring information about solar magnetic fields in
situations where the linear polarization is dominated by scattering and
Hanle processes.

Other issue to solve is the inference of the magnetic field azimuth in
the presence of significant velocity fields or temperature gradients,
which produce a lack of precision in such estimation (at least in our
theoretical results). How can our results be extrapolated to
chromospheres with stronger magnetic fields?Are the linear polarization
signals similarly modified by thermodynamic gradients in such cases?

## Appendix A Appendix.

### a.1 Special functions in section 4.3.1

Introducing Equation 4.10 into Equation 4.2.1

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Introducing the variables @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , then the mean
intensity in the comoving frame

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In passing from Equation ( A.1 ) to Equation ( A.2 ), we have extended
the integration limit on @xmath to @xmath . Analogously for the
anisotropy in the comoving frame

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following integrals are easily evaluated (see Spiegel , 1998 )

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.5)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have made use of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

From them, the values for @xmath and the anisotropy @xmath are trivially
derived.

In the high velocity limit ( @xmath ), @xmath , and @xmath (regardless
of @xmath ). In the low velocity limit:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

### a.2 Statistical equilibrium equations in the non-magnetic case.

The rate equations for the considered problem are as follow. They have
been obtained by particularizing to the model-atom of Fig.1 the
equations contained in Sects. 7.2 and 7.13 of Landi Degl’Innocenti &
Landolfi ( 2004 ) .

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (A.9)
     @xmath         (A.10)
     @xmath         (A.11)
     @xmath         (A.12)
     @xmath         (A.13)
                    (A.14)
     @xmath         (A.15)
     @xmath         (A.16)
     @xmath         (A.17)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Einstein emission and absortion
coefficients; @xmath and @xmath are the excitation and deexcitation
inelastic collisional rates, respectively; @xmath and @xmath are the
collisional transfer rates for alignment between polarizable levels
(with @xmath ); and @xmath is the depolarization rate of the @xmath -th
multipole of level @xmath due to elastic collisions with neutral
hydrogen atoms. The @xmath elements are referred to a coordinate system
with the quantization axis along the solar local vertical direction.

### a.3 Derivation of the fractional linear polarization under EB
approximation.

We consider a non-magnetic, static, axisymmetric and semi-infinite
atmosphere. With axisymmetric we mean an atmosphere without
inhomogeneities around its radial axis. Under this assumptions, symmetry
breaking effects are negligible, what in turn nullifies quantum
coherences ( @xmath ). Thus, only @xmath and @xmath are non-zero, what
implies as well that only I and Q are non-zero in the Stokes vector.
Then, Eqs. (6) of Sec. 4.2.2 are still valid. They are used in the next
demonstration with the only difference that absortion profiles are not
affected by dopplershits ( @xmath ).
The solar atmosphere is weakly anisotropic, so @xmath . Then, neglecting
second order terms in Eqs. (5) of Paper i , and recalling that optical
depth seen by a photon along the ray path s is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have the next RTE ’s:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.18a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.18b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Source functions for intensity and Stokes Q are @xmath and @xmath .
Under EB approximation the source function @xmath is developed in power
series through optical depth and truncated to first order as @xmath
(being a and b arbitrary constants). Thus, taking into account that
@xmath , the solution to the RTE for the emergent intensity is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that @xmath or, equivalently, @xmath . And from Eq. ( A.19 ) we
also note that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hereafter, we follow the notation @xmath , indicating that the quantity
@xmath have to be evaluated at @xmath . Thus, we can write @xmath .
Repeating the same considerations, we assume EB as well for Stokes Q and
write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this expressions we can put the emerging relative linear
polarization as :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The evaluation of @xmath can be done using the RTE or simply realizing
that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Until now, we have only imposed axisymmetry and EB. If we also
particularize for strong lines ( @xmath and @xmath ) and use Eqs. ( 4.6
) of Sec. 4.2.2 for substituting absortion and emission terms, we arrive
to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the superindex @xmath is a notation for optical depth and the
superindex @xmath has to do with the designation of the quantum numbers
decribed in Table 4.1 . Multiplying and dividing by @xmath the
expression read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the quantity affecting to the lower level alignment is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

If radiative processes dominate over inelastic collisional ones, @xmath
with very good approximation, and then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

is valid at line center @xmath . The only difference with the equation
estimated by Trujillo Bueno ( 1999 ) is the factor A, that can be
neglected in majority of cases due to its closeness to one. The factor A
can be understood as a measure of the mean intensity gradient around
@xmath , being larger in presence of shocks and heatings. If the
gradient of temperature is then significant in that region we could
expect this factor to modify the lower level fractional alignment and
the estimation of the line center Q/I. Although the proximity of this
idea with the main topic of the this thesis, we have not found a clear
application to Eq. A.24 . We always fix @xmath and use that equation for
explicative purposes in the text.

### a.4 Other figures in Chapter 6.

### a.5 Stereographic view of a cool chromospheric bubble.