The main goal of this thesis has been to investigate the effect that the
macroscopic vertical velocity fields have on the scattering polarization
signals formed in the solar chromosphere. We followed a theoretical
approach based on the spectral synthesis of scattering polarization
signals in dynamic models of the quiet Sun. Until now, the impact of
macroscopic motions had never been considered in the treatment of the
polarization signals produced by scattering processes and the Hanle
effect. This is especially important in the solar chromosphere, given
its strong dynamism and reduced magnetic field intensity. This
investigation focuses in the analysis of the Ca ii IR triplet lines (at
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath Ã…). The methodology of spectral synthesis
allows to confront chromospheric models with real observations.

We solved the multilevel, non-LTE radiative problem of the generation
and transfer of polarized radiation in increasingly realistic atmosphere
models: Milne-Eddington atmospheres, atmospheres composed by two-level
atoms, semiempirical models with ad-hoc velocities, hydrodynamical
time-dependent models and a snapshot of a 3D MHD simulation. To such
end, we included the action of the velocity fields on the atomic level
polarization. Thus, we studied the impact of velocity gradients on the
anisotropy of the radiation field, which controls the scattering
polarization. We showed the effects of amplitude modulation, spectral
shift and asymmetry that the vertical velocity gradients have on the
zero-field linear polarization profiles; finally, we studied the
emergent polarization in a forward scattering geometry including as well
the Hanle effect produced by the magnetic field.

Thus, we obtained the first tomographic view of a model quiet
chromosphere that includes synthetic maps of linear polarization
dominated by Hanle effect and of circular polarization dominated by
Zeeman effect. We focused on the use of such maps to diagnose the
spatial topology of the magnetic field, the thermodynamical state of the
atmosphere and the vertical stratification of velocity. We also studied
the relevance of dynamic and thermodynamic in the calculation of the
chromospheric magnetic field orientation in the presence of the @xmath
and @xmath ambiguities. Furthermore, we simulated synthetic observations
by degrading our polarization maps, as the space telescope Solar-C would
do with real observations, and we reconstructed them by following
several methods (e.g., Principal Component Analysis). We found that
Solar-C and the European Solar Telescope should be able to capture
bevaviors similar to the ones simulated in this thesis for the Ca ii IR
triplet lines.

We dedicated a chapter to the tools and technical procedures developed
in this thesis: the RT code; an adaptative method for numerical grids
that improves the convergence of the RT calculation; a PCA code; a
program to calculate response functions for chromospheric lines; and
finally, some techniques for three-dimensional analysis and
visualization.
