##### Acknowledgements. Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisor,
Mark Van Raamsdonk, for involving me in his research and lending his
strong intuition whenever it was needed. Apart from proofreading, he
works hard to ensure that students have projects matching their
interests. Gordon Semenoff agreed to proofread this thesis as well. I
thank him, not only for that, but for delivering the lectures that first
taught me string theory. I wish to thank my collaborators Klaus Larjo,
Nima Lashkari and Brian Swingle who discussed many of the problems that
came up in our work, and possessed the skill and motivation to solve
them. I am grateful to many fellow students, especially Michael
McDermott, Fernando Nogueira and Jared Stang, for sharing their progress
and taking an interest in mine. In the first year of this work, I was
supported by the Nation Science and Engineering Research Council of
Canada. Lastly, it is a pleasure to thank my parents for all of their
love and support. This thesis is dedicated to my cousin Greg, whose
wedding I missed while pursuing this degree.

###### Contents

-    I Introduction
-    II Aspects of holography
    -    II.1 Thermodynamics
        -    II.1.1 In free field theory
        -    II.1.2 In string theory
    -    II.2 Black holes
        -    II.2.1 Useful metrics
        -    II.2.2 Hawking radiation
    -    II.3 Strong coupling
        -    II.3.1 Gauge theory phases
        -    II.3.2 Plasma balls
-    III Treating energy stochastically
    -    III.1 Main equations
        -    III.1.1 Physical assumptions
        -    III.1.2 The continuum limit
    -    III.2 Interesting features
        -    III.2.1 Static situations
        -    III.2.2 Mean-field variances
-    IV Nonlinear diffusion
    -    IV.1 Basic properties on a bounded domain
        -    IV.1.1 Conservation of energy
        -    IV.1.2 The maximum principle
        -    IV.1.3 Existence of a steady-state
    -    IV.2 Time scales
        -    IV.2.1 The concentration comparison theorem
        -    IV.2.2 Estimates in one dimension
        -    IV.2.3 Higher dimensional generalization
        -    IV.2.4 Upper and lower bounds
        -    IV.2.5 Remaining problems
    -    IV.3 Comments on unbounded domains
        -    IV.3.1 Barriers to uniqueness
        -    IV.3.2 Barenblatt profiles
-    V Numerical analysis
    -    V.1 Implementation details
        -    V.1.1 The Crank-Nicolson method
        -    V.1.2 Convergence tests
    -    V.2 Simulation results
        -    V.2.1 Short time dynamics
        -    V.2.2 Long time dynamics
        -    V.2.3 Higher dimensions
-    VI Room for improvement
    -    VI.1 A common approximation
        -    VI.1.1 Basic hydrodynamics
        -    VI.1.2 The fluid / gravity correspondence
    -    VI.2 Restricting the density of states
        -    VI.2.1 Some conformal field theory
        -    VI.2.2 Convoluted functions
-    VII Entropic dynamics of momentum
    -    VII.1 Proceeding by analogy
        -    VII.1.1 Allowed transitions and rates
        -    VII.1.2 A tensor identity
        -    VII.1.3 Setting up the equations
    -    VII.2 The continuum limit
        -    VII.2.1 To first non-vanishing order
        -    VII.2.2 To first consistent order
        -    VII.2.3 Static configurations
    -    VII.3 Consistency check
        -    VII.3.1 Linearized equations
        -    VII.3.2 Comparison with hydrodynamics
        -    VII.3.3 One more simulation
-    VIII Conclusion
-    A Cumbersome derivatives
-    B Discontinuous PDE solutions
-    C Crank-Nicolson code

## I Introduction

This thesis deals with a recently proposed toy model for the dynamics of
energy distributions in thermal field theories. These include the
conformal field theories and deformations of them that have gravity
duals according to the AdS / CFT correspondence maldacena . As argued in
mvr , our model suggests that certain important aspects of gravitational
physics emerge for thermodynamic reasons. From this perspective, it is
related to the ideas of entropic gravity in jacobson ; verlinde1 ;
lashkari ; faulkner .

Before deriving the equations of our model, it is helpful to consider
Figure 1 — energy quanta that randomly hop between sites in a line. To
each site, we ascribe a density of states @xmath counting the number of
ways for it to have @xmath units of energy. The growth of this function
lets us determine which scenario is more likely: site 1 giving a quantum
to site 2 or site 2 giving a quantum to site 1. Asking this question is
equivalent to comparing the sizes of @xmath and @xmath . Positing a form
@xmath , we see that site 1 is most likely to give up energy when @xmath
and site 2 is most likely to give up energy when @xmath . Thus, we see
that this random walk leads to diffusion when the density of states is
log-concave and clustering when the density of states is log-convex. In
the diffusion case e.g. , a uniform energy distribution is the
inevitable final state, even when the microscopic physics are completely
reversible. Special attention is paid to the Hagedorn phase @xmath which
is almost completely static.

Even though the essence of our model is this simple statement, it takes
the form of a nonlinear partial differential equation that accepts a
@xmath function as input. A ubiquitous density of states, which we
derive using the AdS / CFT correspondence, consists of four phases. One
of the narrow phases is omitted throughout this thesis for simplicity.
The three that are left consist of a diffusive phase at high energies, a
Hagedorn phase at intermediate energies and another diffusive phase at
low energies. Roughly speaking, these respectively correspond to a black
hole forming, living for a long time and ultimately evaporating away.
Less ambitiously, we may say that they correspond to balls of plasma in
a purely field theoretic setting aharony . We derive rigorous bounds on
the decay times for these objects in our model and compare them to the
hadronization times in aharony . We find that our times are longer in
one dimension and much shorter in higher dimensions.

To address these problems, a second model is proposed that treats
momentum as another quantity that moves stochastically through a
lattice. Since the second model is much more complicated, the discussion
of its properties remains at a speculative level. Even though evolution
equations for energy and momentum sound similar to the spirit of
hydrodynamics, we compare our equations to the hydro equations and only
find agreement in the crudest approximation. Despite taking the form of
classical PDEs, we hasten to emphasize that our models include quantum
effects when functions like the density of states are chosen
appropriately.

This thesis begins with theoretical background in Chapter 2. This
chapter focuses on the tools needed to derive thermodynamic quantities
via the AdS / CFT correspondence and contains some lengthy derivations.
The main model is derived afterward in Chapter 3. In Chapter 4, various
results from the mathematical literature on nonlinear diffusion
equations are applied to our PDE and used to derive the time scales for
black hole evaporation. The suspicious features of our results are
discussed in this chapter as well. Chapter 5 introduces numerical
methods that are suitable for our PDE and uses them to check most of our
results. The method chosen for most problems is the implicit
Crank-Nicolson approach. Chapters 6 and 7 contain the newer results that
were derived after mvr appeared. Their focus is the extension of our
model that includes momentum. Just as our first model depends on a
density of states, our second model depends on a momentum restricted
density of states. An expression for this quantity is derived that
allows a small amount of numerical work to be done. Code forming the
basis for all of our simulations is presented in the appendix.

## Ii Aspects of holography

Of all the conjectures that have been made about quantum gravity, the
one that has had the largest impact so far is the AdS / CFT
correspondence proposed by Juan Maldacena maldacena . Known by various
other names like holography or gauge-gravity duality, it states that
string theory in anti-de Sitter space is equivalent to a conformally
invariant quantum field theory living on the boundary of that space.
Questions about string theory can therefore be recast in the language of
quantum field theory without gravity. Deriving the evidence for the AdS
/ CFT correspondence would exceed the scope of this thesis magoo .
Instead, we will explore certain dynamical processes that can be best
understood with the correspondence. The effect that will demand most of
our attention is black hole evaporation. Hawking’s derivation of black
hole evaporation is one of the most successful uses of quantum field
theory in curved spacetime and any eventual theory of quantum gravity is
expected to account for it. Many studies of Hawking radiation have been
done using string theory and the AdS / CFT correspondence in particular
lt1 ; lt2 ; horowitz ; marolf .

Naturally, the first such studies focused on the original version of the
correspondence in which the background is @xmath maldacena . If one
writes the six-dimensional Euclidean Dirac matrices as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

the conformal field theory is specified by the Lagrangian polchinski

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----

Typically the gauge group is @xmath or @xmath meaning that the scalars,
spinors and vectors that show up are really @xmath matrices consisting
of those types of fields. This is called the @xmath Super Yang-Mills
theory or sometimes the field theory of @xmath -branes. A less than
encouraging fact about string theory is that @xmath is far from the only
background we need to consider. There is really a whole landscape of
vacua whose boundary field theories may look very different. Indeeed CFT
duals have been proposed for @xmath abjm , @xmath lunin , @xmath tong1
and many others.

Calculations involving these theories are difficult. Even showing that (
1 ) has conformal symmetry is not trivial. Something that allows us to
explore Hawking’s process from the holographic viewpoint without
choosing a specific Lagrangian is the intimate connection between black
holes and thermodynamics.

### ii.1 Thermodynamics

A number of different field theories have the same thermodynamic
potentials. A useful example of this appears in a conformal field
theory. Neglecting the Casimir effect, energy and entropy are both
extensive so they must be proportional to the volume. A conformal theory
has no intrinsic scale so the only dimensionful quantity that can
multiply this volume is the temperature. This leads to the expressions
@xmath and @xmath . Substituting them into eachother yields

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

The density of states will turn out to play a fundamental role in our
model so we will sometimes exponentiate this expression.

In the calculations that follow we will see some situations in which
this formula for the entropy does not hold. In general, the rule is that
( 2 ) becomes true for non-conformal theories if the energy is much
larger than any other scale. Different low energy behaviours can be
introduced if one compactifies a CFT like ( 1 ) on a sphere.

#### ii.1.1 In free field theory

An exercise done in behan is finding the partition function of a free
field theory. Starting with the fact that @xmath in a massless theory,
@xmath is the contribution of a single fermionic mode and @xmath is the
contribution of a single bosonic mode. Using @xmath and @xmath for the
number of internal states, the partition function is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we take the log, the product turns into a sum and if we take the
momentum spectrum to be continuous, the sum turns into an integral.
Remembering the integration measure for momentum space, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----

Here, @xmath is the Riemann zeta function, @xmath is the alternating
zeta function and @xmath is the volume of a unit ball in @xmath . We may
now use @xmath and @xmath to show that ( 2 ) holds with a
proportionality constant of @xmath .

If one is interested in the density of states, the exponential of this
entropy is certainly the first term in @xmath . However, there are an
infinite number of other terms that come from the differences between
the canonical and microcanonical ensembles. The second term is a
standard result that comes from treating @xmath as the Laplace transform
of @xmath . Performing a saddle point approximation,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The higher asymptotic terms cannot be found in the same way because the
integral of @xmath has no closed form solution. Instead, powers of
@xmath after the first two must be Taylor expanded again so that the
above becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These calculations require us to consider an ever-growing number of ways
in which a power of @xmath can be made. Nevertheless, this method is
still practical for finding the third term in @xmath and the resulting
expression is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----

In behan , ( 4 ) is found in a different way. The inverse Laplace
transform of @xmath is found exactly via a Hankel contour but as a
Taylor series, not an asymptotic series. From this series

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

the first three asymptotic terms are picked off. An advantage of this is
that ( 5 ) can be compared to a recent expression for the @xmath density
of states due to Loran, Sheikh-Jabbari and Vincon loran :

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

Neither is a generalization of the other because @xmath is arbitrary in
( 5 ) and the interactions are arbitrary in ( 6 ).

In the partition function we have constructed, the @xmath variable is
conjugate to the energy. There are also conjugate variables associated
with each momentum direction. Something special that we can do in @xmath
dimensions is combine these into a complex number. Let @xmath be a
positive momentum. If there are @xmath excitations of @xmath and @xmath
excitations of @xmath , this state has an energy of @xmath and a
momentum of @xmath . Therefore, generalized partition functions we can
write down are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Taking the product of @xmath over all positive momenta, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----

The dimensionless number @xmath is called the modular parameter . If
@xmath , ( 7 ) becomes the regular partition function ( 3 ). The
quantity @xmath appearing in ( 7 ) is central charge that we would use
in ( 6 ) if we wanted to apply it to a free theory.

#### ii.1.2 In string theory

The worldsheet theory of a string can be regarded as a conformal field
theory in @xmath dimensions. However, @xmath would not be correct for a
macroscopic observer who has different notions of energy and
dimensionality. The worldsheet Lagrangian for a supersymmetric string
theory in flat space is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----

In the second form we have split each Dirac spinor field into two
Majorana spinor fields. We have also written derivatives with respect to
@xmath as @xmath and @xmath . What makes this different from a usual
quantum field theory is that the @xmath scalar fields @xmath can be
interpreted as positions in a @xmath -dimensional target space . The
worldsheet energy comes from @xmath but the energy we should use for
counting states is the conserved quantity associated with @xmath . The
worldsheet has @xmath Lorentz symmetry regardless of how many fields
there are, but the @xmath Lorentz symmetry of the target space is more
sensitive. To survive quantization it requires that @xmath polchinski .
If we had left the fermions out of ( 8 ) to construct bosonic string
theory, the same calculation would tell us that @xmath .

To calculate the free energy of a gas of strings, we will begin in the
same way as before.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This expression has a sum over the masses of bosons and a sum over the
masses of fermions. To arrive at ( 3 ), we set these masses to zero and
replaced the sums by degeneracy factors. This was valid because the
masses became negligible in the high temperature limit. The high
temperature limit of a string theory is different because it supports
arbitrarily large masses. To continue, we will use the trick

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to rewrite the free energy density.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----

Above, we have made the substitution @xmath . To proceed further, we
need to know the mass spectrum of our theory.

For concreteness we will work in Type II which is a theory of closed
strings. This is natural because evidence of the AdS / CFT
correspondence was first discovered with Type IIB string theory
maldacena . Very little would change if we used Type I or heterotic
strings. The mode expansions for the scalar fields are identical to the
ones that describe the closed bosonic string:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

For the closed superstring, the left and right movers ( @xmath and
@xmath ) are independent and have the mode expansions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since fermions can have two different types of boundary conditions, the
parameter @xmath denotes which one we are using. For Ramond fermions,
which are periodic, @xmath . For Neveu-Schwarz fermions which are
antiperiodic, @xmath . The creation and anhilation operators above obey
the relations bbs

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To build up the spectrum from this, we need to consider gauge
symmetries. The action ( 8 ) came from a more general action in which
the worldsheet metric was dynamical. Choosing @xmath restricts the
physical Hilbert space to only those states which are anhilated by the
Virasoro generators :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Analogous expressions hold for @xmath and @xmath . Like @xmath , the
normal ordering constant @xmath is an anomaly that can be fixed by
demanding Lorentz invariance bbs . We may use the relativistic
dispersion relation, the mode expansions and the Virasoro generators to
write down a formula for the mass operator.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

We must have @xmath . This translates into a condition known as level
matching requiring every state to have the same number of left and right
moving excitations. Despite accounting for a gauge symmetry in this way,
the action ( 8 ) still has some gauge symmetry left. A common technique
for dealing with this redundancy is fixing the lightcone gauge. This
essentially means that any Lorentz index @xmath running from @xmath to
@xmath becomes a regular index @xmath running from @xmath to @xmath bbs
.

We now have everything we need to derive the massless spectrum of Type
II string theory. In typical examples of a Fock space, the ground state
is unique. It is a singlet with respect to any symmetry group of
interest and denoted most often by @xmath . This is not the case for the
superstring. For Ramond fermions, the operators @xmath commute with
@xmath meaning that many states have zero mass. This degenerate ground
state in fact transforms as a spinor in ten dimensions. Moreover it can
be split into two chiralities @xmath and @xmath . This is different from
four dimensions which would make the split into Weyl spinors
inconsistent with the split into Majorana spinors that we have already
performed polchinski . For Neveu-Schwarz fermions, the lowest lying
state has negative @xmath . However, one of the advantages of the
superstring is that it allows us to avoid this tachyon and start at the
massless states. These are also degenerate and are denoted by @xmath .
Even though @xmath is an anticommuting operator for the worldsheet, the
@xmath index here makes this a vector particle in the target space. We
have shown that massless R states are spacetime fermions while massless
NS states are spacetime bosons. The choice between R and NS can be made
for the left and right movers separately. This means that Type II string
theories have four sectors bbs .

  -- -- -- ------
           (11)
  -- -- -- ------

Each sector is 64-fold degenerate.

Our expression for the free energy density has terms like @xmath summed
over masses. These sums look like familiar partition functions if we
substitute ( 10 ) in for @xmath . Going back to ( 9 ), it is almost
correct to replace the term in square brackets with @xmath . In the
notation being used

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

@xmath and @xmath are bosonic occupation numbers while @xmath and @xmath
are fermionic occupation numbers. Accounting for level matching is the
one correction that needs to be made. This can be done by inserting a
Kronecker delta

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the left and right excitations respectively.
Multiplying this by ( 12 ), we see that the quantity being integrated is
nothing but the generalized partition function for 8 fermions and 8
bosons. Rewriting ( 9 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (13)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

In terms of our old notation, @xmath while @xmath and @xmath approach
@xmath in the small @xmath limit.

Our goal is to investigate the high temperature limit of ( 13 ). Since
this corresponds to @xmath , the integral is dominated by the @xmath
term of the sum and the small @xmath limits of the worldsheet partition
functions. A curious fact about string theories is that at a high enough
temperature, called the Hagedorn temperature @xmath , the free energy
density diverges. We will solve for @xmath . This can be done by looking
at any one of the four terms in the integrand of ( 13 ). Substituting
the generalized partition function ( 7 ), the function we are
integrating is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The value of @xmath is reached when the overall exponent is zero. This
means

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (14)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The partition function for a system first diverges when the density of
states becomes exponential and the decay of the Boltzmann factor can no
longer overpower such growth. This is equivalent to saying that @xmath .
The proportionality constant can be read off from ( 14 ) because @xmath
must give @xmath . The result of this, in contrast to ( 2 ) is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

### ii.2 Black holes

It is clear how entropy arises in the field theories we have discussed.
If we only know the energy @xmath of a field, the corresponding ensemble
of particles can be in any one of @xmath microstates contributing to our
lack of knowledge about the system. Microstates of this form do not
appear to be present for black holes. Classically, one can learn
everyting about a black hole from just three numbers: mass, charge and
angular momentum. The discovery that black holes have entropy as well,
has led to some of the deepest results in theoretical physics wald .

#### ii.2.1 Useful metrics

Black hole metrics in arbitrary dimension have seen increasing interest
since the discovery of the AdS / CFT correspondence emparan . Most
authors take the Einstein equations to be fundamental so that they read

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

regardless of how many dimensions there are. The same cannot be said of
the Newtonian limit. If ( 16 ) describes the full theory of gravity in
@xmath dimensions, one can show that dimension dependent prefactors
necessarily appear in the Poisson equation emparan :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

The second form above specializes to a point mass of @xmath .

The neutral, irrotational black hole in arbitrary dimension is called
the Schwarzschild-Tangherlini solution.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

We will take this opportunity to review some of the basic properties
that black hole metrics should have.

1.  It can be checked that ( 18 ) solves Einstein’s equation with no
    cosmological constant and no stress-energy tensor. In fact, it is
    the unique spherically symmetric and time independent solution. The
    requirement that it be time independent is redundant if @xmath .

2.  It is clear that ( 18 ) is asymptotically flat. Therefore, the
    notion of “escaping” from a potential well in this metric is well
    defined.

3.  It is also clear that beyond a certain radius, one can no longer
    escape. Far away from the origin, @xmath is timelike and @xmath is
    spacelike but this reverses when @xmath falls below @xmath . On the
    inside of this event horizon , the flow of time in ( 18 ) is such
    that an object is inexorably drawn toward the centre.

4.  This implies that the mass generating the event horizon has been
    compressed to a point. This, along with the fact that metrics for
    equal point masses should be indistinguishable, tells us that ( 18 )
    represents the most efficient packing of said mass into a sphere of
    radius @xmath .

5.  The mass may be computed by taking the Newtonian limit. For those
    unfamiliar with the ADM procedure adm , we will consider a test
    particle far away from the origin, moving radially outward. If the
    motion is non-relativistic, the timelike geodesic condition becomes
    @xmath or @xmath . Substituting this into the geodesic equation,

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    The function inside the gradient should be a solution to ( 17 ).
    Recalling the Green’s function for the @xmath -dimensional
    Laplacian, this is only true if @xmath .

A further generalization of interest to us is the metric for a black
hole that is asymptotically AdS. Anti-de Sitter space is the maximally
symmetric solution to Einstein’s equations when they have a negative
cosmological constant. A cosmological constant defines a length scale
for the spacetime with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

by convention. Because of this, AdS posesses a conformal boundary. Its
radial co-ordinate is infinite but an observer is able to reach it in a
finite amount of proper time. The solution is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

and a black hole metric asymptotic to this is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

Uniqueness of ( 21 ) in the same sense as ( 18 ) is suspected but not
known. The horizon radius is a solution to @xmath with the outermost one
being the point of no return. The mass is again given by @xmath . To see
this, a non-relativistic radial trajectory satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

While this lacks the sophistocation of methods like ashtekar , we obtain
the right answer if we simply subtract the acceleration that a particle
would have in pure AdS.

It will be convenient to rewrite this metric in Eddington-Finkelstein
co-ordinates. This can be done using either the retarded time or
advanced time, which take the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

respectively. Differentiating these to arrive at

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

we see that @xmath should be chosen so that its radial derivative is the
factor relating @xmath and @xmath . For a null geodesic,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the positive sign corresponds to an outgoing particle and the
negative sign corresponds to an ingoing particle. We now have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In certain cases, this can be integrated to give @xmath explicitly.
However, this is not needed for replacing @xmath . Performing the change
of variables,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

are the desired metrics.

#### ii.2.2 Hawking radiation

To derive the relation between entropy and the area of a black hole, we
will follow Hawking’s original paper hawking as well as the
clarifications in parker ; thompson . What we will see is that two
observers — one observing spacetime before a black hole has formed, the
other after — will have different definitions of the quantum vacuum. The
Klein-Gordon equation for a field in curved spacetime is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

For any two solutions @xmath and @xmath , the Klein-Gordon inner product

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

will be conserved. The notation above suggests a scalar field, but this
does not have to be the case. Fields with multiple components like
vectors and spinors satisfy the Klein-Gordon equation componentwise. To
indicate that Hawking radiation is a mixture of all types of particles,
we will write creation and anhilation operators as @xmath and @xmath
where @xmath is an index set. One simplification we will make, however,
is that the fields are massless.

We may write a basis of solutions to ( 23 ) as @xmath and choose them to
be orthonormal with respect to ( 24 ). If we do this, the field operator
takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, positive frequency modes multiply anhilation operators
while negative frequency modes multiply creation operators. We will let
these @xmath represent any particles that can be seen before a black
hole forms. Since there are no such particles, the past observer will
see the vacuum state @xmath defined as the state that is anhilated by
all @xmath . The future observer sees a different metric and in
particular a different time component of the metric. This means he will
have a different definition of positive and negative frequency. Writing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

each @xmath representing a particle in the black hole spacetime should
be expressible as a linear combination of the @xmath . A positive
frequency @xmath may therefore include a contribution from a negative
frequency @xmath and vice versa . If so, the @xmath will not anhilate
the @xmath vacuum and the @xmath will not anhilate the @xmath vacuum.
This discrepancy between @xmath and @xmath means that the future
observer will see radiation precisely because the past observer did not.

It is not correct to say that the only modes of @xmath are @xmath waves
that the past observer can see and @xmath waves that the future observer
can see. There are also @xmath waves in the future that cannot be seen
because they are behind the event horizon of the black hole. We would
have to consider these if we wanted to write the past modes as linear
combinations of the future modes. As it happens, we will only need to
write the future modes as linear combinations of the past modes.
Converting

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

into a set of relations between operators, we arrive at the so-called
Bogoliubov transformation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This tells us that the number of particles detected as belonging to
@xmath in the future is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

Assuming that we are dealing with bosons, we also have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

We will now be more explicit about what the modes are so that we may
plug them into the inner product and find the @xmath and @xmath
coefficients.

Spherical waves are convenient choices, but it is important not to use
the expressions for flat space spherical waves when we are really in a
curved space. By construction, outgoing null geodesics are lines of
constant @xmath while ingoing null geodesics are lines of constant
@xmath . Therefore, the advanced and retarded times should be used in
place of @xmath giving us

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

as approximate solutions for large @xmath . We could similarly consider
@xmath and @xmath but these would affect the result very little. The
interesting effects come from waves that switch from ingoing to outgoing
while the black hole is forming. By this, we mean that waves of constant
@xmath travel toward the collapsing mass at @xmath . As long as an event
horizon has not formed yet, such waves may emerge from the other side
and start moving away with constant @xmath . A natural question to ask
is which constant @xmath ? That is, what will @xmath be in terms of the
@xmath that the wave used to have? This is the key question that must be
answered before we can take an inner product and derive Hawking’s
result. The difficulty in relating these is explained in Figure 2 .

A better way to compare objects A and B is to imagine that A throws a
ball C backwards until it is caught by B. The proper time for C to
travel should be equal along all stages of the journey. Instead of
proper time, we will use a difference of affine parameters which is
appropriate for signals travelling at the speed of light.

Waves hoping to escape the black hole must start off with a @xmath
smaller than the one posessed by photon B in Figure 2 . We will call
this largest advanced time @xmath . If the spacetime is Minkowski, long
before the black hole has formed, @xmath and affine parametrizations are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By the time C makes it to B, it will have the same position and time
co-ordinate as B so it must have the same @xmath as B. Therefore
subtracting the advanced times corresponding to A and C, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We may therefore call @xmath an affine parameter that vanishes for the
wave that stays at the event horizon. This means that after the horizon
at @xmath has formed, a wave’s radial co-ordinate must look like @xmath
. We will substitute this into the retarded time for C noting that C is
not a wave of constant @xmath because it travels backwards from A back
to B.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This does not have a closed form integral, but the interesting effects
come from waves that are close to the horizon. Keeping only the lowest
order in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The equation relating @xmath to @xmath has now been found, so we may
substitute ( 27 ) into ( 24 ) for a surface whose normal derivative is
@xmath . We will abbreviate the @xmath dependence as @xmath and the
@xmath dependence as @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The other Bogoliubov coefficient is found similarly. The only difference
is that when integrating two spherical harmonics without a complex
conjugate, we have to use the identity @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The integrands above have a branch cut on the real axis because of the
@xmath . In order to manipulate them with complex analysis, it is
convenient to displace them with @xmath . The @xmath and @xmath
integrals become

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

respectively. The signs for @xmath above are dictated by our requirement
that @xmath vanish at infinity.

The integral in ( 29 ) vanishes if the domain is the contour in Figure 3
. We may therefore split it up as follows.

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

In the second step, we made the substitution @xmath . This integral is
written with the understanding that it should be evaluated with a
contour in the lower half plane. We must therefore write @xmath instead
of @xmath to avoid crossing the branch cut. We will perform this step
and then make another substitution @xmath .

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

By manipulating ( 29 ), we have turned it into a multiple of ( 30 ).
This implies the relation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

Going back to ( 25 ) and ( 26 ), the integral @xmath describes what the
black hole will absorb. The integral @xmath describes what the black
hole will emit. Without worrying about normalization, ( 31 ) tells us
that the ratio between a mode’s absorbtion and emission cross sections
is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

This is precisely the Bose-Einstein thermal factor for a blackbody at
temperature

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

Had we used an anticommutator in ( 26 ), we would have seen the
Fermi-Dirac factor for the same temperature. The famous
Bekenstein-Hawking entropy, @xmath , clearly follows from this if @xmath
is large. For a general @xmath , we will use the fact that @xmath to
write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then integrating,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

and we see that the entropy formula is exactly the same in @xmath .

Hints that the area of a black hole somehow describes an entropy were
already known in 1973 when Bekenstein proposed the proportionality with
a coefficient “close to” @xmath bekenstein1 . Apart from improving the
coefficient to @xmath , Hawking’s 1975 paper established that ( 34 ) is
the genuine entropy of a thermal spectrum hawking . Modern techniques
can derive ( 34 ) much more quickly but at the cost of once again
obscuring the nature of this entropy page ; witten1 . In 1981,
Bekenstein noticed that ( 34 ) is more than just the entropy of a black
hole. It is an upper bound on the entropy that any system occupying the
same volume can have bekenstein2 . The argument, which was strong
motivation for the AdS / CFT correspondence magoo , is remarkably
simple. Suppose that a non-black hole system fills a ball of radius
@xmath and has more entropy than @xmath . Its mass must be less than
that of a black hole with horizon radius @xmath and therefore, it can be
turned into said black hole through the addition of mass. Such a
procedure would give the system an entropy of @xmath later on, violating
the second law of thermodynamics. Incidentally, two major open problems
in physics are related to the evaporation of black holes. A featureless
object described uniquely by mass, charge and angular momentum should
not have entropy and yet we have seen that it contains more entropy than
anything else. While their exact nature remains unknown, some methods
for elucidating black hole microstates are provided by string theory
strominger . A more serious problem is the black hole information
paradox . This is concerned with the fact that a bath of radiation
cannot contain information about the formation of a black hole. If a
thermal state is all that a black hole leaves behind after it
evaporates, one effectively has a pure state evolving into a mixed state
which is a violation of unitarity. String theoretic resolutions to this
have been proposed as well but are, at the time of writing, much more
speculative braunstein ; amps .

### ii.3 Strong coupling

The AdS / CFT correspondence delivers on a 1974 promise to make strongly
coupled @xmath and @xmath gauge theories more tractable when @xmath is
large thooft . More precisely, the quantum gravity theory in the bulk
that is dual to a CFT becomes increasingly classical as we take @xmath
with @xmath fixed. This is known as the large @xmath , planar or ‘tHooft
limit. The ‘tHooft coupling @xmath which only needs to be fixed, is the
parameter that would have to be small for the usual Feynman diagram
expansion to be valid. When a series of Feynman diagrams is written down
using powers of @xmath instead of @xmath , the expansion looks very
similar to that of a closed string theory with coupling @xmath . For
this reason, the identification

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

appears in the duality magoo . This small string coupling allows a
perturbative calculation to be done in AdS when the field theory on the
boundary is strongly coupled. Some of the coupling strengths not covered
by this limit ( e.g. large @xmath and @xmath ) can be explored with the
help of string dualities. For instance, a weak-strong symmetry known as
S-duality is often associated with Type IIB string theory hull . If IIB
in AdS is equivalent to SYM on the boundary, this statement implies that
( 1 ) is invariant under @xmath . Although such a result could have been
discovered through holography, it was discovered earlier using some of
the same evidence that led to the correspondence tseytlin ; green . In
addition, we should note that even if one believes AdS / CFT, the idea
of S-duality holding for Type IIB string theory is also a conjecture
hull .

Using classical gravity to approximate field theories in the strong
coupling regime has become the most widely explored aspect of the AdS /
CFT correspondence csaki ; sachdev . For this application, questions
about whether string theory is realized in nature, are irrelevant. We
will go through an example of this duality, whereby the interacting
spectrum of ( 1 ) can be understood through our seemingly unrelated
calculations regarding free field theories and black holes.

#### ii.3.1 Gauge theory phases

When compactified on a sphere, there are at least four interesting
phases posessed by Super Yang-Mills. The transitions in and out of these
phases are gradual, as they must be for a theory with finitely many
fields. However, the transitions may become sharp in the strict @xmath
limit. Following our pattern above, we will give an expression for the
entropy of each phase in order of increasing energy.

The first thing we need to know is that in the original version of the
correspondence, the bulk geometry is @xmath where the length scale of
@xmath and the radius of @xmath are equal maldacena . This radius, which
we will call @xmath is given by the duality prescription as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

There is also a radius for the @xmath of the the field theory, which we
will call @xmath . It is natural to compare the dimensionless energies
of the string theory @xmath to “some multiple” of the dimensionless
energies of the field theory @xmath . By studying the Klein-Gordon
equation ( 23 ) for a graviton propagating in @xmath , one may show that
the second-lowest energy it can have is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

While this would not be the case for a general gauge theory, a highly
supersymmetric theory like SYM has some excited state energies that can
be computed without the correspondence. This is a harder calculation but
an analysis of chiral primary operators magoo ; witten2 tells us that
@xmath on the field theory side. The multiple in question is therefore 1
and we will be able to replace @xmath with @xmath in what follows.

The low energy behaviour of the bulk is described by a free gas of
strings in their worldsheet ground states. Refering to ( 11 ), this is a
gas of 128 bosons and 128 fermions — essentially gravitons and their
superpartners. The free field theory result ( 3 ) includes a volume
@xmath , which is only well defined if there is a clear separation
between space and time, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a Riemanian metric. Since the line element

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

is not in this form, the brute force calculation of the partition
function would have to start with the Klein-Gordon equation. Solving the
relevant Klein-Gordon equation is certainly a useful exercise. In
addition to energy eigenvalues like ( 37 ), it would allow us to derive
a bound on the mass that any particle in @xmath must satisfy bf1 ; bf2 .
However, there is another method that can tell us the appropriate @xmath
more quickly. Performing a conformal transformation on ( 38 ), we may
turn it into

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

The massless version of ( 23 ) (called the minimally coupled
Klein-Gordon equation) is not invariant under such a rescaling, but the
conformally coupled Klein-Gordon equation is. This equation is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar. The volume associated with the ( 39 )
metric would therefore appear in the partition function for this
graviton gas in the conformally coupled case.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Because the difference between minimal and conformal coupling only
appears beyond the leading order thermodynamics behan ; magoo , it is
sufficient to substitute @xmath , @xmath and the @xmath above. This
yields

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (41)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

as the entropy of the lowest energy phase.

As energy increases, the infinite tower of worldsheet vibrations becomes
important and the entropy enters the Hagedorn regime. Starting with ( 15
), we just need to use the ( 35 ) and ( 36 ) identifications to get the
entropy for the second phase in terms of gauge theory parameters:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

As with any proper string theory, the @xmath background is not static.
It receives a backreaction from stringy states that becomes more
significant as the energy increases. The highest energy phases of
Super-Yang Mills will therefore involve Newton’s constant @xmath . The
formula

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

is the last piece of the correspondence that we need burgess . We
mentioned previously that Einstein’s equations (and Newton’s constant in
particular) should be the same in all dimensions. Thus, it may seem
strange to refer to a five-dimensional gravitational constant @xmath .
The explanation is that @xmath is not the gravitational constant at all,
but rather an illusion created by the presence of compact dimensions.
The true @xmath appears as a prefactor in the Einstein-Hilbert action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the radius of the sphere is small enough, a macroscopic observer only
sees @xmath . Integrating out the @xmath and looking at the prefactor
once again will tell us the relation between @xmath and @xmath . Using
the fact that Ricci scalars add for direct product manifolds

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We have turned the action into an effective action by evaluating part of
it. This makes it clear that @xmath . The fact that these dimensionally
reduced Newton constants are generally much smaller than @xmath has led
to the hypothesis that the apparent strength of gravity increases when
the distance is very small. Indeed, proponents of extra-dimension
phenomenology have discussed the possibility of forming black holes at
the LHC banks ; giddings ; dimopoulos .

With these constants in hand, we need to calculate the entropy
associated with the geometry that develops in the third phase. Since
entropy increases with energy, it is only logical that our spacetime
should eventually achieve the geometry that has a monopoly on entropy —
that of a black hole. The mysterious microstates of this black hole can
be put in a one-to-one correspondence with the well defined microstates
of the CFT. When the event horizon @xmath first forms, it is smaller
than the radius @xmath . It is therefore a good approximation to
describe it with the Schwarzschild solution ( 18 ) involving all ten
spacetime dimensions. Using the entropy formula ( 34 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (44)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

As the black hole grows to a radius @xmath , the five small dimensions
become negligible allowing us to use the asymptotically AdS black hole (
21 ). This also makes it a good approximation to say @xmath . Inserting
this into ( 34 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

This matches the behaviour that a conformal theory must have at high
energies ( 2 ).

We have yet to give estimates for the energy ranges where these phases
are valid. Prefactors for these energies would be suspicious due to the
gradual nature of the phase transitions. We will therefore only keep
factors that may be comparable to @xmath . To determine when the
Hagedorn phase becomes important, we should set @xmath to the mass of an
excited string. From ( 10 ), we see that this is of order @xmath .

Strings have a characteristic length and a black hole with this length
as its horizon radius has a characteristic energy. When the energy of a
string gas exceeds this, it is expected to collapse to the small black
hole that we discussed before. Of course there are some non-black hole
geometries having energies of this magnitude ( e.g. a giant graviton
mcgreevy ) but these are “rare”. This is consistent with the “heat
death” proposal in which a black hole is the inevitable final state of a
system that evolves via thermal fluctuations. An equivalent statement on
the CFT side is that as the dimensions of gauge invariant operators
increase, the fraction of them that describe black holes approaches
unity larjo . The transition for this black hole “probably forming” can
be found by checking when the Hagedorn entropy becomes comparable to the
small black hole entropy. Setting ( 42 ) equal to ( 44 ), this energy is
of order @xmath .

Finally, the midpoint between the small black hole and the large black
hole occurs when @xmath . Expressing the event horizon radius in terms
of the mass, @xmath . Putting this together we see that the entropy for
strongly coupled SYM is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

Notice that if we were to find the entropy of free Super-Yang Mills by
substituting @xmath and @xmath in ( 3 ), the result would be @xmath .
The entropies differ by a factor of @xmath or equivalently, the free
energies differ by a factor of @xmath . Writing

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath and @xmath , various authors have studied how @xmath
interpolates between these limits using curvature corrections on the
string theory side gubser and loop diagrams on the field theory side
fotopoulos ; kim . It was later found that interpolating between weakly
coupled and strongly coupled free energy is not as simple as multiplying
by @xmath . Corrections to ( 47 ) involving @xmath need to be multiplied
by different functions of the ‘tHooft coupling burgess .

#### ii.3.2 Plasma balls

The microcanonical entropy of strongly coupled SYM on @xmath ( 46 ) is a
formula that we will use repeatedly. Part of its derivation relied on
the fact that the theory’s dual description involved black holes
radiating a thermal spectrum. The goal of this thesis is to argue for
the converse: an arbitrary field theory with an entropy sufficiently
similar to ( 46 ) exhibits dynamics that are indicative of black hole
formation and evaporation. There is a large class of field theory
solutions, called plasma balls, that have been shown to be of this type
aharony . Most studies of them are numerical aharony ; figueras ;
bhardwaj but at least one has been constructed analytically milanesi .

Consider the canonical phases of Super Yang-Mills found by fixing the
temperature instead of the energy. We may differentiate the entropy in (
46 ) to plot @xmath as a function of @xmath .

At low temperatures, the system must be in the graviton gas phase. One
could raise the temperature (lower the dotted line) all the way to the
Hagedorn temperature at which the canonical ensemble ceases to exist but
the most interesting situation occurs for an intermediate value where
there is competition between three phases. From ( 46 ), a
straightforward calculation of the graviton gas free energy yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

and we have already written the large black hole free energy ( 47 ). If
we were to calculate the small black hole free energy in the same way,
we would find that it is positive, so ( 48 ) and ( 47 ) are the only
ones we need. Setting them equal, we find a first order phase transition
at

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

Were it not for the complication of the internal manifold @xmath , this
would be the Hawking-Page transition page showing that a sufficiently
large black hole in AdS can come to equilibrium with the radiation it
emits. Since the energy, entropy and temperature of a black hole are all
known in terms of its event horizon radius @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

When @xmath , this is minimized for an @xmath that rolls to zero. When
@xmath , this is minimized for as large an @xmath as possible.
Substituting @xmath into ( 33 ), we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

This phenomenon on the field theory side has the interpretation of a
deconfinement phase transition related to the scale @xmath . As @xmath ,
the temperature ( 49 ) vanishes and there is no confinement as expected
for a CFT in Minkowski space. Since the confining theory of greatest
physical interest (quantum chromodynamics) lives in infinite volume, it
has little in common with Super Yang-Mills on @xmath . A holographic
study of QCD requires one to introduce a scale to SYM in a more drastic
way.

This can be done by compactifying some but not all of the directions in
a Minkowski CFT. Witten’s model witten1 e.g. compactifies SYM on a
Scherk-Schwarz circle — @xmath with antiperiodic fermions. Since the
other directions are extended, it is helpful to rewrite ( 20 ) so that
they manifestly appear as Minkowski space. Global AdS is large enough
for this to be done several times yielding disjoint patches separated by
co-ordinate singularities. A given patch has the following metric known
as Poincaré AdS

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the boundary is located at @xmath . The transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (52)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

converts between the global and Poincaré metrics magoo . Some sources
assume @xmath before deriving ( 51 ) in order to write the simpler
transformation @xmath schaposnik . This gives the false impression that
( 51 ) is only approximately equal to a patch of AdS. Applying ( 52 ) to
( 21 ) gives another form of the AdS black hole:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

If we compactify a spatial direction and let @xmath take on fewer values
than @xmath , the resulting metric is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

An interesting procedure, that would not have worked for any of the
previous metrics, is available to be used on ( 55 ). We may
Euclideanize, exchange the @xmath circle with the @xmath circle and
switch back to a Minkowskian signature. This yields a spacetime known as
the AdS soliton without us having to solve Einstein’s equations again.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

The deconfinement we saw earlier was a transition between two spacetimes
that shared the same boundary: empty AdS and the AdS black hole. We now
have ( 55 ) and ( 56 ) competing for the same boundary. However, the
horizon position @xmath has a very different interpretation in ( 56 )
because it causes the @xmath circle to shrink to zero size. A horizon
that observers can safely cross changes the signature according to
@xmath . On the other hand, if we allowed @xmath , we would see @xmath .
Because this is a Lorentzian theory, @xmath is simply a point where the
spacetime ends. This enduring scale, called the infrared wall, is what
leads to a mass gap wiseman .

The Witten model with these two backgrounds is the typical arena for
seeing plasma balls. These were conjectured aharony based on the
observation that stable domain walls should exist between solutions like
( 55 ) and ( 56 ). Roughly, such a domain wall is constructed by
choosing a special direction @xmath and making @xmath a function of
@xmath . Choosing this function appropriately, the bulk metric can be
made to look like the black hole at @xmath and the soliton at @xmath .
This solution, which cannot be found analytically, may look like the one
in Figure 5 . In order for it to be stable, the pressure of the
deconfined phase must be small enough to balance the domain wall tension
at some temperature. Intuitive arguments for this are given in aharony
with the final confirmation being numerical.

This process can be repeated to further localize the domain wall.
Instead of going from the confining vacuum at @xmath to the deconfined
plasma at @xmath , one may change the solution so that it goes from
confined to deconfined and back wiseman . This can also be done using
directions other than @xmath to make the area of the black hole horizon
finite. The black hole made in this way decays in a process that looks
like some combination of shrinking in @xmath and hitting the infrared
wall in @xmath . The field theory state dual to this black hole near the
IR is called a plasma ball. The dual decay process consists of hadrons
leaving the ball and travelling outwards. Because they are travelling
into a confining vacuum, they must be color singlets, leading to a
lifetime proportional to @xmath aharony .

When deriving ( 46 ), the black holes we discussed were dual to energy
eigenstates of SYM on @xmath . In analogy with free theories (whose
momentum eigenstates are completely delocalized), these states have
uniform energy density of order @xmath on the whole sphere. The
situation is very different for plasma balls. They have non-uniform
energy densities like those in Figure 6 because their dual black holes
come from an interpolation of gravity saddle points. When we construct
plasma balls (in a completely different manner), we should keep in mind
that small compact directions and infrared walls are likely to appear in
the corresponding geometries. As a check, it is interesting to see what
goes wrong when trying to construct a plasma ball for Super-Yang Mills
on @xmath . In principle, one could prepare a state in the CFT that has
Figure 6 ’s energy density at @xmath . Rather than a thermalization
process dual to Hawking radiation, this state’s future is governed by
the phenomenon of collective oscillations freivogel . When quantized on
a sphere, the generators of conformal transformations obey the same
commutation relations as traditional raising and lowering operators.
Rewriting them as @xmath and @xmath , freivogel constructed undamped
oscillating states by applying a function of them to a density matrix:
@xmath . In analogy with coherent states of the harmonic oscillator,
explicit functions were given such as the simplest one:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

When @xmath , ( 57 ) is unitary and @xmath , but freivogel gave
normalization constants for other @xmath and @xmath as well. Crucially,
the AdS isometry dual to ( 57 ) is no more complicated than a boost.
This allows its effect on strongly coupled states to be found with the
AdS / CFT correspondence. The example considered in freivogel starts
with a three-dimensional spacetime known as the BTZ black hole btz :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

As before, the boundary theory dual to this has a uniform stress-energy
tensor when compactified on the @xmath sphere:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

We could use @xmath / @xmath analogues of ( 36 ) and ( 43 ) to replace
@xmath and @xmath with gauge theory expressions above. Because AdS has a
boundary, boosting ( 58 ) to a velocity of @xmath yields a black hole
that oscillates about the origin indefinitely. The CFT state dual to
this bouncing black hole has the stress-energy tensor:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               (60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Thus we see that a valid CFT solution having Figure 7 as its @xmath
energy density is not a meta-stable ball at a fixed position, but a
stable flow with an oscillating position freivogel .

## Iii Treating energy stochastically

Our goal is to model certain features of an interacting field theory,
without recourse to what the specific interaction is. One way to
accomplish this is to construct a model that is based on the system’s
density of states. A thermodynamic quantity like this is easier to
understand than the Hamiltonian because it is only an indication of the
spectrum of the Hamiltonian. The result of our derivation will be an
evolution equation for the energy density at each point in space.

### iii.1 Main equations

To begin our analysis, we consider a cubic lattice of identical sites in
@xmath dimensions and keep track of the number of units of energy that
can be found on each site. Following mvr , we will write @xmath to mean
@xmath units on site 1, @xmath units on site 2, @xmath units on site 3,
etc . Each configuration has a certain probability of being realized.
This probability is @xmath . Uppercase letters have been used for random
variables with the lowercase versions denoting specific values. However,
we will often shorten this to @xmath . In a stochastic process with
continuous time, the probabilities as a function of time obey the master
equation ngvk :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

The @xmath quantities which determine the process are called the
transition rates and are defined by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To convert ( 61 ) into something more concrete, we will make three
physical assumptions: local energy conservation, detailed balance and
entropic dominance.

#### iii.1.1 Physical assumptions

Inline with our first assumption, we declare that any transition which
is nonlocal or does not conserve energy has a @xmath value of zero. In
the transition rates that are left, energy is transferred between two
sites and those sites must be nearest neighbours. Instead of listing all
@xmath configurations that can be reached from @xmath , we may simply
choose a pair of sites @xmath and a number @xmath to transfer between
them. The master equation therefore becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (62)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

We will not work directly with probabilities, but rather the expectation
of a particular site’s energy:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

The next step is to differentiate ( 63 ) and substitute ( 62 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Every @xmath in the sum is a @xmath for some other @xmath and the
negative @xmath value. As long as @xmath does not appear, these cancel
with the same coefficient. We may therefore let @xmath and reindex.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (64)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

We have yet to show that it is safe to replace random variables by their
expectations in the last step. Since ( 64 ) is still quite general,
further work is required to narrow down our choices for @xmath .

The configurations @xmath represent collections of several microstates.
Introducing the function @xmath giving the number of ways for site
@xmath to have energy @xmath , it is easy to count the number of ways in
which our configurations can be realized. There are @xmath microstates
with the distribution @xmath . The most familiar situation in
statistical mechanics is that of thermal equilibrium. State @xmath in
equilibrium is achieved with probability @xmath . Since this is just one
microstate, we should add up a sufficient number of them to get

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

These are equilibrium probabilities so the master equation should vanish
when they are inserted. This condition provides a constraint on the
possible transition rates but we will make use of a stronger condition;
the principle of detailed balance. Detailed balance, which holds for
reversible Markov chains, states that all terms in ( 62 ) should
separately vanish in equilibrium instead of just the entire sum:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

This principle was famously used by Einstein to predict spontaneous
emission rates before quantum field theory had been developed mccumber .
Substituting ( 65 ) into ( 66 ), our condition becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

There are many solutions to this system of equations but some make more
sense than others.

One solution to ( 67 ) has @xmath proportional to the number of final
states @xmath . This type of transition rate is the one most compatible
with the ergodic principle. When fluctuations are completely thermal, a
higher number of final states should be the only thing favouring one
transition over another. We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where there can be some additional dependence on @xmath . Substituting
this into ( 67 ), we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this relation repeatedly, we may set @xmath equal to @xmath or
@xmath , telling us that @xmath is only a function of the total energy.
For this to be valid, any configuration must be reachable from the
configuration obtained by having one site shift all of its energy to a
neighbour. This is the same as saying that there are no superselection
sectors. We now have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we have included the factor of @xmath for later convenience. We
should note that @xmath is not proportional to the number of
configurations that have @xmath on site @xmath and @xmath on site @xmath
. This would be @xmath . A transition rate involving all of these
factors would be inconsistent with the nearest neighbour logic we have
been using. The only transition we have allowed is one in which site
@xmath sends @xmath units of energy to site @xmath . If a transition
rate compatible with the ergodic principle also depends linearly on
@xmath for some other site @xmath , this is not a transition rate for
@xmath but rather @xmath . In other words, site @xmath has itself
undergone a transition to some other internal state that keeps the same
energy @xmath . This amounts to two transition happening in the same
timestep. Moreover, there is no way to tell that this is indeed a
nearest neighbour transition paired with a transition between internal
states far away. It could have been site @xmath sending @xmath units of
energy to site @xmath followed immediately by @xmath sending @xmath
units of energy to site @xmath , thus violating locality.

#### iii.1.2 The continuum limit

The equation we wish to build on is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the transition rates are given by ( 68 ). So far, we have been
assuming that the energy and the spatial co-ordinate both vary by
discrete amounts. One way to write this is to have site @xmath labelled
by which means that site @xmath is @xmath for some unit vector . To
consider a continuous version of ( 69 ), the lattice constant @xmath
must approach zero. Additionally, the sum over @xmath must become a sum
over @xmath with @xmath also going to zero. Our formula ( 68 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we use @xmath instead of @xmath to make it clear that we are
talking about energy densities that are being incremented continuously.
One should keep in mind that @xmath has units of inverse time in order
for @xmath to be a rate. Since our differential equation for the energy
density is now a function of the small parameters @xmath and @xmath , a
useful approximation to it can be derived with a Taylor expansion.

Using ( 70 ) in the continuous version of ( 69 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (71)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

We will define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in which case the relevant Taylor series becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

We can see from ( 71 ) that @xmath , so any term in ( 72 ) that
survives, must involve at least three derivatives of @xmath : two with
respect to @xmath and one with respect to @xmath . In fact, the number
of derivatives we need to take is even higher. Differentiating something
like @xmath with respect to @xmath would contribute a @xmath term inside
the sum. If we add up the @xmath components of where runs over all
positive and negative standard basis vectors, the result is zero. This
means we need at least one more derivative with respect to @xmath and
the approximation we seek is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

We will use the abbreviated notation @xmath and @xmath which satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Also, the derivatives with respect to @xmath are not calculated here but
in the appendix. Picking up from where the appendix leaves off,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (75)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

It is not immediately obvious but ( 75 ) simplifies to a more compact
expression involing a logarithm. If we expand

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

we get something whose @xmath derivative is ( 75 ). This shows that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

Checking the dimensions of ( 76 ), the left hand side is an energy
density over a time. On the right hand side, we have an energy density
in the form of @xmath because the other @xmath cancels with the @xmath .
We also have an inverse time because the function @xmath had inverse
time units. The @xmath cancels with the two spatial derivatives. From
now on, we will drop unknown dimensionful parameters by absorbing them
into the time. The main differential equation of our model is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

in which @xmath is assumed to be a dimensionless function. Common
choices for it will be @xmath and @xmath .

### iii.2 Interesting features

Our continuum limit equation has particularly nice things to say about a
system with microcanonical phases like ( 46 ). At least two of these
phases only appear at energies that are large compared to the spatial
volume. After considering some insights in mvr concerned with the case
@xmath , we will see that large energies are required to even trust the
model at a basic level.

#### iii.2.1 Static situations

A special role is played by the density of states whose logarithm is
linear in @xmath . This is the Hagedorn density of states that we saw
appearing in string theory and Super Yang-Mills: @xmath . In this case
@xmath , a constant. The @xmath acting on this constant will set the
left hand side of ( 77 ) to zero. Under Hagedorn behaviour, the energy
distribution @xmath does not change with time.

The gauge theories with holographic duals have a Hagedorn regime as well
as other phases. As stated before, we expect @xmath where we could have
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath depending on the energy. Since the dynamics
are frozen with a purely Hagedorn density of states, we expect changes
in the energy to take place very slowly if @xmath is the widest phase.
The @xmath phase can equivalently be described as the energy range for
which the inverse temperature @xmath is flat.

Using the fact that @xmath is the microcanonical entropy, we can rewrite
our main equation in terms of @xmath as well:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and our equation becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

The phases can be characterized by whether @xmath is decreasing ( @xmath
), increasing ( @xmath ) or neither ( @xmath ).

With a Hagedorn density of states, @xmath vanishes for any energy
distribution. Conversely with a uniform energy distribution, @xmath
vanishes for any density of states. This equilibrium distribution may be
stable or unstable depending on the phase we are in. We will decompose
the energy as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is small, allowing us to keep only one power of it in the
PDE ( 78 ). First,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This expression with one power of @xmath is multiplied by @xmath . A
first order expansion of @xmath would give an overall result that is
second order in @xmath so we only expand it to zeroth order:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

This is either the heat equation or the reverse heat equation depending
on whether the overall coefficient is negative or positive. The sign of
@xmath is what matters because @xmath and @xmath are positive functions.
Agreeing with our earlier intuition about the entropic dynamics of
energy, we have the following three cases:

-   @xmath is a decreasing inverse temperature, a concave entropy and a
    log-concave density of states. It leads to diffusion or
    inhomogeneities that decrease with time due to the heat equation.

-   @xmath is an increasing inverse temperature, a convex entropy and a
    log-convex density of states. It leads to clustering or
    inhomogeneities that increase with time due to the reverse heat
    equation.

-   @xmath is a constant inverse temperature, a linear entropy and a
    Hagedorn density of states. It leads to static behaviour.

Understanding the detailed properties of the diffusion and to a lesser
extent the clustering caused by this PDE will be the focus of the next
chapter.

#### iii.2.2 Mean-field variances

A loose end in this chapter has been the assumption that we may work
only with expected values in ( 64 ). In general, mean-field
approximations may be used on quantities that have a small variance. An
energy with a small variance is also one of the desired features of our
model. After all, the model is an attempt at connecting the excitations
of field theory degrees of freedom to Einstein gravity, something that
is completely deterministic.

If variances are initially small, we want to make sure that they grow
slowly so that our model stays valid for a long time. Just as we derived
an expression for @xmath from the master equation, we can repeat the
calculation for @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (80)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

If we combine ( 80 ) with ( 64 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have substituted the @xmath solution ( 68 ). This equation for
the variance can be examined in the continuum limit and the key is that
we do not need as many orders as @xmath in the subsequent Taylor
expansion. The continuum limit is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (81)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where the positive sign is due to the fact that we have @xmath instead
of @xmath . Again, define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When Taylor expanding @xmath , we need at least two derivatives with
respect to @xmath because of the @xmath prefactor. This is all we need
because @xmath is nonzero.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (82)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Unlike ( 76 ), it is not the same unknown function that appears on the
left and right hand sides of ( 82 ). One must first solve for @xmath in
order to solve for @xmath .

Since the expression for @xmath has a small prefactor of @xmath while
that for @xmath does not, it would seem that the rate of change of the
variance is parametrically larger, something we wished to avoid.
However, it does not make sense to compare these quantities directly.
The energy has the same units as its standard deviation so we should
compare @xmath to @xmath or more conveniently, @xmath to @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

Factors of @xmath in the numerator and denominator cancel leaving @xmath
in the denominator. This tells us that such a ratio of derivatives can
indeed be small if the energy is large enough. In other words, a PDE
like ( 77 ) can be trusted to model high energy phenomena. Thinking
about gravity, this includes the extreme environments of black holes but
not the everyday motion of test particles around them. On a more
practical level, it would be difficult to even write down the equation (
77 ) if we were concerned with it holding for low energies. For the
field theories we are interested in, only asymptotic expressions are
known for the density of states. Even for situations in which the exact
number of states is known for all energies, this @xmath is not
continuous.

## Iv Nonlinear diffusion

We now cover some of the properties of equations like ( 77 ) that are
known analytically. The main assumption we will use throughout this
chapter is that @xmath is weakly decreasing, i.e. @xmath . This is a
slight departure from the strongly coupled gauge theory result as shown
in Figure 8 .

If @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . We will in fact consider ( 85 ) regardless of @xmath .
This is because ( 84 ) is always ( 85 ) for some other @xmath . Simply
define @xmath . Because @xmath and @xmath are positive functions, @xmath
is decreasing if and only if @xmath is. Therefore we will drop the tilde
and write

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

from now on. Of course the @xmath in ( 86 ) no longer has to be of the
form plotted in Figure 8 but this will be unimportant for most of the
results that follow.

### iv.1 Basic properties on a bounded domain

We will start by assuming that @xmath where @xmath is an open, bounded
domain in @xmath . This allows the initial energy density @xmath to be
integrable without decaying to zero. As shown in Figure 9 , a potential
problem with ( 86 ) is thus avoided because the low energies for which
@xmath diverges are not realized.

The initial condition will be denoted @xmath reflecting the fact that we
choose an energy distribution to evolve forward in time, i.e. @xmath is
an input to the Cauchy problem.

#### iv.1.1 Conservation of energy

Energy conservation was one of the properties we demanded from the
start. As with any Cauchy problem, whether or not energy is conserved
depends on the boundary conditions. As with the heat equation, Neumann
boundary conditions are the appropriate ones to consider. When
discussing these mathematical results, we will use “mass” to refer to
the integral of @xmath over space rather than a gap in the spectrum of a
field theory.

###### Theorem 1.

If @xmath solves

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

then @xmath is constant.

###### Proof.

We can show that the derivative of @xmath is zero using Green’s first
identity.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Dirichlet boundary conditions would not lead to conserved energy unless
we finely tuned @xmath to be zero on the boundary. ∎

#### iv.1.2 The maximum principle

Perhaps the most ubiquitous tool in the study of elliptic and parabolic
equations is the maximum principle. Although it is sometimes introduced
as a tool for studying linear equations, many nonlinear versions of it
have appeared over the years protter . Our proof of a suitable maximum
principle will be very similar to the one in tao .

###### Theorem 2.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath for a monotonically decreasing @xmath .
If @xmath for all @xmath , there does not exist a spacetime point @xmath
for which @xmath .

###### Proof.

First suppose that @xmath is initially non-negative but not always
non-negative. Then there must exist some point @xmath such that @xmath .
We can let @xmath be the position of the minimum of @xmath so that
@xmath and @xmath are also satisfied. If @xmath is the first time such a
point occurs, @xmath .

Now let @xmath where @xmath is some positive constant. Saying that
@xmath is non-negative is the same as saying that @xmath because @xmath
is monotone. Therefore if @xmath initially but not always, the above
says that there must be a point @xmath such that:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

Since @xmath is a supersolution and @xmath is a subsolution, @xmath and
@xmath can be combined to give @xmath . On the other hand, our four
conditions above can be combined into an inequality that contradicts
this telling us that @xmath cannot drop below @xmath if @xmath .

First we use the fact that @xmath to write @xmath . We must now show
that the difference of the time derivatives is less than zero. To do
this, we note that at least one of the following must be true:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first one is true if @xmath and @xmath have the same sign. The
second one is true if they have different signs. Use @xmath to denote
whatever prefactor appears in the correct statement, either @xmath or
@xmath . The key is that this is a negative constant. The last
inequality in our list of four can turn this into

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Dividing through by @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the first inequality in the list of four, we see that this is less
than zero, completing the proof. ∎

Even though this could still be generalized further arena , it is
already more general than the maximum principle. To get the maximum
principle, let @xmath be a solution (a special case of a subsolution)
and @xmath be @xmath . Since @xmath is a constant, it is also a solution
and therefore a supersolution. The theorem above now tells us that
@xmath must continue to upper bound @xmath at all later times which
means the maximum of @xmath decreases with time. As always, this is
equivalent to the minimum principle which states that the minimum
increases with time. We have already seen in ( 79 ) that our PDE turns
into the heat equation when the energy distribution is close to uniform.
The maximum principle tells us that our PDE is similar to the heat
equation in some respects for general energy distributions as well.

In addition to talking about the value of the maximum of @xmath , we can
gain some information about its position. If our initial condition
@xmath is spherically symmetric, our equation gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now suppose that @xmath achieves its maximum at the origin and has no
other local minima or maxima. In other words @xmath for @xmath . If
@xmath were to become positive away from the origin at some later time,
it would have to first vanish. Also, since an extreme point has not
formed yet, @xmath is an inflection point satisfying @xmath and @xmath .
Plugging these into our expression above, we see that @xmath . If the
radial derivative of @xmath ever gets to zero, it starts decreasing
again and never passes zero to become positive. Therefore the origin is
the only local extremum at all times.

#### iv.1.3 Existence of a steady-state

We now have everything we need to discuss the behaviour of solutions in
the limit of infinite time. By setting @xmath equal to zero, we can see
that the limiting energy distribution satisfies

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The only solutions to the Neumann problem for Laplace’s equation are
constants. Therefore @xmath must be constant in space if @xmath . There
are two ways for this to happen. One is for @xmath to solely occupy the
Hagedorn regime. If not, @xmath is invertible in a neighbourhood of at
least one energy in the steady-state and @xmath must be constant. By
energy conservation, the value of this constant is of course

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, we know what @xmath must be if it exists but it is not
yet obvious that it exists. Even for an energy distribution whose
extrema stay in the same place and smooth out over time, it is possible
for the intermediate regions to constantly oscillate without ever
converging to any function. Our proof that this does not happen for ( 86
) will compare it to the heat equation.

###### Theorem 3.

Suppose that @xmath solves

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for a spherically symmetric @xmath with a central maximum as its only
local extreme point. If @xmath becomes strict whenever @xmath , then
@xmath converges to its average.

###### Proof.

Letting @xmath denote a ball of radius @xmath , the mass satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The inequality came from the fact that the integrand is non-negative.
The flux is non-positive because the value of @xmath must always
decrease as we move away from the origin and @xmath is non-positive by
assumption. Let @xmath be the largest radius at which @xmath . If @xmath
ever reaches the radius of @xmath , the solution will have converged to
@xmath by energy conservation and the maximum principle. Therefore
assume the opposite and let @xmath . Since @xmath , we can make the
integral larger by replacing @xmath with @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now see that @xmath for our equation ( 86 ) shrinks more quickly than
@xmath for a heat equation with diffusion constant @xmath . The standard
Fourier series method shows that the solution to said heat equation with
initial data @xmath will converge to @xmath . Thus @xmath , the sphere
where @xmath is first achieved, eventually encloses a constant function.
By energy conservation and the maximum principle, @xmath must be equal
to the same constant outside this sphere as well. Therefore for any
@xmath , the energy at the edge always comes within @xmath of @xmath
which means that “the outside of this sphere” must have not existed all
along. ∎

### iv.2 Time scales

So far we have shown that the nonlinear diffusion we are interested in
shares a number of intuitive properties with linear diffusion: energy is
conserved, peaks smooth out over time and reasonable configurations of
energy will decay to a distribution that is completely uniform. However,
we still have relatively little information on how quickly these energy
distributions decay. Defining and bounding time scales for the diffusion
will allow us to compare our model to what is already known about
gravitational bound states.

#### iv.2.1 The concentration comparison theorem

If we continued applying the basic properties, we would be able to
derive some powerful results that are found in the literature. One of
these is the concentration comparison theorem vazquez1 which applies to
equations of the form ( 86 ) called filtration-equations . The only
difference is that filtration equations are typically written @xmath
where @xmath is weakly increasing. A fundamental property of diffusion
is that the mass contained within a fixed ball at the origin @xmath
should decrease. The total mass @xmath which we found to be constant in
time is @xmath . The concentration comparison theorem, which we state
below, is used to convert an inequality involving @xmath to an
inequality involving @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.

Let @xmath be increasing functions sending @xmath to @xmath such that
@xmath . Suppose that @xmath having mass @xmath and @xmath having mass
@xmath are solutions to @xmath and @xmath respectively with spherically
symmetric data. If @xmath for all @xmath then @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath .

To use this theorem, we must convert our function @xmath into something
satisfying @xmath . This is easily done with @xmath . Figure 11 shows
what kind of function @xmath is if @xmath is the function in Figure 8 .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is now the same as saying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is now some energy distribution equal to zero on @xmath .
If we can find an exact solution to another filtration equation whose
mass shrinks more quickly than that of @xmath , we will have found a
“decay time” that is shorter than the one we are looking for. Similarly,
a mass that shrinks more slowly would be associated with a longer “decay
time”. Time scales can therefore be determined if we choose bounding
functions that are “steeper” than @xmath or “flatter” than @xmath . The
crudest thing we could do is find a lower bound on the decay time by
drawing a linear function above @xmath . The next logical step is to
find proper estimates for the decay time by comparing our filtration
equation to something more non-trivial.

#### iv.2.2 Estimates in one dimension

As stated before, we are considering a density of states that has two
microcanonical phase transitions. We will call the energy of the first
one @xmath for Hagedorn and the energy of the second one @xmath for
field theory. A useful definition of decay time for us will be the time
required for the maximum of an energy distribution to descend from
@xmath to @xmath . Specifically, we will look at the initial condition

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

and see how long it takes until @xmath for all values of @xmath . The
steep vertical jump through the Hagedorn regime is a feature that ( 87 )
has in common with sharply peaked initial energy distributions. The
sharply peaked functions do not need to be constant at @xmath but this
will happen anyway once they are allowed to evolve. The distributions in
Figure 13 will flatten out in a relatively short time because diffusion
dominates above @xmath but not below. This suggests that the decay time
for a general peak is dominated by the decay time of ( 87 ). Further
evidence that ( 87 ) is representative of more general initial
conditions will appear in the next chapter on numerics.

Finding the decay time of ( 87 ) with respect to a general filtration
function is still too hard, so we will pick a simple filtration function
with the goal of using the concentration comparison theorem. The one to
pick is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

If we take an energy profile solving @xmath and look at it at some
instant of time, the parts with energy above @xmath should be static and
the parts with energy below @xmath should be satisfying the heat
equation. Energy crosses @xmath at a particular distance @xmath . Using
the method of mvr , we will construct a one-dimensional solution where
@xmath starts off at @xmath and eventually shrinks to zero indicating
that the decay time @xmath has been reached.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath solves the regular heat equation. Clearly @xmath cannot be
just any solution to the heat equation. To obey the initial condition (
87 ), we must have @xmath for @xmath . Also, we must impose conservation
of energy. The mass contained between @xmath and @xmath is @xmath . The
mass everywhere else is @xmath . We want their rates of change to be
equal and opposite so

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have differentiated under the integral sign. Therefore

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

is a necessary condition for the ansatz ( 89 ) to work. It is also
sufficient as we show in the appendix. The initial condition for @xmath
that will give us these necessary and sufficient conditions is @xmath
where @xmath is a yet undetermined constant that will turn out to be
between @xmath and @xmath . Figure 14 shows the basic setup.

To solve for @xmath , we first note that the heat kernel is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The heat equation’s Cauchy problem is solved by taking the convolution
of the initial condition with the heat kernel. Therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (91)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Differentiating @xmath is now straightforward and the position of the
interface can be found by setting @xmath . From this we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (92)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

and the ratio between ( 92 ) at the interface and the derivative of ( 93
) is constant.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We must set this equal to @xmath . The @xmath we obtain from doing so is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (94)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The transcendental equation defining @xmath can be solved because the
range of the left hand side includes all positive real numbers. The last
thing we need to do is find a more explicit value of @xmath for the case
when @xmath . If we were to consider @xmath , the solution would simply
be @xmath . Since @xmath is close to zero but not quite, it is
appropriate to linearize the left hand side of ( 95 ) giving us @xmath .
Plugging this into ( 94 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, the time scale can be found by setting @xmath or @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (96)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

#### iv.2.3 Higher dimensional generalization

The procedure above works in an arbitrary number of dimensions if the
initial condition has energy @xmath inside a hypercube of side length
@xmath . We will take @xmath , solve the heat equation for @xmath with
this Cauchy data and write

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

Performing the convolution with the heat kernel is straightforward
because the solution has a product form.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (98)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

From this we see that the surface @xmath where @xmath takes on the value
@xmath is the locus of points

  -- -- -- ------
           (99)
  -- -- -- ------

where @xmath . Differentiating @xmath and evaluating it on this surface,
we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

The analogue of ( 90 ) to the higher dimensional case is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is @xmath minus the volume enclosed by the surface ( 99 )
in the positive orthant. This can be visualized in Figure 15 . Clearly
@xmath . If we want to calculate the volume @xmath , we are looking for
@xmath values that go from the @xmath curve to @xmath instead of from
@xmath to the @xmath curve. This is the same as saying that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Each @xmath only depends on one @xmath so it is trivial to find the
Jacobian determinant.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Also, by multiplying all but one of these eigenvalues together, we can
find the area element required to calculate the surface integral in (
101 ). An expression for the volume is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (102)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

We only need to know the length of @xmath to compute the surface
integral. Working this out,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (103)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have arbitrarily chosen @xmath as the variable to be determined
from @xmath . The fact that ( 102 ) is proportional to one more factor
of @xmath than ( 103 ) is what allows ( 101 ) to be obeyed. There is a
problem with these expressions however that only rears its head when
@xmath ; not all points on the surface @xmath reach the co-ordinate
planes at the same time. In two dimensions for instance, the endpoint

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

will reach @xmath before the midpoint

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

reaches @xmath . In other words, for late times, the volume ( 102 )
includes some regions outside the positive orthant. It is not correct to
integrate @xmath values from @xmath to the @xmath curve. We must
integrate from @xmath to @xmath . The decay time obtained by setting (
98 ) to @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The expression ( 102 ) is most accurate when @xmath is large, i.e. when
@xmath . If this is true, we can obtain a reasonable approximation to
this complicated integral by setting @xmath . Doing this, we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With this, @xmath becomes much easier to express.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In the first step, we have used the fact that @xmath because @xmath are
very close to @xmath while in the last step, we have used l’Hôpital’s
rule. Linearizing the inverse error function in the denominator and
solving for @xmath , we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is precisely the condition we needed in the first place to be able
to say that @xmath was large and use this approximation. Therefore when
@xmath , the time scale @xmath in @xmath dimensions becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (104)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

#### iv.2.4 Upper and lower bounds

It is time to leverage these results to improve the decay time estimates
for the filtration function in Figure 12 . To achieve the tightest
possible bounds, we will make sure that our more-steep and less-steep
functions flatten out at @xmath . Figure 16 shows what this looks like.
The function on the left @xmath has a slope @xmath equal to @xmath . The
function on the left @xmath has a slope @xmath equal to @xmath . When
these slopes are determined, the concentration comparison theorem tells
us that our time scale will satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the main part of the text that will use a specific formula for
@xmath , so first consider the one that is valid when @xmath . Recall
that this is @xmath in the lowest energy regime. The slopes that we must
insert are simple:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (106)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Plugging ( 106 ) and ( 107 ) into ( 105 ), this time scale is now
solved:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

This dependence on @xmath is a general feature of long Hagedorn regions
as we will see in our next time scale. Recall that when we had @xmath ,
the effective inverse temperature function to consider @xmath was
defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We will construct a filtration function from this in the same way as
before. @xmath . In the low energy regime, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The first thing to notice is that @xmath is the same for @xmath and
@xmath . One derivative vanishes if and only if the other does. Also, at
an energy of @xmath , the number of states is very close to @xmath so
@xmath . Finding the slopes of appropriate bounding functions @xmath and
@xmath comes down to extremizing @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore @xmath starts off with a steep derivative at @xmath and
becomes less steep until reaching the inflection point @xmath . This
means that there are two important cases to consider: @xmath and @xmath
. The flattest point occurs at @xmath in the former case and at @xmath
in the latter.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (109)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Plugging ( 109 ) and ( 110 ) into ( 105 ), the next time scale is solved
as well:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is a third possibility; @xmath being so large that @xmath
surpasses @xmath . However, @xmath can always be made small enough to
stop this from happening.

#### iv.2.5 Remaining problems

A useful question to ask is how our decay time differs from a decay time
that would arise from linear diffusion. Solivng the heat equation with
the ( 87 ) initial data,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The time needed for the central peak to come down to @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , this decay time is parametrically less than the @xmath
result that we found for diffusion with a Hagedorn regime. However,
linear diffusion in @xmath is much slower. To get a sense of why the
@xmath times are similiar, we will look at the amount of energy outside
@xmath after a short amount of time mvr . For diffusion with a Hagedorn
regime, we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For the heat equation with the same slope, the result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where in the last step we have assumed @xmath . Therefore, diffusion
without a Hagedorn regime is faster at the beginning, but not over
longer time scales. We can explain this effect by noticing that a lump
of energy diffusing linearly becomes remarkably flat towards the “end”
of its diffusion. Small spatial derivatives lead to small time
derivatives and a long time constant. Diffusion with a Hagedorn regime
does not have this problem. The discontinuous solutions we saw had steep
profiles during all stages of what we called the diffusion. A different
effect, the large static phase, is what lengthened the time constant.
Even though diffusion times are similar with and without a Hagedorn
phase, the numerics will show that if the energy distribution begins
with a peak well above @xmath , its diffusion will slow down
significantly upon reaching @xmath . This does not contradict our
analysis because the diffusion in the high energy phase comes with a
much larger constant than the diffusion that crosses over to Hagedorn
behaviour in the other two phases.

Regardless of how many dimensions there are, we should expect that our
model overestimates the decay time of a plasma ball. The energy in our
model can only diffuse away to infinity so quickly once it leaves a ball
of radius @xmath . In a realstic plasma ball, energy escaping the
central region is quickly ejected because it is travelling through a
vacuum.

### iv.3 Comments on unbounded domains

For unbounded domains such as the whole space, the only sensible energy
distributions are the ones that decay to zero and filtration equations
like ( 86 ) take on many new properties. Even though the diffusion of
energy governed by a master equation should certainly be well defined
for a space that extends infinitely, we found in the last chapter that
our PDE is only a useful model for such behaviour when the energy is
high. Therefore, it is not necessarily true that a result derived for
@xmath applies to the entropic limit of a field theory.

#### iv.3.1 Barriers to uniqueness

The first thing we note is that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

would have many solutions if we simply looked for them in the set of all
differentiable functions. This property is well known for the heat
equation. In fact, for the heat equation chung and similar equations
dhungana in the whole space, nonzero solutions have been found that
vanish at @xmath . These authors have found a restriction that must be
made in order to recover uniqueness; there must exist a paraboloid in
@xmath such that @xmath stays below it at all times. Because our
equation is different from the heat equation, it is not yet clear that
the same condition, or a stronger one, will yield unique solutions to (
86 ). Nevertheless, we will impose the stronger condition that @xmath be
uniformly bounded in spacetime.

Requiring uniform boundedness is natural because it forces solutions to
still obey the maximum principle. The maximum principle phrased in terms
of subsolutions and supersolutions made no assumption about the domain
being bounded, but in applying it, we set one solution equal to the
maximum of the other. Our assumption of uniform boundedness is the only
reason that we can still write @xmath because the maximum of a
continuous function is only guaranteed to exist on a compact domain.
Having to make assumptions about how solutions grow is a common theme
when extending maximum principles to the unbounded case protter . We now
turn to the question of uniqueness which is intimately related to energy
conservation.

Consider the function @xmath which is monotonically decreasing for all
@xmath . The equation ( 86 ) for this choice

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

has been studied extensively esteban ; rodriguez ; vazquez2 ; carrillo .
It is called the porous medium equation for @xmath , the fast diffusion
equation for @xmath and the very fast diffusion equation for @xmath . We
are mainly interested in very fast diffusion because we had @xmath and
@xmath is essentially @xmath . We are only writing @xmath instead of
@xmath here for consistency with the literature.

Trying to naively derive conservation of energy for ( 112 ) does not
work. This is related to the fact that @xmath does not need to be
bounded at a given time, even if @xmath is uniformly bounded. To
illustrate this, let us work with the very fast diffusion equation in
one dimension. For the initial condition @xmath , it is perfectly valid
to choose a function that decays like @xmath where @xmath . For large
@xmath , this leads to a time derivative given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The exponent tells us that it is possible for @xmath to decay “too
quickly”. If @xmath then @xmath is not bounded at @xmath . This affects
our ability to compute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to take the derivative inside the integral, there must exist an
@xmath such that @xmath is bounded on @xmath . We cannot do this with
all @xmath values, but even if we could, we would still not be out of
the woods.

Pick a value of @xmath satisfying @xmath . Since @xmath @xmath as
derived above must be finite at @xmath . Computing the time derivative
of the total mass,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Our choice @xmath tells us that the time derivative of @xmath is
initially infinite. Therefore @xmath cannot possibly be a constant
function on @xmath . We have demonstrated that there are infinitely many
functions @xmath such that there is no energy conserving soluton to the
following:

  -- -- -- -------
           (113)
  -- -- -- -------

As it turns out, however, for any @xmath , there is esteban ; vazquez2
an energy conserving solution to the similar problem:

  -- -- -- -------
           (114)
  -- -- -- -------

Differential equations can only hold in open sets so the notation @xmath
really means that any derivative of @xmath will converge to the
corresponding derivative of @xmath as @xmath . The subtle distinction
between ( 113 ) and ( 114 ) is that the only thing that needs to
converge is the function itself. The @xmath will converge in @xmath to
@xmath but the @xmath need not converge to @xmath . In other words,
@xmath appeared to diverge because we were still calculating it
incorrectly.

Esteban, Rodriguez and Vázquez esteban showed that an energy conserving
solution to the very fast diffusion Cauchy problem exists in one
dimension. However, there are also solutions that vanish in finite time
such as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This solves ( 114 ) for @xmath and does not conserve energy. The theorem
of esteban still applies to initial conditions like

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it just yields a different solution. In fact, for all @xmath and all
initial conditions, there are short lived solutions to ( 114 ) in
addition to the one that conserves energy. One of the following
equivalent conditions is needed to make sure we are choosing the right
solution.

1.  @xmath for @xmath .

2.  @xmath for @xmath .

3.  @xmath for @xmath .

In fact, rodriguez generalized this to arbitrary flux functions.

###### Theorem 5.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are non-negative. Then there exists a unique
solution to

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

whose total mass satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The energy conserving solution that interests us is precisely the case
@xmath . It is important to remember that even though the vanishing flux
of @xmath is posed as a constraint, we are still free to consider an
initial profile @xmath that does not have a vanishing flux. This is an
example of a problem with inconsistent initial and boundary conditions .
Some numerical methods have been written specifically to address this
verma . Infinite propogation speed ensures that the conditions are only
inconsistent on a set of measure zero. Depending on what we specify for
the flux, the distribution might “jump” to a function that decays
quickly or to a function that decays slowly. When @xmath , energy
conservation in ( 114 ) is known to hold without the complication of
non-uniqueness vazquez2 .

We may summarize this discussion by saying that the maximum principle
only holds for a general ( 86 ) if we specify uniform boundedness and
that uniqueness only holds for a general ( 86 ) if we specify energy
conservation. The very fast diffusion equation in one dimension provides
an example of uniqueness not holding for ( 86 ) if we only specify
uniform boundedness. Even when we have a unique energy conserving
solution, the time derivative of the total mass will not make sense at
@xmath for the perfectly good initial conditions that are inconsistent
with the boundary conditions. For those, the energy flux that vanishes
for the solution at all positive times will not vanish at @xmath .

#### iv.3.2 Barenblatt profiles

Solutions to ( 86 ) on a bounded domain converge to their average values
which means that solutions to the same equation on the whole space
should converge to zero. This will be an @xmath convergence and not an
@xmath convergence because of energy conservation. One should check
whether the associated decay times on @xmath have anything to do with
our main time scales ( 108 ) and ( 111 ). Some known results about the
very fast diffusion equation will help us do this. There is an important
family of exact solutions to the porous medium, fast diffusion and very
fast diffusion equations given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a positive constant that determines the mass carrillo .
These self-similar functions called Barenblatt solutions have a Dirac
delta as their initial conditions. Solving for the mass,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (116)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have recognized a beta function. The time that it takes for a
Barenblatt profile’s peak to reach @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we wanted to call this a Barenblatt profile of mass @xmath , we could
use the mass relation ( 116 ) to replace @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

Even though this decay time is concerned with a Dirac delta of mass
@xmath , it upper bounds the decay time for a box of mass @xmath by the
concentration comparison theorem. Things are even nicer than this; the
Barenblatt profiles attract all solutions to the Cauchy problems for
these nonlinear diffusion equations. As time goes on, general solutions
@xmath will converge to @xmath and the rate of convergence has been
found carrillo :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means that ( 118 ) still depends on the mass in the same way as the
true decay time. Since @xmath and @xmath are very different, we should
not have used results from an unbounded domain to derive ( 108 ) and (
111 ). Implicit in all of this is a certain relation between @xmath and
@xmath . Consider this list of conditions:

1.  The constant @xmath must be positive for the Barenblatt solutions to
    be well defined.

2.  The overall power of @xmath in ( 115 ) must be negative in order for
    the peak value to decay with time.

3.  In order for the mass ( 116 ) to be finite, @xmath must approach
    zero faster than @xmath .

4.  An @xmath decay time should decrease with the mass.

Any one of these four requirements will tell us that @xmath . Since
diffusion in our model happens when @xmath , our primary interest is
@xmath . This is only above the critical exponent in one dimension
providing another reason why it was necessary to demand a bounded
domain. We know from esteban ; rodriguez that when @xmath , the very
fast diffusion equation yields infinitely many solutions and one energy
conserving solution. The latter is indeed asymptotic to the Barenblatt
profile having the same mass. However, in @xmath we already see that
there is no energy conserving solution to the very fast diffusion
equation. It would be interesting to find some analogue of ( 115 ) for
bounded domains that acts as a fundamental solution and stays well
defined for all @xmath and @xmath .

## V Numerical analysis

The expressions for our time scales rely on the fact that @xmath in a
domain that has a large but finite size. To see how sensitively the
inequalities depend on these factors, we have undertaken a numerical
test of our time scales and ( 108 ) in particular. The code used for
most simulations can be found in the appendix. One thing that is
immediately visible in the code is our decision to use initial
conditions that decay according to a power law:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the very fast diffusion equation on an unbounded domain, we saw that
it was possible for the initial condition to decay too quickly ( @xmath
). Since the nicest functions to simulate are the ones with a finite
@xmath , this rules out functions @xmath that decay exponentially or
have compact support. For low energies, the relevant exponent is @xmath
. This confines us to using @xmath values smaller than @xmath and not so
much smaller that the decay takes forever. The numerics are done on a
bounded domain so @xmath is technically finite for any @xmath . However,
if we were to pick @xmath , the flux at the edges would experience
unbounded growth as we made the domain larger casting doubt on our
ability to trust those results.

### v.1 Implementation details

In ( 86 ), we have been considering a function @xmath which has
diffusive behaviour for low and high energies with a Hagedorn phase and
possibly a clustering phase in between. The chosen entropy should be of
the Super Yang-Mills type ( 46 ) where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A smooth approximation to this can be accomplished with the function:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

However, the clustering phase where @xmath is convex is difficult to
simulate numerically and our results including ( 108 ) have neglected
it. Assuming that @xmath so that this phase does not exist, we arrive
at:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

Plotting the @xmath derived from these two functions, we see a slight
problem. After the flat region of ( 119 ), @xmath increases reaching a
local maximum. After this it begins to decrease more and more quickly
until it reaches a point of inflection and asymptotically approaches 0.
The plot for ( 120 ), on the other hand, does not look very flat in any
region and seems to always be asymptotically approaching 0. There is no
point of inflection where some other behaviour “crosses over” to @xmath
behaviour. We will now show by brute force that there is no inflection
point, ruling out the possibility that this only happens for certain
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Claim 1.

For any @xmath , @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has no point of inflection.

###### Proof.

First we will write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now the equation @xmath becomes:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Even though we cannot factor this sixth degree polynomial, we may
conclude that it has no positive real roots via Descartes’ rule of
signs. ∎

What we should take away from this is that removing the clustering phase
by hand is too crude to give us a good filtration function to use in the
numerics. Instead we will use a function like the one plotted in Figure
19 where quadratic interpolation has been used to guarantee that it is
differentiable and decreasing with an almost-flat section and two
inflection points.

#### v.1.1 The Crank-Nicolson method

Now that the form of ( 86 ) has been decided, we need a method capable
of finding approximate solutions to it. Our PDE involves time and space,
so it is natural to discretize space and reduce it to the following set
of coupled ODEs:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The simplest method for integrating this type of ODE system is the
forward Euler method:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

One might expect a method like ( 121 ) to be accurate as long as @xmath
and @xmath are small. However, one can use the heat equation to show
that things are not so simple.

Figure 20 shows that making the discretization smaller is not always an
improvement. To avoid numerical instabilities, the restriction that must
be obeyed is @xmath . This is the precise restriction for the heat
equation but a nonlinear equation would suffer from a similar
restriction. This is especially harsh for investigating the long decay
times associated with a Hagedorn phase. Although they are more difficult
to apply, there are other methods known to be stable for large timesteps
press . One of these is the backward Euler method:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

In ( 121 ), we evolve @xmath forward in time by adding the derivative
that it has now . In ( 122 ) which looks similar, we add the derivative
that it will have after we add it. Since some inversion is clearly
necessary, we refer to this type of method as an implicit method . In
this work, we will use the average of the forward and backward Euler
methods, known as the Crank-Nicolson method. In order to isolate @xmath
in ( 122 ) when treating the heat equation, we must solve a system of
linear equations - one for each site in the lattice. For a nonlinear
equation like ( 86 ), these become nonlinear algebraic equations, and
hence often require numerical methods themselves. Something that might
look familiar is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is Newton’s method where the sequence converges to a zero of @xmath
unless the initial guess @xmath is sufficiently far away. The derivative
becomes the Jacobian when we have more than one variable.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

We should solve this (tridiagonal) linear system for an initial guess of
@xmath since @xmath is small enough to not change the energy much with
each step. The Crank-Nicolson method for us is then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath generated in the ( 123 ) way. One aspect of this which is
still undesirable is having a constant @xmath . Given the energy
profiles we wish to evolve, it will be more convenient to have @xmath
depend on @xmath so that the lattice can be finely grained in regions
where the energy profile changes the most. Figure 21 shows the need for
a variable spatial step and also establishes the conventions we will use
to have logarithmic axes.

#### v.1.2 Convergence tests

We wish to test this algorithm, but do not have any exact solutions at
our disposal. To verify that our finite difference scheme converges to a
solution as @xmath , there is a useful test suggested by choptuik based
on the Richardson expansion:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the approximate solution computed by the Crank-Nicolson
method, which differs from the exact solution according to functions
@xmath , @xmath , etc . If we choose different discretizations, @xmath
for example, ( 125 ) states that for a given @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a better check, we will compare the 2-norms of the numerical
solutions instead of choosing a single point @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

Plotting this for five different values of @xmath , it looks like @xmath
. This would be expected for a non-centred finite difference method
whose Richardson expansion looks like:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Our departure from the expected error @xmath is likely a result of the
nonlinear algebraic equations. As soon as we use Newton’s method,
Crank-Nicolson is not being followed exactly and an @xmath error can be
introduced. Linear combinations such as @xmath can be used to cancel
this error term in a technique called Richardson extrapolation. This has
been successfully used for other diffusion equations with the
Crank-Nicolson method zlatev .

### v.2 Simulation results

Going ahead with the Crank-Nicolson method, one can print out slices of
the energy every so often to see how it is diffusing. The numerics make
it clear that there are two time scales of interest. What we have
predicted in ( 108 ) is the long decay time needed for a distribution of
energy to descend below @xmath . Before this, the distribution will
reach @xmath or some number close to it, at what we call the
termalization time. Figure 23 shows that for a variety of initial
conditions, the energy profiles are qualitatively similar to step
functions when this happens.

#### v.2.1 Short time dynamics

The left plot in Figure 23 uses the @xmath form. It is fairly clear from
the figure that the profile is flattening out somewhere above @xmath .
After interpolation, the effective Hagedorn and field theory energies
become slightly shifted with respect to the parameters @xmath and @xmath
. Therefore to measure thermalization times as a function of @xmath , we
have used @xmath as a rule of thumb for where the peak energy should be.
After making a plot for five values of @xmath , we see that the
thermalization time is much more sensitive to variations in @xmath than
@xmath .

Another trend we may investigate is how @xmath behaves as a function of
@xmath . Plotting this for @xmath will give us Figure 25 . After a slow
start at early times, the plot becomes steeper before levelling off
again. This basic shape holds for other @xmath values as well. It is
different from the decay of a Barenblatt profile which would always have
@xmath as a power law. The time @xmath when @xmath is changing most
quickly appears somewhere in Figure 25 . If we work with the functions
having similar thermalization times (the ones normalized to have the
same mass), we find that @xmath in all five cases. The ratio between
@xmath and the average rate of change in the interval @xmath is about
@xmath . We have not found a way to predict these numbers analytically.

#### v.2.2 Long time dynamics

The next step is to wait until @xmath . An example of what this
diffusion looks like is in Figure 26 . This time, @xmath is predicted in
( 108 ) to depend on the squared mass. After all, a cylinder of radius
@xmath and height @xmath has a volume of @xmath if the base is
one-dimensional. When investigating the short time dynamics, initial
conditions of five different shapes were normalized to have the same
mass. Since @xmath was found to be almost the same for them, it is no
surprise that @xmath shares this property. Figure 27 shows a plot of
these times. As long as the mass is kept constant, early and late time
dynamics are largely insensitive to @xmath so we will use the initial
condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

from now on. The major quantity we have not changed yet is the @xmath
ratio. We have always had @xmath and @xmath so far. As we know in one
dimension, @xmath is proportional to @xmath and not a power of @xmath .
Whether or not we can change @xmath and leave @xmath invariant will be
the real test of ( 108 ). The condition @xmath needs to be satisfied so
we will choose a few @xmath values. The decay times for these choices,
plotted in Figure 28 , are remarkably close. The exact prefactors in (
108 ) still need to be checked but it turns out that they are not very
constraining. We know that @xmath and taking the length @xmath from the
code, we can plug it into ( 127 ) to find @xmath . Because @xmath is so
small, the prefactor multiplying @xmath in the upper bound from ( 108 )
is very different from the prefactor multiplying @xmath in the lower
bound from ( 108 ). In this simulation, they differ by a factor of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is much larger than any of the numbers put into the simulation by
hand.

#### v.2.3 Higher dimensions

Good agreement between our prediction and the numerical results has been
demonstrated in one dimension. In our case, extending the numerics to
higher dimensions is simple because we are focusing on spherically
symmetric data. Our equation becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This adds a term with a single spatial derivative to our one-dimensional
equation from before. A plot like Figure 28 should no longer be expected
because @xmath in ( 108 ) is no longer proportional to @xmath . In two
dimensions, @xmath . This means we are looking for a decay time that
varies linearly with the field theory energy. After modifying the
Crank-Nicolson code in the appendix, two-dimensional simulations testing
this have been performed. The results, plotted in Figure 29 , do not
appear to be proportional to @xmath . The @xmath decay time is much less
than twice the @xmath decay time. Even though the times scale
differently from the bounds in ( 108 ), they do not actually violate the
bounds because of the extreme prefactors that differ by a factor of
@xmath .

The typical values for @xmath differ greatly between dimensions one and
two. More generally, the decay times when @xmath are much smaller than
when @xmath . One dimension is special because it is only in this case
that the @xmath Barenblatt profile exists. Figure 29 shows decay times
that are only nonzero because of the bounded domain - a phenomenon known
as instantaneous extinction. This states that @xmath as @xmath , or in
other words, the process we are simulating is not well defined in
infinite volume.

## Vi Room for improvement

The dynamics of our model have shown many similarities to plasma balls
but there are three main problems. To start, our solutions show that
energy diffuses to infinity rather slowly once it escapes the central
region. The phenomenon of decay via hadron ejection is not realized. A
more serious problem is the instantaneous extinction we have seen for a
lattice with two or more dimensions. Finally, we have seen that some
punishing prefactors allow the admissible decay times to span several
orders of magnitude.

Though one can imagine several ad hoc changes to our model that might
eliminate these problems, an extension that refers to conserved
quantities other than energy is physically well motivated. The remainder
of this thesis will focus on developing an explicit PDE description for
the momentum in a Poincaré invariant theory.

### vi.1 A common approximation

There is already a widely applicable PDE framework called hydrodynamics
that puts energy and momentum on equal footing. Hydrodynamics is
concerned with systems that are close to equilibrium. Because of this, a
system may deviate from a translation invariant state only slightly
leading to slowly varrying charges @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These
are associated with long distance variations in their sources @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath respectively.

A theory with a symmetric stress-energy tensor and a @xmath current has
@xmath independent components. It is therefore not possible to describe
every system using the @xmath hydrodynamic variables above.
Nevertheless, hydrodynamics provides a good description of field
theories with high occupation numbers and has demonstrated a particular
aptitude for problems relating to plasma balls and black holes.

#### vi.1.1 Basic hydrodynamics

The hydrodynamics equations are nothing but the local conservation laws

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The conserved currents are built from @xmath , @xmath and @xmath making
this a system of @xmath equations for @xmath unknown functions (the
velocity satisfies @xmath ). The rules for writing ( 128 ) in terms of
the hydrodynamic variables are called the constitutive relations . There
is no limit to how complicated the constitutive relations might be so it
is helpful to use the assumption that the functions are slowly varrying.
This allows one to consider different versions of hydrodynamics based on
how many derivatives are kept. In zeroth order hydrodynamics, the
temperature, velocity and chemical potential are not differentiated in
the expressions for @xmath and @xmath . In first order hydrodynamics,
they are differentiated at most once. These orders are often referred to
as “ideal” and “dissipative” hydrodynamics. It is important to note that
this is different from the linearization of hydrodynamics. Nonlinear
equations ( e.g. the Navier-Stokes equations) can easily arise from
zeroth or first order hydrodynamics, so it is common to introduce a
further order-by-order expansion that drops terms with too many
variables multiplied together.

The first step in developing constitutive relations is decomposing the
currents into components that are transverse and longitudinal with
respect to @xmath . This leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have defined the projector @xmath . Transverse quantities like
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath cannot be built out of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath without derivatives. Therefore ideal hydrodynamics takes the
form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The pressure @xmath , while not a charge or a source, is usually given
in terms of sources by an equation of state @xmath . Going to the
fluid’s rest frame makes it clear that @xmath is the energy density and
@xmath is the charge density.

Things become more complicated when we include one order of dissipation
kovtun . Looking at ( 129 ), many quantities such as @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath depend on position for a general non-equilibrium configuration.
There is nothing that prevents us from changing @xmath to a different
function of spacetime as long as @xmath and @xmath change as well to
keep @xmath and @xmath invariant. This redundancy, similar to a gauge
freedom, is called frame invariance in hydrodynamics ambrosetti .
Consider a shift @xmath . To preserve the normalization, @xmath is
transverse to @xmath . Using the inverse of ( 129 ), corresponding
changes in the coefficients can be calculated to first order.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that purely dissipative quantities like @xmath and @xmath become
second order when multiplied by @xmath . These are all zero which
explains why we could write down ( 130 ) without worrying about frame
invariance. The same analysis would give @xmath as well. Conversely,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We see that a suitable definition of local velocity reduces the number
of terms in ( 129 ). The one that makes @xmath is called the Eckart
frame while the one that makes @xmath is called the Landau frame.
Naturally, @xmath and @xmath are allowed shifts of the other hydro
variables. Under these redefinitions, the coefficients from ( 130 )
become

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This means we can define temperature and chemical potential such that
@xmath and @xmath kovtun .

Choosing the Landau frame, constitutive relations are expressions for
the scalar @xmath , the transverse vector @xmath and the transverse
traceless symmetric tensor @xmath . These may contain any combination of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath with one derivative. However, the equations
of zeroth order hydrodynamics ( 130 ) give relations between many of
these terms up to higher order corrections. The Landau frame expressions
that follow from this are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The frame invariant parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are functions
of @xmath and @xmath that must be determined from experiment or the
microscopic theory. They are called the bulk viscosity, shear viscosity
and conductivity respectively. It turns out that @xmath must be zero for
time-reversal invariance to be satisfied. The linearization of ( 131 )
will be important in what follows.

We linearize around the equilibrium solution which has constant hydro
variables and zero velocity. This allows us to write @xmath .
Explicitly, what we seek are evolution equations for

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is important to remember that most coefficients in ( 130 ) and ( 131
) are functions of @xmath and @xmath . Their derivatives evaluated at
@xmath and @xmath should therefore appear in the linearization. These
derivatives, known as susceptibilities, do not have a functional
dependence on @xmath and @xmath anymore; they are simply numbers. For
this reason, we should not be worried if the linearized hydrodynamics
equations appear to have more coefficients than the six we have seen so
far. One equation of hydrodynamics is always the continuity equation
@xmath . It is easy to see that this becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

because it is already linear. The equation involving stresses linearizes
to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (133)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Finally, to handle the @xmath current

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (134)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

It is interesting to note that the continuity equation ( 132 )
effectively splits into two equations in non-relativistic hydrodynamics.
In this limit, one must insert the speed of light back into ( 131 ) and
collect powers of @xmath . Taking @xmath , inverse powers vanish leaving
only @xmath and @xmath terms in the hydro equations. Since these orders
can be considered separate, they yield conservation of mass and
conservation of kinetic energy kaminski .

Matching the predictions of hydrodynamics with those of the interaction
picture leads to the Kubo formulas. A simple Kubo formula can be derived
for the diffusion constant in the heat equation @xmath . Performing a
two-sided Fourier transform in space and a one-sided Fourier transform
in time, the equation can be solved as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

We assume that the initial buildup of charge is due to a local chemical
potential that existed before @xmath . If this chemical potential
increased adiabatically starting at @xmath , the corresponding
perturbation to the Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Heisenberg’s equation now gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is the retarded Green’s function of @xmath with itself. The
one fact we need is that the zero mode of @xmath is the susceptibility
@xmath . It is a matter of complex analysis to show that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (136)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Comparing ( 135 ) to ( 136 ), we see that a quantum theory well
described by linear diffusion should be one whose momentum space
retarded Green’s function is @xmath . A calculation that is longer but
equally straightforward has the linear hydrodynamics equations in place
of the heat equation. This is done in kovtun . Additionally a field
theory is developed that allows one to compute corrections to the
Green’s functions arising from small nonlinearities in the hydrodynamics
equations.

#### vi.1.2 The fluid / gravity correspondence

Correlation functions in certain CFTs are related to supergravity
amplitudes in certain AdS backgrounds. The link between Green’s
functions and linearized hydrodynamics opens up the possibility of
describing fluid phenomena using gravity. This was demonstrated in
policastro which found that the shear viscosity in Super Yang-Mills
theory is given by @xmath . By now it is known that in arbitrary
dimension, the holographic shear viscosity differs from the entropy
density by a factor of @xmath rangamani . A major result of 2007 is that
all transport coefficients in the fluid stress-energy tensor can be
algorithmically found from the gravity side as well hubeny . This
expansion, which is valid to all orders, is called the fluid / gravity
correspondence.

In the examples discussed previously, we related the energy of a state
on the boundary of AdS to the mass of a black hole in the bulk. More
generally, there is a systematic way to find the boundary stress-energy
tensor corresponding to a given bulk metric balasubramanian ; fg .
Because every metric yields a conserved stress-energy tensor, it is not
surprising that the fluid / gravity correspondence exists. However, the
limit in which temperature and velocity suffice to describe @xmath could
have corresponded to an intractable @xmath . Showing otherwise, hubeny
started with the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is nothing but the black brane ( 54 ) written in ingoing
Eddington-Finkelstein co-ordinates with @xmath . Boosting the brane to a
particular velocity, this becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

Greek indices have been used for all co-ordinates except @xmath which is
not in the field theory. The key step is to promote @xmath (which
determines the temperature) and @xmath to slowly varrying functions of
spacetime. One could repeat the calculation for a charged black hole if
she wanted chemical potential to vary as well. Clearly, these functions
are heavily constrained for ( 138 ) to still solve Einstein’s equations.
The constraints turn out to be those of hydrodynamics with infinitely
many orders of dissipation. Put another way, we may say that temperature
and velocity functions satisfying SYM hydrodynamics at a given order,
cause ( 138 ) to only violate Einstein’s equations at a higher order.

Instead of making @xmath and @xmath functions of @xmath , hubeny makes
them functions of @xmath to keep track of derivatives before setting
@xmath . Using @xmath to denote the metric of ( 138 ), @xmath with
unconstrained @xmath and @xmath has a stress-energy tensor like ( 130 )
and violates the Einstein equations at order @xmath . To correct this
and make the violation order @xmath , one must do two things. The first
is to write @xmath , @xmath so that @xmath picks up terms of order
@xmath . When these corrections are explicitly calculated, @xmath e.g.
will be some multiple of a derivative of @xmath . The second is to add a
new piece of the metric @xmath . If we plug this new metric into
Einstein’s equation, a vanishing @xmath term will dictate that @xmath
and @xmath satisfy ideal hydrodynamics ( 130 ). It will also allow us to
compute the corrected metric and show that it corresponds to the
stress-energy tensor ( 131 ). The result of this is wiseman

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               (139)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Of course ( 139 ) is still in the form of ( 138 ). The choice to not
collect all the @xmath terms makes it easy to see the non-derivative
part whose components satisfy ideal hydrodynamics. Continuing the
procedure with @xmath and @xmath and @xmath , these same components are
constrained to satisfy dissipative hydrodynamics. Rather than ( 139 )
associated with the dissipative stress-energy tensor ( 131 ), Einstein’s
equations then yield a longer metric associated with the stress-energy
tensor for a conformal fluid at two orders of dissipation. This logic
continues inductively showing many non-trivial constitutive relations.
Beyond just conformal fluids, similar constitutive relations may be
derived for fluids in spaces with compactified directions. These
relations have been used to study plasma balls and other objects that
appear in the Witten model cardoso ; rocha ; lahiri . These studies
assume that a black hole is already present because the process of black
hole formation is outside the regime of hydrodynamics wiseman .

Simply replacing the stochastic model of this thesis with hydrodynamics
is not what we plan to do. For one thing, it is hoped that the initial
conditions of Figure 21 correspond to black holes that have not formed
yet. For hydrodynamics to apply, we must wait for the inhomogeneities to
be smoothed out. Therefore, we should only expect agreement between
hydrodynamics and a suitable extension of our model if we linearize both
of them. Another reason to extend our model comes from the importance of
the density of states. When we only had energy being transferred, this
function allowed us to read off diffusing or clustering behaviour. It is
plausible that something similar can be done when we include momentum.

### vi.2 Restricting the density of states

If momentum is viewed as a quantity exchanged between nearest neighbour
sites, the rate for each transition naturally depends on a momentum
restricted density of states @xmath . While expressions for @xmath
appear in some models of electron structure weick , the restricted
density of states for a field theory is a barely studied quantity. Here,
we attempt to rectify this by deriving some properties of the restricted
density of states for simple field theories. A strongly coupled SYM
expression analogous to ( 46 ) is most likely beyond our reach.

#### vi.2.1 Some conformal field theory

Some of the most interesting techniques for counting states are
applicable to two-dimensional CFTs. Consider a Minkowskian theory on
@xmath where the circle has radius 1 by convention. At thermal
equilibrium, this can be thought of as a Euclidean theory on @xmath
since temperature and time are related by a Wick rotation. The radius of
the second circle must be @xmath . If we rescale each @xmath by the same
factor, one such rescaling gives us another Euclidean theory on a circle
of radius 1 as shown in Figure 30 .

Conformal invariance then tells us that inverse temperature @xmath and
inverse temperature @xmath are completely equivalent tong2 . In terms of
the modular parameter we defined for ( 7 ), @xmath becomes @xmath . For
a @xmath that is not imaginary, the factor we trace over to compute the
generalized partition function is @xmath . Clearly, this does not change
if we increase the real part of @xmath by 1. Symmetries of the
generalized partition function can therefore be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

These two transformations generate the modular group which is the
discrete but infinite group @xmath . The utility of modular invariance
for studying thermodynamics was first noticed by Cardy in 1986 cardy .
Our previous expressions for the partition function of a free theory do
not posess modular invariance. This is because they are only asymptotic
expressions for the high temperature limit of @xmath . Low temperature
information is lost when we convert sums to integrals. It is perhaps for
this reason that most sources prefer to write infinite products or
special functions when simple expressions like ( 3 ) and ( 7 ) are all
that are needed.

For an infinite collection of oscillators with frequencies @xmath , the
energy of an arbitrary state @xmath is @xmath . The degeneracy of energy
@xmath is simply the number of ways to make @xmath by picking a certain
number of ones, a certain number of twos, a certain number of threes and
so on. This well-studied object @xmath is usually called “the partition
function” in number theory. We will call this microcanonical quantity
“the partition sum” to distinguish it from the canonical partition
function we have been using so far. The first asymptotic @xmath due to
Hardy and Ramanujan was based on transformation properties of the
generating function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (141)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

If we take @xmath (and @xmath as before), ( 141 ) becomes a sum of
Boltzmann factors. It is not quite the partition function of our
oscillator family because we have not yet included the Casimir effect.
Accounting for zero point energies, each term in the product ( 141 )
picks up a factor of @xmath giving us

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (142)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

We have analytically continued and written this partition function in
terms of the Dedekind eta function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

Referring to the eta function, Rademacher gave a convergent series for
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (144)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the coefficients are written in terms of the Dedekind sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Just as we treated @xmath as the inverse Laplace transform of @xmath ,
the partition sum is an integral transform of its generating function.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Instead of a vertical line, the contour @xmath that leads to ( 144 ) is
a beautiful shape built up from fractals in the complex plane. A very
readable thesis on this derivation is hsu .

The main fact about @xmath used in the proof is that it is an imaginary
exponential times a function which plays nicely with the modular group —
as it would be even if our theory were not free. Under the modular
generators ( 140 ), the Dedekind eta function transforms in the
following way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The first of these equalities is trivial. The second is not but there is
a clever proof containing no more than a page of algebra elstrodt . A
function with transformation properties similar to ( 145 ) is called a
modular form . More precisely, a holomorphic function @xmath in the
upper half plane is a modular form of weight @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

According to this definition, @xmath is a modular form of weight @xmath
. The Rademacher formula can be rederived for (multiples of) other
modular forms. The result is dijkgraaf ; birmingham

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (146)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the Kloosterman sum is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For our purposes, we will choose a weight @xmath and use @xmath .
Uniqueness of the vacuum gives @xmath and the central charge is 2 when
we have left movers and right movers. This formula can be understood as
the origin of the Bessel function in ( 6 ).

In order to use the partition sum and its asymptotics to study @xmath ,
there are some changes that must be made to our theory of positively
indexed oscillators.

To start, we should introduce negatively indexed oscillators to make it
more like a field theory in momentum space. An excitation of any
oscillator increases the energy. Whether it increases or decreases
momentum depends on whether the frequency is positive or negative. This
means that in the contribution of the newly introduced oscillators,
@xmath has the same sign as in @xmath and @xmath has the opposite.
Including a sum of @xmath Boltzmann factors along with our sum of @xmath
Boltzmann factors suggests that the partition function for the doubly
infinite family of oscillators is @xmath . This is almost correct, but
we need to remember that the Casimir contribution doubles instead of
vanishes when we add more oscillators. Fixing this, the appropriate
partition function is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is still not modular invariant because we have not yet included the
oscillator with zero frequency. The zero mode has a continuous spectrum
which is quadratic in the free variable @xmath tong2 . This can be seen
e.g. in the scalar field mode expansion that was discussed in the
context of the string action ( 8 ). The most exact expression for the
partition function of scalar field theory is therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (148)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

To summarize these results, the partition function @xmath is a modular
form of weight @xmath . By ( 146 ), its density of states is asymptotic
to the partition sum; @xmath . Doubling the number of oscillators, we
made the partition function @xmath which is a modular form of weight
@xmath . Its density of states has the behaviour @xmath . The partition
function @xmath , since it describes a CFT, is a modular form of weight
0. If we take the density of states @xmath and substitute @xmath for the
conformal weight, our expression agrees with ( 4 ) which gave @xmath for
a free CFT from an entirely different setup.

#### vi.2.2 Convoluted functions

Evidently, the Casimir term and the zero mode do not affect @xmath to
leading order. It is therefore valid to use @xmath instead of @xmath as
the generating function. With this approximation, the convolution
formula gives a very clear picture of how the density of states is
comprised.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The first term @xmath has @xmath right movers and @xmath left movers and
corresponds to energy @xmath and momentum @xmath . The last term @xmath
has @xmath right movers and @xmath left movers and corresponds to energy
@xmath and momentum @xmath . The middle term @xmath has a left mover for
every right mover and corresponds to energy @xmath and momentum @xmath .
This tells us that in a @xmath -dimensional possibly interacting CFT,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a good approximation to the momentum restricted density of states.
This only becomes difficult to evaluate when @xmath are of the same
order.

Essentially we derived ( 149 ) by starting with a function whose
asymptotic behaviour is @xmath . The convolution of two of them yields a
function that follows @xmath . In other words, convolution doubles the
central charge. At least for free theories, this phenomenon can be
readily seen in higher dimensions. The crudest form of ( 4 ) is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It will be helpful to write this density of states explicitly as @xmath
from now on. For a bosonic theory, we had @xmath proportional to @xmath
and for a fermionic theory, we had @xmath proportional to @xmath .
Writing the partition function @xmath , it becomes clear that @xmath is
@xmath convolved with itself. Performing substitutions in the resulting
integral,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (150)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the second last step we have used the fact that densities of states
are zero for negative arguments. Part of the definition of the
restricted density of states is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -- -------

Comparing ( 150 ) to ( 151 ), a plausible formula for the restricted
density of states in a free CFT is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to use the convolution formula, we factored the partition
function in a way that is not always valid. This means we again have
results for a free CFT in arbitrary dimension and an arbitrary CFT in
two dimensions. It is possible that further results could be obtained
using an entropy proposed by Erik Verlinde in 2000 verlinde2 ; kutasov .
This Cardy-Verlinde formula suggests that higher dimensional CFTs are
thermodynamically more similar to their two-dimensional cousins than
previously thought.

## Vii Entropic dynamics of momentum

Retracing our steps, there are nonlinear PDEs associated with changes in
the momentum distribution on a lattice. Each lattice direction, which we
will call a large direction, needs to have one evolution equation
associated with it. Additionally, each site is allowed to have compact
or small directions which do not show up in the PDEs. Therefore the
@xmath we should use comes from a more restricted function @xmath for
the whole field theory and has @xmath for the small directions
integrated out. Most of the simulations for our previous model had one
large direction. Because we used the density of states ( 46 ) for SYM on
@xmath , it is tempting to say that these simulations had three small
directions. This is misleading as Figure 32 shows.

If each site is viewed as a miniature field theory whose spatial
directions are all orthogonal to the lattice, there is nothing left
after integrating out @xmath . The result is simply an unrestricted
density of states @xmath precluding our attempts to extend the model.
What we really need are sites that include the directions of the lattice
in addition to their compact directions. Therefore what we considered
previously was not @xmath with radius @xmath but @xmath . This is a
background with only two small directions because the non-periodic
@xmath matches up with the lattice. By arguments in aharony , the
density of states for such a theory should be similar to ( 46 ).
Including time, this theory with one large direction and two small ones
lives on @xmath . The Witten model, which is known to host plasma balls,
has the background @xmath suggesting that its lattice sites look like
@xmath . The equations that follow will have @xmath referring to the
number of large spatial dimensions only.

### vii.1 Proceeding by analogy

In order to derive our PDE for the energy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -- -------

we took the continuum limit of the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

The main steps involved were assuming that @xmath was some small amount
of energy @xmath and writing @xmath as @xmath where site @xmath was “one
lattice vector” away from site @xmath . Then ( 154 ) became

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we took @xmath and @xmath to zero. The sum runs over positive and
negative versions of the standard basis vectors so that in a cubic
lattice, all @xmath nearest neighbours are accessed.

#### vii.1.1 Allowed transitions and rates

In ( 155 ) above, @xmath was proportional to @xmath , the smallest
amount of energy allowed to move in one timestep. Therefore, we should
presumably add an equation for momentum where @xmath is proportional to
some , the smallest momentum vector that moves in one timestep. This can
be written as @xmath , the length times some unit vector, where @xmath
just like @xmath and @xmath .

However, @xmath and @xmath are not independent. A CFT in @xmath for
instance has energy and momentum operators that can be written in terms
of left movers and right movers:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The only way to add to @xmath is to excite either @xmath or @xmath with
@xmath units of energy and this necessarily adds @xmath to or subtracts
@xmath from @xmath . In this case we must have @xmath . We will make the
assumption that the other theories we wish to model also have the energy
transferred equal to the magnitude of the momentum transferred.

Now that we know @xmath increases or decreases by @xmath whenever
increases or decreases by @xmath , an allowed transition takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where is a unit vector indicating the two sites involved and @xmath is a
priori some other unit vector. However, it does not make sense for
momentum in the vertical direction to move between sites that are
horizontally displaced and it does not make sense for momentum pointing
in the up direction to move down. Therefore we require that @xmath .
This is where we see that the vector of large momentum components lives
in the same number of dimensions as the lattice vector .

When focusing on energy distributions, the form of the transition rates
in ( 155 ) followed from thermodynamic arguments as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the number of states having energy @xmath given by @xmath . The
analogous transition rate involving momentum should depend on @xmath in
the same way. We are led to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### vii.1.2 A tensor identity

Consider what happens when we differentiate @xmath twice with respect to
@xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath and @xmath without the boldface are not the @xmath and
@xmath standard basis vectors, they are the @xmath and @xmath components
of the general unit vector . All of the terms that we must differentiate
with respect to @xmath occur inside a sum over so we must know how to
deal with sums of components of unit vectors. When we sum @xmath , there
is only one standard basis vector for which @xmath is nonzero and only
one standard basis vector for which @xmath is nonzero. They have to be
the same one for the resulting sum to be nonzero, so it is clear that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We used this fact when deriving the PDE for our first model. For reasons
that are not initially clear, we will show that one can get the same
answer up to a constant by replacing the sum over lattice vectors with a
surface integral over a sphere.

###### Claim 2.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the volume of the unit ball in @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath , we simply apply the divergence theorem to the identity
vector field. Let @xmath , defined on the unit ball @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for this vector field reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because if the unit vector extends from the origin to a point on @xmath
, the unit normal to the surface at this point is just . By symmetry,
the right hand side is @xmath copies of what we are trying to compute,
so this cancels the @xmath on the left hand side yielding:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To see that this integral vanishes when @xmath and @xmath are different,
parametrize the unit sphere as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and without loss of generality, choose @xmath and @xmath . The desired
integral is then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the part in brackets is @xmath . Since the area element only goes
up to @xmath , the part involving @xmath is just a sine and a cosine
which we know integrates to zero. ∎

Unlike in our first model, equations involving momenta will have several
places in which there are four components of . This will make it
important that we integrate rather than sum. A sum of four components
will give zero unless the indices are all the same.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The continuous version, on the other hand, is a much nicer object.

###### Claim 3.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the volume of the unit ball in @xmath .

###### Proof.

We will first prove the special case when @xmath . Define a vector field
@xmath which cubes every component of its argument:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the divergence theorem on this, we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We will now apply this to the case when @xmath and @xmath are different.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (159)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

We summed @xmath over all but one of the @xmath choices, so by symmetry,
this should be @xmath times the actual value. This shows that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have computed the integral when @xmath and @xmath are the same.
Similarly, if @xmath and @xmath were the same, the result would be
proportional to @xmath and if @xmath and @xmath were the same, the
result would be proportional to @xmath . This covers the three ways to
have pairs of equal indices. It remains to be seen that the expression
vanishes when @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all different. As
before, we can show this using explicit co-ordinates.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Again, @xmath and @xmath contribute an odd function of @xmath while the
surface measure does not depend on @xmath . The other components cannot
change this because @xmath and @xmath are both distinct from @xmath and
@xmath . ∎

#### vii.1.3 Setting up the equations

In ( 155 ), @xmath was schematically given by “ @xmath for a transition
that adds @xmath to site ” minus “ @xmath for a transition that
subtracts @xmath from site ”, summed over and multiplied by @xmath . We
will write out this type of expression except we will integrate instead
of sum.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (160)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Note that @xmath always receives a @xmath contribution because we are
adopting a convention where @xmath is the “other site”. If our
convention had @xmath as the other site, @xmath would receive a @xmath
contribution. The fact that there are two ways to raise the energy
@xmath (adding a left mover from the right site and adding a right mover
from the left site) is accounted for by the integral that causes to
change direction. Writing down the momentum equation and being careful
about the same type of thing, we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (161)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Substituting our transition rates ( 157 ), these become:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (162)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Our task in the following section will be to differentiate the right
hand sides with respect to @xmath and @xmath and plug in @xmath and
@xmath . Recall that in our model for the energy, the only non-vanishing
derivative of order @xmath was @xmath . The momentum equation in ( 162 )
has other low order derivatives that do not vanish. For example, set
@xmath and compute @xmath . Differentiating with respect to @xmath once
and setting @xmath simply removes the factor of @xmath in front.
Therefore this contribution to @xmath is:

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath   @xmath            (163)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------

This produces a rotationally covariant equation precisely because of the
integral. From the discrete sum of @xmath that we computed previously,
we can see that this would have given us @xmath which does not transform
as a vector.

### vii.2 The continuum limit

Rewriting ( 162 ) for brevity,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We must Taylor expand @xmath and @xmath around small arguments.

#### vii.2.1 To first non-vanishing order

It is clear that if we do not differentiate at all with respect to
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath will vanish at @xmath no matter how many
times were differentiate with respect to @xmath . It is also true that
@xmath and @xmath will vanish identically if we do not differentiate
them with respect to @xmath . The integrand in @xmath becomes the zero
function of @xmath once we plug in @xmath . The integrand in @xmath does
not but it becomes proportional to @xmath which is odd.

@xmath and @xmath so the lowest order derivative that could possibly
survive is @xmath . Looking at @xmath once more, @xmath which is the
zero function of @xmath . Therefore, @xmath . We will now compute this
same derivative for @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

What this shows is that to second order,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This is consistent with the intuition about which way a distribution of
momentum should move. In ( 164 ), @xmath is a function of the energy
(which is static) and the momentum magnitude @xmath . Consider the
simplest case where we let @xmath and Taylor expand @xmath as some
constant plus @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A solution to the above equation is @xmath where @xmath is a
non-negative function. Because of the absolute value, another solution
is @xmath . This confirms that the direction of motion for a disturbance
is equal to the sign of the disturbance; @xmath is a lump of positive
(right) momentum that moves to the right, while @xmath is a lump of
negative (left) momentum that moves to the left. This behaviour appears
to rectify a shortcoming of our last model; an ejected piece of a plasma
ball propagating through empty space.

For our purposes, it is not enough to stop at the second order expansion
where the energy is constant in time. As we did with our first model, we
will compute as many derivatives of @xmath as we need to see the energy
dynamics. We argued above that we must differentiate @xmath at least
once with respect to @xmath and at least twice with respect to @xmath .
In fact, we must differentiate even more than this; @xmath still
vanishes. What we find by looking at the fourth order derivatives is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -- -------

When evaluating this and similar expressions, we will surpress the steps
in calculating the @xmath derivatives, saving them for the appendix.
Additionally, we will adopt the notation @xmath and @xmath and recall
that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

If we apply this to ( 165 ), our steps are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This shows that to first non-vanishing order,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that when we only considered the energy, we dropped factors of
@xmath and @xmath from ( 153 ). We must keep factors of @xmath and
@xmath in the PDEs for energy and momentum because they appear with
different exponents. The dominant contribution to @xmath includes @xmath
, while in the dominant contribution to @xmath , it is @xmath . The
ratio between these factors is a physical quantity because it tells us
how long the diffusion time scale in ( 167 ) is relative to the
transport time scale in ( 164 ).

#### vii.2.2 To first consistent order

We now have non-trivial differential equations for both energy and
momentum. However, the former is correct to fourth order while the
latter is only correct to second order. To be consistent, we will find
further terms in the momentum PDE. The terms are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we will calculate one by one.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In the next one, the steps are very similar.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The final expression for @xmath involves no more than one derivative of
@xmath becaues there is only one derivative with respect to @xmath .
Since @xmath has two @xmath derivatives, there is a chance that the
expression will involve two derivatives of @xmath . However, we know
from above that the double derivatives of @xmath cancel out. This will
not happen when we compute @xmath . In this case all three derivatives
of @xmath will survive and we will have to extend ( 166 ) so that we
know how to deal with up to three derivatives of @xmath . A simple
@xmath can be used to illustrate the problem.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These expansions are straightforward. However, when we consider @xmath ,
we do not get the benefit of being able to write multiple derivatives in
a compact form.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (169)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

We must be careful to use these relations in the last part of the
calculation we are carrying out.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We saw in ( 163 ) that the fourth order term in @xmath involving @xmath
is quite simple when @xmath . The above shows that it is considerably
more messy for a general @xmath . Putting together all of the
derivatives that have been computed, the end result is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (170)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

These equations take up a lot of space and that is all because of the
last term.

#### vii.2.3 Static configurations

For a general density of states @xmath and function @xmath , ( 170 ) is
only static when energy and momentum are both uniform. If only one of
them is, derivatives of @xmath and @xmath will not vanish and the
equations will introduce non-uniformities. If the momentum is initially
zero everywhere, we can compare the energy equation just derived with
the one from our first model:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The unrestricted density of states @xmath should be qualitatively
similar to the zero momentum density of states @xmath . Therefore these
models predict similar diffusive behaviour at early times. However, this
diffusion generates momentum which can cause very different behaviour to
occur at late times once the non-uniformities become significant. For
example, a Hagedorn density of states with @xmath requires @xmath to be
zero (indicating slow diffusion) at @xmath but not necessarily later
times. This supports the idea that our first model overestimates the
amount of time taken for a cluster of energy to diffuse.

Before, we saw that the dynamics were frozen for any energy distribution
when @xmath was a Hagedorn density of states. If such a density of
states were to exist for this system of PDEs, @xmath would have to be
linear in both @xmath and . Of the five terms in ( 170 ), this form
causes the three involving logarithms to vanish. What about the term in
momentum proportional to @xmath ? This will not vanish unless we choose
a special @xmath function as well. The one to choose is @xmath . It is
not immediately obvious, but this choice causes the one remaining term
(the one proportional to @xmath ) to vanish as well. This is because

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore @xmath and @xmath appear to be natural choices once again. We
will see that the part of our equation that looks complicated for a more
general @xmath simplifies considerably if we take the linearization.

### vii.3 Consistency check

Hydrodynamics is concerned with fluctuations of a system around some
equilibrium state. This system is often a field theory like the one
being modelled by ( 170 ). An encouraging result we have seen already is
the solution at order @xmath in terms of left and right moving waves.
These are exact solutions to hydrodynamics for a CFT in two spacetime
dimensions. It will not be possible to compare solutions in the other
cases of interest so we will focus on matching coefficients in the
linearized equations.

#### vii.3.1 Linearized equations

We will use @xmath as our equilibrium state and insert

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

into our equations of motion leaving only one power of the perturbations
@xmath . Working with the term inside the derivatives in our energy
equation ( 170 ), we may write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used the subscript @xmath to denote evaluation at @xmath .
Taking one derivative kills the constant so we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

When we use this type of logic on the momentum equation in ( 170 ), a
nice thing happens. Only a few terms in the long @xmath contribution do
not have derivatives of @xmath and @xmath multiplied together: the one
with @xmath , the one with @xmath and the one with @xmath . Carrying out
the straightforward linearization, we see that ( 170 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These equations are still rather long. The @xmath term is now only one
line but the linearization has made the @xmath term expand. The
situation can be improved if we assume that the momentum @xmath around
which we linearize is not only a constant function but a constant close
to zero. This is reminiscent of a common assumption in hydrodynamics
where the fluid velocity must be much less than the speed of sound to
yield propagating hydrodynamic modes kovtun . We also used this
assumption previously when we linearized hydrodynamics. This allows us
to remove all coefficients above that involve an odd number of
derivatives with respect to components of . After all, functions like
@xmath and @xmath are spherically symmetric in , so their odd order
derivatives vanish at the origin. Moreover, second derivatives become
proportional to @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If we substitute this into ( VII.3.1 ), we arrive at:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (172)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

#### vii.3.2 Comparison with hydrodynamics

We are now in a position to compare ( 172 ) to hydrodynamics. Since our
equations have second and third derivatives, we should not attempt to
relate them to ideal hydrodynamics. In fact, ideal hydrodynamics has a
conserved entropy and one of the fundamental assumptions in our model
was that the entropy was driven to increase bhattacharya . We will have
to use a stress-energy tensor that includes derivatives — a situation we
referred to as dissipative hydrodynamics.

In the Landau frame, dissipative hydrodynamics came from ( 131 ). For
our purposes, it is enough that these equations have two derivatives
even though ( 172 ) has three. For a proper comparison, we need the
linearization of the hydro equations. An alternative expression for the
system ( 132 ) and ( 133 ) with no charge is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this form, we have implicitly Fourier transformed the fields and
decomposed the momentum into a part parallel to and a part perpendicular
to . The coefficients

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

have been defined as in kovtun . The most obvious difference we see is
that the energy decouples in ( 172 ) instead of satisfying a continuity
equation. If a model with only energy is governed by the heat equation,
one hopes that this is an effective description of a continuity equation
with Fick’s law: @xmath . The linearization of ( 170 ) has shown that
this is not the case; the heat equation for energy is still an explicit
part of our model.

One way around this is to consider an incompressible fluid: @xmath . In
hydrodynamics this is equivalent to the approximation that the energy is
constant in time. For this to be true in the model ( 172 ), we need an
energy that is already uniform so that only momentum is flowing. The
simplest comparison we can make is between the incompressible hydro
equations and a pure momentum version of our model. Since this is the
@xmath term in ( 172 ), the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (173)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

are produced. This implies @xmath , which is much different from the
results of policastro . For a conformal fluid in any number of
dimensions, tracelessness of the stress-energy tensor demands @xmath .
This also differs from the results of takeuchi which considered the
hydrodynamics of a non-conformal theory of holographic QCD. One would
have to contend with this problem even if she found a way of going
beyond incompressible hydrodynamics ( e.g. introducing auxiliary
conserved currents to cancel the problematic terms in ( 172 )).

These problems (no continuity equation and the coefficients of @xmath
and @xmath not being independent) suggest that our entropic model is
fundamentally incompatible with the long distance effective description
that is hydrodynamics. Some evidence for this can be seen in our
expression for the mean-field variance ( 83 ). To have energy variances
grow more slowly than squared energies, our @xmath in the denominator
had to be large. Similarly, requiring @xmath to be large is the most
obvious way of ensuring that the growth of the momentum covariance
matrix is small. While not necessarily incompatible with hydrodynamics,
this is certainly incompatible with the linearization of it.

#### vii.3.3 One more simulation

The most fundamental problem with our first model is that it only had
well defined decay times in one dimension. The only way to make this
model sensible is to remove the low energy phase from the density of
states, allowing ( 83 ) to be strictly obeyed. This has the effect of
removing decay times altogether leading to infinitely long lived black
holes. A pressing question is whether the decay times of ( 170 ) remain
comparable when moving from one dimension to the next.

Since instantaneous extinction is a low energy effect, it suffices to
use much easier initial conditions than the ones in Figure 21 . Its
presence is also agnostic to whether the field theory is strongly
coupled or weakly coupled. Therefore, we may use the restricted density
of states expressions ( 152 ) that are valid for free fields.
Unfortunately, a numerical investigation of ( 170 ) shows that momenta
grow very quickly even if they start from zero. This leads to a time
scale for satisfying @xmath . After this time, momenta at various points
are comparable to the energies at those points and ( 152 ) is no longer
valid. This time scale is shorter than the black hole decay time and
probably also shorter than the black hole thermalization time that we
defined earlier. Nevertheless, we present results showing that this
“momentum generation time” is similar in @xmath and @xmath . There may
be arguments involving the other time scales that follow from this.

Figure 33 shows the results for @xmath . In this case, the sites only
have directions that are aligned with the lattice so the @xmath
restricted density of states is used. Choices made for ( 170 ) are
@xmath and @xmath . Since we are only interested in short time dynamics,
the simplest forward difference Euler method has been used.

It is clear that these nonlinear equations do not satisfy the maximum
principle. The centre of the distribution splits into left and right
moving waves instead. The @xmath simulation has also been done with no
extra small dimensions leading to the @xmath formula ( 152 ). Even
though the momentum generation time is shorter in this case, Figure 34
shows that it still has the same order of magnitude.

If more accurate expressions for the restricted density of states were
to be found, it would be interesting to return to the study of decay
times for ( 170 ) using a better numerical method. In addition to being
more trustworthy than the estimates ( 108 ) and ( 111 ), these decay
times are also likely to be shorter and therefore easier to find
numerically.

## Viii Conclusion

Motivated by the universality of black hole physics in a variety of
holographic models, we studied general properties of field theories
where excitations move throughout a lattice purely due to statistical
noise. This led to two interesting models: one in which only energy is
dynamical and one in which momentum is as well. Many shortcomings of the
first model appeared to be resolved by the second when the most basic
calculations were carried out. A more quantitative comparison between
them is likely to be difficult because both models require one to deal
with nonlinear partial differential equations.

To elabourate on our first model ( 77 ), a so-called filtration
equation, we found that it made sense for high energies and predicted
frozen dynamics for systems that are governed by a Hagedorn density of
states mvr . As input to the PDE, we chose a filtration function based
on the thermodynamics of @xmath Super Yang-Mills, which have been