##### Contents

-    Introduction
-    \thechapter The evidence for dark matter
-    \thechapter Methods of dark matter detection
-    \thechapter Standard Model with @xmath
    -    1 Description of @xmath
    -    2 Gauge singlet operators in @xmath
-    \thechapter Dark matter operators
    -    3 DM operators with scalar @xmath and fermions @xmath .
    -    4 DM operators with an additional vector field @xmath
        -    4.1 Mass generation for DM vector field
        -    4.2 Operators within the Stuckelberg mechanism
        -    4.3 Operators within the Higgs mechanism.
-    \thechapter Renormalizable models of @xmath interactions.
-    \thechapter Effective operators for @xmath interactions
    -    5 Effective Lagrangians
    -    6 @xmath operators
    -    7 @xmath operators with a scalar field @xmath
    -    8 @xmath operators with fermions: @xmath , @xmath .
    -    9 @xmath operators with vector field @xmath
        -    9.1 The Stuckelberg mechanism
        -    9.2 The Higgs mechanism
    -    10 Generation of effective operators in high-energy theory
        -    10.1 Effective operators suppressed by factor @xmath
            -    10.2 Effective operators suppressed by factor @xmath
-    Conclusions
-    \thechapter The Fierz identities and four-fermion operators
-    \thechapter Useful formulas

## Introduction

Understanding the nature of dark matter (DM) is one of the major
problems of contemporary cosmology, astrophysics and particle physics.
Since 1930s, when the problem of “missing matter” first arose in the
context of galaxy rotation curves, despite major advances in studies of
the universe and the role of dark matter in its formation, evolution and
present behaviour, we are still unable to find out how dark matter
incorporates into the particle physics framework.

Numerous theories beyond the Standard Model (SM) with sensible dark
matter candidates have been proposed. Among them are: supersymmetric
particles, additional scalars in the extensions of the SM Higgs sector,
axions, dark matter in technicolour or extra dimensions theories, to
mention only the most intensely studied [ 1 ] . Nonetheless no traces of
new physics were found, neither at the LHC, nor at other particle
colliders, while scalar particle, which fits the Standard Model
predictions for Higgs boson was discovered. Furthermore experimental
efforts leading to direct detection of dark matter particles are still
inconclusive [ 2 ] .

As a fundamental theory of dark matter is not known, it is useful to
approach the problem in the model-independent manner, in the context of
an effective field theory. Such theory describes only low-energy
processes disregarding possible UV completions. Integrating out heavy
modes in the fundamental theory, one obtains an effective Lagrangian
which contains infinite number of operators suppressed by increasing
powers of @xmath - the scale of high-energy modes. This work aims to
present the classification of effective operators that parametrize
possible interactions between the Standard Model and general dark matter
candidates: scalar, fermion or vector particles.

In the first two chapters we present a short review of increasing
evidence for dark matter and methods of its detection. Then in the main
part of the thesis we firstly present the Standard Model with
right-chiral neutrinos ( @xmath ) and find the list of all gauge
singlets operators up to dimensions 4 in different Lorentz
representations (tab. 2 ). Then we complete a similar list (tab. 2 ) for
particles in the dark sector, that are assumed to be singlets of the SM
gauge group, but without enforcing any stabilising symmetry. In the next
part we use the previous results to obtain a list of possible
interactions between @xmath and dark sector, firstly for the
renormalizable theories with operators up to dimension 4, then within
effective field theory up to dimension 6 with the assumption of the
stabilising @xmath symmetry for every dark matter particle (tab. 3 ). We
focus on the problem of mass generation for vector fields and indicate
differences and similarities between the Stuckelberg and the Higgs
mechanism. Finally we handle the issue of the effective operators
generation within a general renormalizable gauge theory and find out,
following classification of suppression for effective operators in the
SM [ 3 ] , which operators are generated by tree and which by loop
graphs.

## Chapter \thechapter The evidence for dark matter

The basic assumption of the contemporary cosmology is that the
homogeneous, isotropic and flat Universe is governed by the laws of
General Relativity. Numerous experiments give evidence that the Universe
is filled not only with the known baryonic matter, but also with two
other constituents: dark matter and dark energy. Dark energy is the form
of energy with negative pressure, that homogeneously permeates the space
causing the accelerating expansion of the Universe. Its exact nature and
origin are still unclear, however it can be described by Einstein’s
equations with cosmological constant. On the other hand, observations
indicate that dark matter behaves like the ordinary matter. It interacts
gravitationally and has tendency to cluster, but as its name suggests,
it does not emit or scatter light and therefore is difficult to detect
by standard astronomical methods.

The commonly adopted model of cosmology is the @xmath model, which
includes dark energy in the form of cosmological constant and cold dark
matter, that moves slowly compared to the speed of light. The @xmath is
in a good agreement with contemporary, precise observations. They
indicate that only @xmath of the Universe energy is in the form of known
baryonic matter, the rest is described by the dark components. Currently
the best experimental value for dark energy @xmath , dark matter @xmath
, and baryon @xmath energy density (calculated with respect to @xmath -
the current critical density, @xmath ) comes from data produced by
Planck and WMAP satellite survey of the cosmic microwave background
(CMB) [ 4 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The evidence for dark matter has various character and spans from the
galaxy scale to the Universe as a whole. From various observations and
theoretical models we can infer the essential properties of dark matter,
namely it is electrically neutral (therefore non-luminous), massive,
non-baryonic, non-relativistic (cold) and weakly interacting with the
ordinary matter. Moreover dark matter must be stable or decay with a
lifetime much larger than the age of the Universe. This requirements
cannot be fulfilled by any known particle. Many reasonable candidates
beyond the Standard Model were proposed. To became one of them, a
particle must pass a ten-point test [ 5 ] .

The problem of "missing matter" was first noted by Franck Zwicky in
1933. He was observing the Coma cluster and using viral theorem found
that it contains insufficient amount of luminous matter to explain
distribution of galaxy velocities. Similar conclusions can be reached by
examination of the rotational curves for single galaxies. The
measurements exhibit (fig. 1 ) that the galaxy rotation curves on large
distance remain flat, while the Newton’s gravitational law provides the
following expression for circular velocity @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the mass of matter in the radius @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (0.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This means that for large @xmath , where the density of luminous matter
is negligible and @xmath is nearly constant, the rotation curves should
decrease as @xmath , but the observed shape advocates the existence of
dark matter galaxy halos with @xmath , that gives @xmath .

It turns out that the observed rotational curves could be described by
the modification of Newtonian gravity [ 1 ] , nevertheless the
observation of cluster collisions are hardly explicable without the
existence of dark matter. The clearest evidence is given by the famous
Bullet Cluster (fig. 2 ) that consists of matter perceivable in the
visible and X-ray spectra and weakly interacting dark halos detected by
gravitational lensing, that were not decelerated during collision and
separated from baryons.

[] []

We can also infer dark matter properties from the observations of the
universe on larger scales. In the scale structure formation not only the
density but also type of dark matter particle is important [ 7 ] . In
the case of the light particles, moving with relativistic velocities,
dark matter would escape from the overdense galaxy-size regions
preventing formation of the smaller structures. This results in a
top-down hierarchy of structures with the smaller formed by the
fragmentation of the larger. Such behaviour is in the contradiction with
the galaxy distributions observed at very high redshift. It favours the
existence of cold dark matter with a mass of order GeV or higher. On the
other hand, the particles moving with non-relativistic velocities can
concentrate on smaller scales. It leads to the opposite structure
formation with the smaller ones merging into the larger. This viewpoint
is also supported by the N-body simulations like the Millennium project
[ 8 ] or recently Illustris [ 9 ] .

We can derive information about the role of dark matter in the early
Universe from relics, among them the most important is the cosmic
microwave background radiation (CMB). It originates from the time of
recombination, when electrons were bounded with protons to form neutral
atoms. From that time, photons could freely stream through the Universe,
what is now observed as a radiation with perfect black body spectrum of
temperature @xmath K. The CMB is nearly homogeneous. Although the
fluctuations, that mimic the density anisotropies in the plasma before
recombination are of order @xmath , they can be used to derive baryon
and matter distribution in the Universe. The CMB power spectrum in the
angular decomposition (fig. 3 ) includes number of peaks that come from
acoustic oscillations of primordial plasma. These oscillations were
driven by gravitational attraction of matter and the pressure of
radiation. Their behaviour was imprinted in the CMB at the moment of
recombination. The odd peaks refer to compression of plasma and the even
ones to its rarefaction, while baryon density affects only the latter [
10 ] . Thus one can measure discrepancy between number of baryons and
total matter distribution. Fitting the power spectrum to the @xmath
model yields the precise values ( 0.1 ) of dark matter, dark energy and
baryon density.

To summarise, there is clear evidence for existence of dark matter on
vast range of cosmic scales. Many cosmological observations are in the
remarkable mutual agreement and create a self-consistence model called
the "Concordance Cosmology", where dark matter is the essential
ingredient. Nevertheless the cosmology alone cannot explain the role of
dark matter in the particle physics context.

## Chapter \thechapter Methods of dark matter detection

There are basically three different methods that may be employed to
identify dark matter particles, all of them relies on the assumption
that DM particles interact with the SM also through other forces than
gravity. We hope to produce the DM particles at colliders, because they
allow to control initial conditions and obtain precise results, however
no signals of dark matter were found at LHC. Beside collider experiments
there are also numerous efforts to detect dark matter directly in
laboratories or indirectly looking for products of its annihilation.

The goal of the direct detection experiments is to measure recoiled
energies of nuclei scattered by the DM particles with unknown mass
@xmath . It can be estimated that DM particles present in our galaxy
halo should flow through the Earth with a flux @xmath . The obtained
rate and energy of the nuclear recoils can be used to reconstruct
properties of dark matter [ 1 ] . There are two leading technologies in
the current detectors: cryogenic detectors measure the heat, that is
produced when particle interacts with solid state or superfluid @xmath
He absorbers at temperature below @xmath mK and scintillation detectors,
which use light emitted during a collision of dark matter with liquefied
noble gas, such as argon or xenon. All types of detectors are placed
deep underground to ensure screening from cosmic rays and the
environmental radioactivity.

There was an impressive improvement in the detectors precision over the
last years, mostly in the mass range below @xmath , where the direct
detection methods complements collider searches. For the weakly
interacting particles and typical galactic velocities of order @xmath
scattering of the nuclei should take place at or below @xmath pb, which
is in the sensitivity range of current detectors. In the recent years
there were numerous claims of dark matter detection. The most promising
from the DAMA/LIBRA experiment, which announced the observation of the
annual modulation of the nuclear recoil rate, a possible effect that
comes from the motion of the Earth around the Sun. In spite of the fact
that the signal is strong, its interpretation is problematic, because it
was not confirmed by any other experiments. An excess of events,
connected with interaction of dark matter particles, was also reported
by COGENT, CRESST, EGRET and others [ 2 ] . Nevertheless direct
detection methods are still inconclusive, because of large amount of
uncertainty, e.g. from nucleon matrix elements or the nuclear form
factors.

Indirect detection aims at finding the secondary particles produced by
annihilation or decay of dark matter particles, mainly in the center of
our galaxy. Recently most studies concentrate on @xmath -rays, because
they travel rather unabsorbed through galaxy in straight lines and
indicate the point, where annihilation of dark matter took place. Due to
this properties one can separate the energy distribution of the signal
from the astrophysical background [ 2 ] . An interesting case is the
annihilation into two photons considered in [ 12 ] . Due to conservation
of energy and momentum non-relativistically moving particle will
annihilate into photons with energy nearly equal to its rest mass @xmath
. Moreover motion of a particle and the Doppler effect results in
broadening of a spectral line by only @xmath . Unfortunately such
processes are still difficult to observe, because of the annihilation
rates suppression (interaction between photons and neutral dark matter
must be loop-induced) and a resolution of the current detectors, which
lead to smearing of the signal and its disappearance in the background.
Indirect searches are not so competitive as direct detection, but there
are many preliminary results. There is excess of positrons observed by
the satellite PAMELA [ 13 ] and gamma-line found by FERMI-LAT [ 14 ] .
The latter signal is difficult to explain by astrophysical sources and
corresponds, if confirmed to DM particle with mass greater than @xmath
GeV.

## Chapter \thechapter Standard Model with @xmath

### 1 Description of @xmath

The Standard Model with right-handed neutrinos @xmath consists of the
following matter fields:

Weak isospin, colour and generation indices are denoted by @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath respectively. @xmath is defined as @xmath . Tensors
@xmath and @xmath are totally antisymmetric with @xmath , @xmath . Dual
tensor to @xmath is defined as @xmath . Symbol @xmath over @xmath
denotes @xmath or @xmath .

The SM Lagrangian with gauge-singlet neutrino @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath and Majorana mass @xmath are matrices in a corresponding
generation space. Sign convention for covariant derivative is
exemplified by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath are SU(3) generators with Gell-Mann matrices @xmath and @xmath
are SU(2) generators with Pauli matrices @xmath . It is useful to define
Hermitian derivative term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Gauge field strength tensors and their covariant derivative are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equations of motion read as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 2 Gauge singlet operators in @xmath

The aim of this section is to determine the whole set of gauge singlet
operators that consists of @xmath fields. The operators are ordered by
their dimension and divided into 14 classes: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath in a
box indicates that the class contains operators with respectively at
least one: fermion, vector field tensor, scalar or derivative. Operators
with antisymmetrized covariant derivatives that form a field tensor
could appear in arbitrary class with @xmath , but it is assumed that
they are included only in those containing @xmath . Therefore class
@xmath can be omitted, because it consist of derivatives, which need a
field to act upon. Covariant derivatives satisfy the Leibniz rule and
when they act on an object from the singlet representation, they are
identical to ordinary partial derivatives. Therefore expanding total
derivatives of gauge singlet field operators (class of such operators is
denoted by @xmath ) all ordinary partial derivatives in the Leibniz rule
can be replaced by covariant ones. The results of this section are
summarised in tab. 2 .

DIM 1

No singlets.

DIM 1.5

Every operator of non-integer dimension must contain a fermionic field.

-   @xmath

    The only fermionic field which is the singlet under all gauge
    transformations is

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

DIM 2

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

Other classes are empty and therefore omitted.

DIM 2.5

-   @xmath

    Hypercharge U(1) symmetry forces @xmath and @xmath , and due to
    @xmath symmetry there is only one singlet operator

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

DIM 3

-   @xmath

    Each of the @xmath fermions has different absolute value of
    hypercharge, therefore both fermions in each operator must be the
    same. In the basis of 16 Dirac matrices @xmath and @xmath change
    chirality and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath preserve it. Therefore for
    two Weyl spinors with the same chirality, we have three possible
    fermionic currents.

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    The first operator is a gauge singlet for every @xmath fermion, but
    the currents with particle-antiparticle conjugation @xmath are
    singlets only for @xmath . There are also gauge singlet operators in
    other Lorentz representations, e.g. @xmath or @xmath , relevant for
    four-fermion interaction. Nonetheless, it can be shown that the
    currents above cover all possibilities in forming four-fermion
    operators (Appendix \thechapter ).

-   @xmath

    No singlets.

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Contraction of Lorentz indices for dual tensor gives an operator
    that vanish due to the Bianchi identity @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    No singlets.

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    These two operators are Hermitian, first is the sum, and the second
    is the difference times @xmath of operators @xmath and @xmath

DIM 3.5

These operators must contain exactly one fermion.

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    @xmath allows for @xmath and vanishing operator @xmath .

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    As for DIM 2.5, due to hypercharge, the allowed operators must
    contain @xmath and @xmath .

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.16)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Operator @xmath is the difference of the two above.

DIM 4

Lorentz scalars

-   @xmath

    In this class @xmath symmetry allows only Yukawa interaction terms
    from @xmath Lagrangian.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.17)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.18)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.19)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    Each fermion has different hypercharge, therefore we have only

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.21)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.22)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Total derivative is redundant, because @xmath .

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.23)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    Such operators contain two derivatives and field tensor. The only
    contraction leading to scalar is @xmath . Antisymmetrization of
    derivatives leads to the operators from previous class.

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.24)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.25)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.26)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.27)
      -- -------- -- --------

    As in the case of fermions, total derivative is redundant, because
    @xmath .

We note that @xmath Lagrangian ( 1.1 ) contains all Lorentz scalars with
the exception of total derivatives @xmath and derivative terms @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , which are equivalent to standard kinetic terms up to
total derivatives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Lorentz vectors

-   @xmath

    The only singlets with a scalar and fermions are Yukawa terms in
    @xmath . They contain fermions with different helicities and do not
    allow the @xmath except of the term with @xmath because its
    conjugation does not spoil the gauge invariance

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.29)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    The only possibility is to put @xmath into DIM3 operators which are
    lorentzian scalars or tensors:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.30)
      -- -------- -- --------

    @xmath is equal to the operator above.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.31)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Contraction with tensors can be reduced to the operators above by
    the formula ( .13 ) from appendix.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.32)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    No vectors.

-   @xmath

    No vectors.

-   @xmath

    No vectors.

-   @xmath

    Lorentz vector composed of a field tensor must contain one
    derivative and one scalar field, but there are no such singlets in
    DIM 4.

-   @xmath

    To compose a vector, number of derivatives must be odd, but there
    are no singlets with odd number of @xmath

Lorentz tensors

-   @xmath

    Gauge symmetries allow only Yukawa terms with @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.33)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    Both fermions must be the same, because of @xmath .

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.34)
      -- -------- -- --------

    @xmath is the difference of the two above.

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    It is composed of two derivatives and @xmath field tensor.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Contraction of derivative and dual tensor vanishes due to the
    Bianchi identity.

-   @xmath

    No singlets

-   @xmath

    There are three possibilities: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . They can
    be combined as in DIM3 to more convenient basis:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter \thechapter Dark matter operators

The aim of this section is to find a list of all ¹ ¹ 1 We omit Lorentz
vectors and symmetric tensors of dimension 4, because the @xmath does
not contain respective operators up to dimension 2. Therefore they are
redundant to find the effective Lagrangian for @xmath interactions up to
dimension 6, which we obtain in this thesis. operators up to dimension
4, that consist of Dark Matter fields: a real scalar @xmath , left and
right chiral fermions @xmath and a vector field @xmath . Throughout the
whole thesis all these fields are assumed to be singlets of the SM gauge
group and in this part we do not presuppose the existence of any
symmetry stabilising DM particles. The results are summarised in the
table 2 .

### 3 DM operators with scalar @xmath and fermions @xmath.

Each @xmath without a subscript denotes @xmath or @xmath . Operators are
as in the SM case ordered by dimension and classes: @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Symbols @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in
boxes indicates that operators of a given class contain respectively
fermions, scalars or derivatives.

DIM 1

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

DIM 1.5

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

DIM 2

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

DIM 2.5

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

DIM 3

-   @xmath

    There are 3 possible currents:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (3.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Operator @xmath is redundant, because it equals @xmath .

DIM 3.5

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

DIM 4

In the @xmath there are only scalars and antisymmetric tensors of DIM 1
and DIM 2, therefore it is enough to find respective DM operators to
construct effective operators for @xmath interactions up to dimension 6.

Lorentz scalars

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

    @xmath is their combination.

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.16)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.17)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Operator @xmath is redundant, because it is equal to @xmath

Lorentz antisymmetric tensors

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.18)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.19)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

    All tensors in this class are symmetric.

### 4 DM operators with an additional vector field @xmath

#### 4.1 Mass generation for DM vector field

A massive vector field can be described with the use of Proca Lagrangian
( 4.1 ), but the mass term spoils the gauge invariance and leads to a
term in propagator that gives rise to quadratic divergences at high
energies, this is the feature that we will try to avoid.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In all known renormalizable theories, massive vector field is treated as
a gauge field. One of them is the Stuckelberg mechanism given by
Lagrangian @xmath . The introduction of real scalar field @xmath
restores gauge symmetry and makes the theory manifestly renormalizable [
15 ] , [ 16 ] .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Field @xmath can be eliminated from the model by choosing @xmath . In
this gauge condition Stuckelberg Lagrangian becomes the same as in the
Proca theory. The Stuckelberg mechanism allows the interaction of
massive vector field with conserved currents. Field @xmath can couple to
scalars and fermions through a covariant derivative

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The gauge invariance is still present if @xmath transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

There is also possible interaction of @xmath with another vector field
@xmath through the following kinetic term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Such interactions are usually removed from Lagrangians by
diagonalization of kinetic terms of all vector fields in the model.

Another way to make a vector field massive is the Higgs mechanism. It
uses complex scalar field @xmath with nonzero vacuum expectation value
@xmath . Due to mechanism of spontaneous symmetry breaking, field @xmath
acquires mass @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In contrast to the Stuckelberg mechanism the scalar field cannot be
completely eliminated by the gauge transformation. We can write the
complex scalar field as @xmath . In terms of these real scalar fields
Higgs the Lagrangian looks like

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The field @xmath has a mass @xmath . We can remove field @xmath from the
theory choosing unitary gauge @xmath , @xmath . The interactions of
@xmath and @xmath in this gauge are:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Stuckelberg mechanism can be seen as a limit of the Higgs mechanism.
If @xmath and @xmath , but their product is preserved, then vector mass
@xmath remains constant. Scalar field @xmath decouples from @xmath and
@xmath and its mass tends to infinity @xmath . The Higgs Lagrangian
@xmath becomes identical as in the Stuckelberg mechanism with vector
mass @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is Lagrangian of the decoupled field @xmath . The field
@xmath can be also decoupled within the effective field theory
framework. If we assume that @xmath is a light particle with mass of the
order @xmath , which is SM Higgs VEV, we can put @xmath into the heavy
particles spectrum (in the theory with high-energy scale @xmath ).
Scalar mass is @xmath , therefore for @xmath it is enough to set
coupling @xmath .

#### 4.2 Operators within the Stuckelberg mechanism

When the mass of the vector field is generated by the Stuckelberg
mechanism( 4.2 ) the gauge invariance requires that the vector field
appears in the model as @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . It is assumed, that
@xmath is not a gauge vector for additional @xmath symmetry of dark
matter or standard model fields. Note that, the field @xmath has
dimension 2.

DIM 1

No gauge invariant operators with @xmath .

DIM 1.5

No gauge invariant operators with @xmath .

DIM 2

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

DIM 2.5

No gauge invariant operators with @xmath .

DIM 3

Field tensor @xmath can be combined with the scalar field @xmath or with
a derivative:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dual tensor contracted with derivative vanishes due to the Bianchi
identity. The other possibility is to use the field @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

DIM 3.5

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

DIM 4

As for the operators without the vector field, only Lorentz scalars and
symmetric tensors are relevant.

Lorentz scalars

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Lorentz antisymmetric tensors

@xmath and @xmath are symmetric, the latter due to ( .14 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.3 Operators within the Higgs mechanism.

Gauge invariant quantities containing a vector field in the model with
the Higgs mechanism ( 4.6 ) are built from @xmath , @xmath and covariant
derivatives of complex scalar field @xmath . It is assumed that dark
matter and standard model fields are singlets of the Higgs U(1)
symmetry. Operators built of @xmath and @xmath only are the same as in
Stuckelberg case. Operators with @xmath appear at DIM 3, because they
must contain @xmath to ensure gauge invariance and at least one
covariant derivative that contains the vector field.

DIM 3

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

DIM 3.5

No operators with @xmath .

DIM 4

Lorentz scalars

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Lorentz antisymmetric tensors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Antisymmetrized operators operators @xmath and @xmath are equivalent to
4.28 .

## Chapter \thechapter Renormalizable models of @xmath interactions.

The aim of this section is to determine all possible interactions
between the @xmath and the @xmath sector with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath which are renormalizable, therefore dimension of operators is
constrained to be @xmath . We assume that all @xmath fields are massive.
As before @xmath denotes left-chiral dark fermion or charge conjugation
of its right-chiral counterpart

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Lorentz and gauge invariant operators of DM fields with @xmath are
enlisted in first column of tab. 2 . Many of them can be eliminated from
the general Lagrangian: dimension one operator @xmath can be removed by
simple translation of this field by constant @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are total derivatives, @xmath is up to total derivative equal to
standard kinetic term @xmath , similarly @xmath is redundant, @xmath is
also a total derivative. It should be noted that the operator @xmath ,
which appears in the Stuckelberg scenario can be removed as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

then one can redefine @xmath , such that @xmath and rescale @xmath .
Eventually the unwanted term disappears. The last redundant operator
@xmath is equal up to total derivative to the previous operator.
Operators with @xmath are omitted, because @xmath is treated as a heavy
field, not a DM particle.

-   DIM 2

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   DIM 3

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.36)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   DIM 4

      -- -- -- --------
               (4.37)
      -- -- -- --------

A similar list of all @xmath interactions can be determined using both
tables 2 and 2 :

-   DIM 3

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   DIM 4

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

We can choose operators from the lists above to build models of the
@xmath interacting with the DM sector. The models can be defined
imposing symmetries that forbid some operators. Transformation
properties of the DM candidates are adjusted to ensure their stability.
It is useful to classify those models with respect to transformation
properties of the @xmath fields, which could either be singlets or
transform non-trivially under those symmetries. The two options are
discussed below. We assume that at least one of the dark fields must be
stable.

1.  @xmath fields are singlets of @xmath fields symmetries.

    In the model with only scalar field @xmath there is just one @xmath
    operator that fulfils our assumptions

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.40)
      -- -------- -- --------

    because @xmath would lead to decay of @xmath into @xmath fields.
    Then @xmath is the only self-interaction, that ensures stability.
    This model can be easily realised by adopting @xmath symmetry for
    @xmath . If dark sector contains also fermions then the @xmath
    interactions may also include the following operators

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

    since @xmath can form a singlet of a stabilising symmetry. Note that
    if @xmath is the lightest particle transforming under the symmetry,
    then it remains stable. Then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath might be
    responsible for DM self interaction. Such model can be realised by
    @xmath or @xmath symmetries.

    In the presence of a vector field @xmath interaction may include
    @xmath .

    Summarising we find the following cases:

    -   Symmetry @xmath : @xmath

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.42)
          -- -------- -- --------

        This model has been extensively discussed in the literature [ 17
        ] .

    -   Symmetry @xmath : @xmath and @xmath (or @xmath )

        For @xmath allowed operators are

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.43)
          -- -------- -- --------

        while for @xmath

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.44)
          -- -------- -- --------

    -   Symmetry @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.45)
          -- -------- -- --------

        In this case, there are two @xmath symmetries imposed, therefore
        two components of the dark sector could be stable. This model
        was discussed in details in [ 18 ] .

    -   Symmetry @xmath : @xmath

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.46)
          -- -------- -- --------

        If the dark sector contained fields charged under the
        (Stuckelberg or Higgs) gauge transformation, then the vector
        field @xmath could interact with them in the standard manner
        through covariant derivative.

2.  @xmath transforms non-trivially under @xmath fields symmetries.

    The only interaction term from @xmath Lagrangian that can be removed
    without destroying its correct experimental predictions is the
    Yukawa interaction of @xmath . If we assume that @xmath transforms
    non-trivially under @xmath fields symmetries, the only @xmath
    operators that are allowed by dark symmetries are:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.47)
      -- -------- -- --------

    In terms of @xmath symmetries we find the following realisations
    (for three @xmath flavours):

    -   Symmetry @xmath : @xmath and @xmath

        Note that, without compromising generality, we can arbitrarily
        choose the 3rd @xmath to be odd. Then the following interactions
        are allowed:

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.48)
          -- -------- -- --------

        @xmath or @xmath could be stable in this case.

    -   Symmetry @xmath : @xmath , @xmath (or @xmath ) and @xmath

        Then the following interactions are allowed for @xmath :

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.49)
          -- -------- -- --------

        Similarly for @xmath . The lightest dark field could be stable
        in those cases.

    -   Symmetry @xmath : @xmath (e.g. for @xmath ), @xmath (e.g. for
        @xmath ), @xmath

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.50)
          -- -------- -- --------

        In this case, @xmath and one of @xmath components could are
        stable.

    Additional DM fermions can be easily included. Note that @xmath and
    @xmath can be treated as additional flavours of neutrinos @xmath .

## Chapter \thechapter Effective operators for @xmath interactions

### 5 Effective Lagrangians

The effective field theory is a method to represent the dynamical
content of a theory in the low energy limit. It appears naturally, when
there is a hierarchy of mass scales. To analyse a physical process below
the high energy scale @xmath , one may skip the heavier fields and take
into account their effects by adding to the Lagrangian new couplings
between the light fields [ 19 , 20 ] . Such process is called
"integrating out” the fields and leads to the effective Lagrangian, that
consist of a series of higher dimensional operators suppressed by the
energy scale @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the standard Lagrangian of the theory with light fields
only and operators up to dimension 4, @xmath denote dimension- @xmath
effective operators and @xmath are the corresponding coupling constants
(Wilson coefficients). If we neglect the influence of higher dimensional
operators the physics at lower energy scale is described by
renormalizable part of the Lagrangian. This is the result of the
Appelquist-Carrazone [ 21 ] theorem, which states that all effects, that
depend logarithmically or with higher powers on @xmath , can be absorbed
into the renormalizable Lagrangian by the redefinition of the bare
parameters.

However the correct version of a high energy theory is not known, we
expect one with the new scale e.g. at the Planck level. The effective
field theory is a useful tool to parametrize its effects, because the
higher dimensional operators are strongly suppressed and the series in
the effective Lagrangian can be quickly truncated. It is natural to
assume that the physics at lower energies is described by higher
dimensional operators that obey symmetries of the low energy theory. In
the case of the SM the full set of such operators up to dimension 6 was
constructed in [ 22 ] and then reexamined [ 23 ] . In this thesis we
analyse the effective operators in the extensions of the @xmath with
additional fields, that are candidates for dark matter.

### 6 @xmath operators

In this section it is assumed that each @xmath field: @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath is odd under @xmath symmetry ² ² 2 In other words the
Lagrangian is invariant under independent @xmath corresponding to each
dark field. As a consequence each component of the dark sector is
stable. This assumption could be relaxed allowing for the presence of
messenger fields that couple both to the SM and dark sector. . Therefore
only interactions quadratic in @xmath fields are allowed. Lagrangian
@xmath up to dimension 4 consists of 3 parts

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first is Lagrangian of the Standard Model with right-chiral
neutrinos

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The second is a Lagrangian that contains @xmath fields only ³ ³ 3 Note
that Dirac mass term is forbidden by @xmath symmetries.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

There is only one operator contributing to @xmath interactions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equations of motions derived from the @xmath for @xmath fields are the
same as in the SM with one exception. Equations for scalars @xmath and
@xmath contain a term, that originates from interaction in @xmath .
Complete list of equations for @xmath and @xmath fields reads as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Many of the @xmath operators are redundant due to the equations of
motion. If an operator includes the LHS of one of the above equations,
then it can be written as a sum of the operators that consists of the
RHS of that equation and the operator, denoted by @xmath , which
vanishes due to that equation of motion. If an equation contains
reference to an operator number in box (e.g. @xmath ), it means that the
box should be replaced by the operator up to Hermitian conjugation with
a coefficient, that is irrelevant. The purpose is to express given
operator as linear combination of others, total derivatives @xmath and
@xmath . Such operators are redundant in effective Lagrangian [ 24 ] .
Operators vanishing due to the Bianchi identity are denoted by @xmath .
Adopting tab. 2 and 2 one can construct all the @xmath operators up to
dimension 6. Results are contained in the following sections.

### 7 @xmath operators with a scalar field @xmath

DIM 4

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

DIM 5

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

DIM 6

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath

      -- -- -- -------
               (7.6)
      -- -- -- -------

    Operator @xmath is relevant only for @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -- -- -------
               (7.8)
      -- -- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath

    There are many operators that can be put in one category

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    namely:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.16)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.17)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Remaining operators contain kinetic terms for @xmath fermions, that
    can be reduced with equations of motion to the Yukawa interactions
    and the Majorana mass term for @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.18)
      -- -------- -- --------

    @xmath is Hermitian conjugation of the operator above.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.19)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (7.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

    @xmath is Hermitian conjugation of 7.20 .

To sum up for DIM 6 the operators are: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

### 8 @xmath operators with fermions: @xmath,@xmath.

DIM 4

No operators.

DIM 5

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

DIM 6

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    @xmath is Hermitian conjugation of the operator above.

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    The third equality follows from the fact that last term in the first
    line is equal to the first with an opposite sign. We also used the
    following reduction

      -- -- -- -------
               (8.7)
      -- -- -- -------

    Note that in the case of dual tensor the first term vanishes due to
    the Bianchi identity and the second is reduced by the equation of
    motion, but for the standard tensor the situation is reversed. The
    reduction to @xmath and @xmath is made similarly as in @xmath .

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (8.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    These two operators were created by the multiplication of two
    non-Hermitian operators of DIM 3. Therefore we have to include also
    the respective terms, where one of the DIM 3 operators is
    conjugated. Generally, they can have different Wilson coefficients
    in the effective Lagrangian.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Vectorial currents are Hermitian therefore we need only one
    operator.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

To sum up for DIM 6 the operators are: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath .

### 9 @xmath operators with vector field @xmath

It is assumed that @xmath is odd under @xmath symmetry to make it stable
and that other @xmath fields are not charged under U(1) symmetry with
gauge vector @xmath .

#### 9.1 The Stuckelberg mechanism

In this model the Lagrangian ( 4.2 ) is invariant under @xmath symmetry,
when both @xmath and @xmath are odd with respect to it. Equations of
motion coming from ( 4.2 ) are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Stuckelberg Lagrangian and equations of motion reduce to a part of
the Lagrangian ( 6.3 ) and equations ( 6.7 ) when a gauge condition with
@xmath is adopted.

DIM 6

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    All these operators have to be suppressed by a factor @xmath in
    Lagrangian density, which has dimension 4. It is worth to consider
    closely ( 9.3 ) in the @xmath gauge

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Note that higher dimensional operators will be suppressed by more
    powers of @xmath .

#### 9.2 The Higgs mechanism

Another method to generate vector mass is the Higgs mechanism ( 4.6 ).
It is easy to see that operators containing @xmath and @xmath are
invariant under @xmath for odd @xmath if @xmath transforms into its
conjugation ⁴ ⁴ 4 In this case @xmath can be seen as a charge
conjugation. @xmath (in other words the phase @xmath of @xmath is odd,
while the absolute value @xmath is even). Eventually only quadratic
terms in @xmath survive. Mass @xmath is of order of Higgs field VEV
@xmath if the gauge coupling constant @xmath and VEV of @xmath is of
order of heavy scale @xmath . Then Higgs boson appearing in this model
can be decoupled in the effective theory.

DIM 6

-   @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    These operators have to be suppressed by a factor @xmath in
    Lagrangian density. When @xmath acquires VEV @xmath and @xmath (to
    put Higgs boson into heavy sector) then

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    so we can conclude that this coupling is also suppressed in the
    Higgs scenario.

    The operator @xmath is not invariant under @xmath . In order to make
    it invariant we have to add its conjugation.

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    The operator @xmath does not contain vector field, therefore it is
    irrelevant here. Similarly @xmath is invariant under @xmath , but
    this operator is symmetric in its tensorial indices and vanish after
    contraction with @xmath .

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (9.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Operator @xmath can be made symmetric under @xmath , if we add to it
    conjugation @xmath , but operator @xmath does not contain vector
    field @xmath .

### 10 Generation of effective operators in high-energy theory

We assume that the fundamental theory is a gauge theory, that consists
of heavy and light fields. All Standard Model and dark matter particles
belong to the second category. Integrating out all heavy fields we
obtain infinite series of higher dimensional effective operators that
are suppressed by increasing powers of a high-energy scale @xmath . If
we assume that the SM gauge symmetry @xmath is a subgroup of the
fundamental group, then all these operators are invariant with respect
to it. It can be determined which effective operators are generated at
tree level, and which at loop level [ 3 ] . The latter are suppressed by
factor @xmath , therefore they are more difficult to detect. Possible
vertices (fig. 4 ) of the underlying theory can be put together in all
possible ways to find a complete list of tree graphs (fig. 5 ) that can
produce effective operators up to dimension six. Solid lines represent
fermions and dashed lines represents scalars or vectors. Dotted vertices
has coupling constant proportional to heavy scale @xmath . Each internal
boson line gives a factor @xmath that for momenta @xmath reduces to
@xmath . Fermionic lines give a factor @xmath .

In order to determine, if an operator can be generated with one of the
tree graphs (Fig. 5 ), it is essential to find which vertices between
light and heavy fields are allowed in the fundamental theory [ 3 ] .
@xmath will denote all vectors. @xmath will refer to @xmath fields:
scalar, fermions and vectors respectively. Others field are denoted by
@xmath , if they are written with subscript @xmath it means that they
are heavy and can be integrated out. All these fields have canonical
form of kinetic terms and refer to mass eigenstates.

-   Vector interactions

    Vector-vector interactions originate from kinetic term @xmath ,
    where field tensor read as @xmath . There are terms @xmath with one
    derivative and terms @xmath without. Lie algebra of the fundamental
    gauge group can be divided into generators of the @xmath symmetry
    @xmath having indices denoted with capital letters and a set of
    other generators @xmath . SM gauge group forms a subgroup of the
    fundamental group, therefore commutators @xmath belongs to this
    subalgebra. It means, that structure constants with exactly two
    indices of SM generators vanish @xmath . Structure constants for
    other combination of indices can be non-zero, therefore vertices
    @xmath and @xmath are absent and @xmath are allowed.

-   Scalar interactions

    Vertex @xmath is not allowed, because it breaks @xmath symmetry.
    Other three-scalars terms @xmath are possible if there are heavy
    @xmath singlets and doublets. They can have a coupling proportional
    to heavy scale @xmath , if there are heavy scalars with non-zero
    VEV. All four-scalars vertices are allowed.

-   Vector-fermion interactions They originate from kinetic term for
    fermion multiplets @xmath in the fundamental theory

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (10.1)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Only @xmath is forbidden, because it is proportional to @xmath
    generator @xmath . When SM gauge group is unbroken it cannot mix SM
    fields with others in the fermion multiplet @xmath .

-   Scalar-fermion interactions

    All Yukawa interactions terms are allowed.

-   Scalar-vector interactions

    They come from kinetic term for scalar multiplet @xmath .

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (10.2)
      -- -------- -- --------

    When a multiplet @xmath consists of non-standard fields @xmath with
    zero VEV or standard scalar field @xmath , then all interactions
    between scalars and vectors are allowed. If both types of fields are
    included in @xmath then terms @xmath are forbidden because they
    contain a @xmath generator @xmath , which cannot mix @xmath with
    non-standard fields @xmath . Terms with one scalar field and two
    vectors appear when @xmath has a heavy VEV. They have structure
    @xmath , where @xmath . When the SM symmetry remains unbroken @xmath
    and vertices @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are forbidden.
    @xmath is absent.

    To sum up the forbidden vertices are:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (10.3)
      -- -------- -- --------

#### 10.1 Effective operators suppressed by factor @xmath

Here we collect dim 5 operators and verify if they are tree- or
loop-generated.

Tree:

-   @xmath

    It can be generated by the graph (b) from the list (Fig. 5 ) with
    vertices @xmath and @xmath from high-energy theory, where @xmath is
    a heavy scalar field.

-   @xmath

    It can be generated at tree level in the same way as operator above
    with vertices @xmath and @xmath .

Loop:

-   @xmath

    This operator can be generated through one loop graph with
    interactions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

    {fmffile}
    BBF {fmfgraph*} (150,80) \fmfleft i \fmfright j,k \fmf photoni,v1
    \fmf photon,tension=.7,label= @xmath ,left=0.5v1,v2 \fmf
    photon,tension=.7,label= @xmath ,right=0.5v1,v3 \fmf fermionj,v3
    \fmf fermion,tension=.7,label= @xmath v3,v2 \fmf fermionv2,k

    It is worth to notice, that there are no tree graphs with three
    external lines.

    #### 10.2 Effective operators suppressed by factor @xmath
    In this section we collect operators, that are suppressed by @xmath
    and check how they could be generated.

    Tree:

-   @xmath

    It can be easily generated by the graph (j) and @xmath interaction.

-   @xmath

    The same way as above with @xmath interaction.

-   @xmath

    It can be generated by (h) and interaction @xmath , where @xmath is
    a heavy gauge vector.

-   @xmath

    It can be generated by (h) and interaction @xmath .

-   SM Yukawa interactions @xmath

    They can be generated by (f) and interactions @xmath , @xmath and
    @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath

    They can be generated by (a) and interactions @xmath and @xmath or
    @xmath for the latter operator.

-   @xmath

    It can be generated by (a) and interactions @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath

    Using Fierz identity ( .10 ) we obtain:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (10.4)
      -- -------- -- --------

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (10.5)
      -- -------- -- --------

    All such operators can be tree generated by (a) and an interaction
    of fermionic currents with @xmath or @xmath .

-   @xmath

    It can be generated by (b) and interactions @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath

    Assuming that @xmath has mass due to heavy Higgs @xmath , this
    operator can be generated by (h) with vertices @xmath ( 4.8 ) and
    @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Therefore after integrating heavy Higgs
    it is suppressed by factor @xmath .

    In the Stuckelberg case it is loop-generated by interaction with
    scalar as in ( 4.3 ). The vertices are @xmath and @xmath .

    {fmffile}
    stuck {fmfgraph*} (150,90) \fmfleft i,j \fmfright k,l \fmf
    photoni,v1 \fmf photonj,v2 \fmf scalar,tension=0.7,label= @xmath
    ,l.side=leftv1,v2 \fmf scalar,tension=0.7,label= @xmath
    ,l.side=leftv3,v1 \fmf scalar,tension=0.7,label= @xmath
    ,l.side=leftv2,v3 \fmf dashesv3,k \fmf dashesv3,l

Loop:

-   @xmath

    It could be tree-generated only by (h), but there are no vertices
    that join two vectors with derivatives or one vector with derivative
    and scalar field with a heavy field. On the loop level it follows
    from graph with vertices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

    {fmffile}
    XXP {fmfgraph*} (150,70) \fmfleft i,j \fmfright k,l \fmf photoni,v1
    \fmf photonj,v2 \fmf photon,tension=.7,label= @xmath
    ,l.side=leftv1,v2 \fmf photon,tension=.7,label= @xmath
    ,l.side=rightv1,v3 \fmf photon,tension=.7,label= @xmath
    ,l.side=leftv2,v3 \fmf dashesv3,k \fmf dashesv3,l

-   @xmath

    The generation of this operator is analogous to the previous one. It
    is generated by loop graph with vertices: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

In the end, we have to recall that some operators were eliminated by the
equation of motion and therefore are absent on the list above. However,
if any of those operators can be generated by tree-graph, then its
unsuppressed coefficient will be added to effective coupling of
operators to which it was reduced [ 3 ] . In our case operators @xmath ,
@xmath do not arise in any operator elimination. The operator @xmath (
8.2 ) occurred in the elimination of ( 8.6 ), but this operator also
needs three external lines in the graph and cannot be generated at tree
level. The above reasoning also does not change the importance of @xmath
within the Stuckelberg model.

## Conclusions

Empirical facts combined with theoretical predictions clearly indicate,
that dark matter has significant share in the energy density of the
Universe. Nevertheless, despite many experimental efforts, the nature of
dark matter is still unknown. If we hope to detect dark matter
particles, they ought to interact with the known particles also
non-gravitationally. Therefore, while we do not know the correct model
of beyond-SM physics, it is useful to analyse the problem in the model
independent manner and find possible interactions of the Standard Model
fields with dark matter candidates.

The thesis presents a classification of interactions between the
Standard Model with right-chiral neutrinos ( @xmath ) and the dark
sector ( @xmath ) that consists of a real scalar @xmath , left and right
chiral fermions @xmath , @xmath and a massive vector field @xmath ,
which are singlets of @xmath . In order to determine the interactions,
we obtained full set of gauge singlet operators in the @xmath up to
dimension 4 (tab. 2 ). We would like to emphasize that this list can be
used to analyse general extensions of the @xmath with fields that are
singlets of its gauge group. We found also a similar set of operators
for the dark matter fields (tab. 2 ), that is general for scalar and
fermions. In the case of a vector field, we assumed that its mass should
be generated within a renormalizable theory. Therefore we determined
only those operators containing @xmath , that could arise, when the
vector mass is generated via the Stuckelberg or the Higgs mechanism.

The number of operators in the renormalizable models of @xmath
interactions is substantially limited by the maximal dimension of
operators, which is 4 and the stability conditions we imposed (at least
one dark matter particle should be stable). We enlist models with scalar
Higgs portal, Yukawa interactions and the kinetic mixing term between
@xmath and dark matter vector field tensors. It should be emphasized
that the vector Higgs portal ( @xmath ) is nonrenormalizable and appears
only in the effective Lagrangian, where is suppressed by square of the
high energy scale @xmath .

The main result of the thesis is the full set of effective operators up
to dimension 6. It is minimal, in the sense, that all operators
redundant due to the equations of motion, were eliminated from the
effective Lagrangian. We note that under our assumptions, namely when
the operators are quadratic in the dark matter fields, the effective
Lagrangian with terms suppressed by at most @xmath does not include any
operators with two different fields from the dark sector. Our list (tab.
3 ) contains (up to Hermitian conjugations) one renormalizable operator
of dimension 4 ( @xmath ), 7 operators suppressed by @xmath and @xmath
suppressed by @xmath : @xmath with @xmath , @xmath with @xmath or @xmath
and @xmath with @xmath . The number of effective operators is not large
comparing to total number of 26 operators in the @xmath ( 6.2 ) and the
dark sector ( 6.3 ) Lagrangians.

We found that operators containing field tensors cannot be
tree-generated within a general, underlying gauge theory. The same is
true for the vector Higgs portal ( @xmath ), if the vector mass is
generated within the Stuckelberg mechanism. In consequence, Wilson
coefficients @xmath of these operators are suppressed by a factor @xmath
. Therefore interactions, in which they are involved, are more difficult
to detect.

## Chapter \thechapter The Fierz identities and four-fermion operators

The Fierz identities [ 25 ] , [ 26 ] are the operations that allow to
change the order of fermions in the four-fermion interaction

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.6)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath are various independent @xmath matrices:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.7)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.8)
  -- -------- -- ------

The coefficients @xmath are presented in tab. 4 . For example products
of two vector ( @xmath ) or tensor ( @xmath ) currents can be written as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (.9)
  -- -------- -- ------

These identities can be used to express product of tensor currents in
terms of scalar currents. In case of Weyl spinors it reads as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (.10)
  -- -------- -- -------

Lorentz singlet four-fermion operators have the form @xmath as in ( .6
). When one is looking for all such operators with two fermions from one
particle sector and the other two from the second one, it is enough to
take into account the operators with fields from the same sector
belonging to one fermionic current. If @xmath and @xmath in @xmath are
fermions from the same sector, then we can put them in one current
simply by using Fierz identities. The other possibility, with @xmath and
@xmath from the same sector, can be reduced to the previous case by the
following expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (.11)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , e.g. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . For example

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (.12)
  -- -------- -- -------

These are Hermitian conjugations of operators appearing in tab. 3 .

## Chapter \thechapter Useful formulas

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (.13)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (.14)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath means that @xmath is excluded from summing. To understand the
second equality note that for every non-vanishing term in the summation
all indices in totally antisymmetric tensor must be different, therefore
one of them must be equal to @xmath . Last three terms in the second
line vanish due to @xmath or they contain contraction of antisymmetric
and symmetric tensor in indices @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (.15)
  -- -------- -- -------
