## Acknowledgement

First I would like to express my appreciation to Professor Takaaki
Yokoyama for his great tolerance and a number of insightful comments.
This thesis would never see the light of day without his support for
these six years. In the first year, he told me to see observational data
as they are, and to habitually evaluate physical quantities in the solar
corona by using typical parameters. I learned how to analyze the data in
the second year. From the third year, he gradually has been let me have
my own way of thinking. Even when I took a stupid mistake, he waited and
saw how things go without excessive-teaching attitude more than is
necessary. He had listened my analysis on a solar flare with interest
during the fourth year. The first version of this thesis was written in
the fifth year. He made an enormous amount of helpful comments devoting
much time to reading. The sixth year was challenging period when almost
all of the contents in this thesis have been greatly improved. He is a
major witness of my working toward improvement during these six years.

I extend my gratitude for all of the referees, Dr. Masaki Fujimoto,
Dr. Hirohisa Hara, Dr. Takeshi Imamura, Dr. Toshifumi Shimizu, and
Dr. Ichiro Yoshikawa, for providing me with extraordinary opportunity to
improve this thesis as an education. Dr. Fujimoto discussed with me on
the background and incentive of my work, and helped me write an
attractive abstract submitted along with this thesis. Dr. Hara made a
large number of scientific comments with expertise in EUV spectroscopy
every time I went to National Astronomical Observatory. Dr. Imamura
checked foundation for an understanding of physical processes in the
solar corona. Dr. Shimizu pointed out implications of the results
obtained in this thesis, which was highly suggestive. Dr. Yoshikawa
offered me encouraging words when I was in a daze. This thesis has
finally been completed thanks to all their help and support.

Members of the laboratory, Shin Toriumi, Hideyuki Hotta, Yuki Matsui,
Haruhisa Iijima, Takafumi Kaneko, and Shuoyang Wang encouraged me so
much for more than a year, especially when I was depressed because of my
unsatisfactory situation. A brisk hour of exercise with Shin and
Hideyuki made me get refreshed. I also thank to Yusuke Iida, who had
been a member of the laboratory and is now working in JAXA, for concise
advice about the way of thinking as a researcher.

Masaru Kitagawa, Keiko Kitagawa, Ami Kitagawa, and partner Shoko Sato
were always beside me. I never forget that they were waiting for the day
this thesis would be approved.

As a token of my appreciation for a year of service and repayment, I
will give my pledge to continue effort in years to come, built on the
experience during one-year-lasting thesis defense.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 The solar corona
    -    1.2 Active region outflows
        -    1.2.1 Observations of AR outflows by Hinode /EIS
        -    1.2.2 Driving mechanisms of AR outflows
    -    1.3 Motivation
-    2 Diagnostics and instruments
    -    2.1 Emission line spectroscopy
        -    2.1.1 Spectral line profile
        -    2.1.2 Density diagnostics
    -    2.2 Instruments
        -    2.2.1 Hinode spacecraft
        -    2.2.2 EUV Imaging Spectrometer onboard Hinode
-    3 Average Doppler shifts of the quiet region
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 Observations
    -    3.3 Data reduction and analysis
        -    3.3.1 Line profiles
        -    3.3.2 Fitting
        -    3.3.3 Calibration of the spectrum tilt
        -    3.3.4 Alignment of data between exposures
    -    3.4 Center-to-limb variation
    -    3.5 Summary
    -    3.A Calibration of the spectrum tilt
        -    3.A.1 Observation and data analysis
        -    3.A.2 Results
        -    3.A.3 Summary
    -    3.B Oxygen lines ( @xmath )
-    4 Doppler velocity measurement for AR outflows
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 Observations and data reduction
        -    4.2.1 EIS scan
        -    4.2.2 Data reduction
    -    4.3 Line profiles
        -    4.3.1 @xmath – @xmath
        -    4.3.2 @xmath – @xmath
        -    4.3.3 @xmath
        -    4.3.4 @xmath – @xmath
    -    4.4 Measurement of the Doppler velocities of AR outflows
        -    4.4.1 Doppler velocity maps
        -    4.4.2 Histogram of Doppler velocities
    -    4.5 Temperature dependence of the Doppler velocities
    -    4.6 Summary and discussion
    -    4.A Calibration of the spectrum tilt
    -    4.B Mg emission lines
    -    4.C Temperature dependence of the Doppler velocities (all
        samples)
    -    4.D Residual from single Gaussian fitting in the outflow region
-    5 Density of the upflows
    -    5.1 Introduction
    -    5.2 Observation and calibration
        -    5.2.1 EIS raster scan
        -    5.2.2 Relative wavelength calibration
    -    5.3 Density diagnostics of upflows
        -    5.3.1 Integration of observational pixels
        -    5.3.2 De-blending of Si vii from Fe xiv 274.20Å
        -    5.3.3 Simultaneous fitting of the two Fe xiv emission lines
        -    5.3.4 Density inversion
    -    5.4 Density derived from Fe xiv 264.78Å/274.20Å
        -    5.4.1 Results from single Gaussian fitting
        -    5.4.2 Density of the upflows
        -    5.4.3 Column depth
        -    5.4.4 Uncertainty in Si vii density
    -    5.5 Summary and discussion
    -    5.A Fe xvi 262.98Å and 265.01Å
    -    5.B Fe xiv 264.78Å intensity and electron density
    -    5.C Electron density at the footpoints of the outflow region
-    6 @xmath - @xmath diagram
    -    6.1 Method
    -    6.2 Verification of the method
        -    6.2.1 Dependence on electron density
        -    6.2.2 Dependence on intensity
        -    6.2.3 Dependence on velocity
        -    6.2.4 Dependence on thermal width
        -    6.2.5 Binning effect
    -    6.3 @xmath - @xmath diagram in AR10978
    -    6.4 Summary and discussion
-    7 Summary and discussion
    -    7.1 Summary of the results
    -    7.2 Temperature of the outflows
    -    7.3 Outflow region and fan loops
    -    7.4 Steady flow along coronal loops
    -    7.5 Interpretation in terms of impulsive heating
        -    7.5.1 Temperature dependence of the Doppler velocity
        -    7.5.2 Analytical estimation of electron density
    -    7.6 Driving mechanisms of the outflow
    -    7.7 Mass transport by the outflow
    -    7.8 Eastern and western outflow region
    -    7.9 Future work
-    8 Concluding remarks
-    A Morphology of the outflow region
    -    A.1 Introduction
    -    A.2 Potential field extrapolation from an MDI magnetogram
        -    A.2.1 Calculation method
        -    A.2.2 Properties of calculated field lines
    -    A.3 EUV imaging observations
    -    A.4 Summary

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 The solar corona

The solar corona is an outer atmosphere of the Sun which has a
temperature exceeding @xmath . It is an outstanding issue how the corona
can be heated up to so high temperature compared to the inner
photosphere, where the temperature is around @xmath . The observations
of the solar corona date back to ancient eclipse recorded by Indian,
Babylonian and Chinese. Routine coronal observations started when
Beonard Lyot built the first coronagraph in 1930, which occults the
brighter photosphere by using a disk. Forbidden lines of highly ionized
atoms (Fe x – xiv ; Ni xii – xvi ) were identified (Edlén 1943 ; Swings
1943 ) and it was claimed for the first time that the coronal
temperature exceeds million Kelvin ( @xmath ). As already mentioned, the
physical explanation of the mechanism keeping this high temperature in
the solar corona is still unknown. The second law of thermodynamics
seems to be violated in the point that the much cooler photosphere (
@xmath ) exists at inner atmosphere, closer to the energy source at the
core of the star.

The temperature profile along the height is shown in Fig. 1.1 , from
which we can see the decreasing temperature in the photosphere and the
increasing temperature from the bottom of the chromosphere where the
temperature takes minimum value ( @xmath ), to the upper atmosphere.
There is a thin layer called the transition region between the cool
chromosphere ( @xmath ) and the hot corona ( @xmath ). It is appropriate
to think this layer as a temperature regime rather than a geometric
layer because of the extremely spatial inhomogeneous structure in the
solar atmosphere. The density profile also has steep gradient while the
pressure must be continuous through the transition region. In the upper
part of the transition region the temperature reaches up to @xmath . Due
to the high temperature exceeding @xmath , the corona consists of ions
with high degree of ionization. These ions efficiently radiate the line
emission in the EUV and X-ray wavelength range.

The solar corona has been categorized into three kinds historically by
its X-ray brightness: active region, the quiet region, and coronal hole.
In Fig. 1.2 , various appearances of the solar corona are seen in the
images taken by different filters of Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA)
onboard Solar Dynamics Observatory ( SDO ) launched by NASA. There are
several bright areas (active regions) slightly at the north of the
center and in the south west ¹ ¹ 1 The east (west) is conventionally
defined as left (right) in an image of the Sun. It is opposite to the
Earth map. . At the south east of the center, there is a dark region
most clearly seen in the @xmath Å passband image. Such a kind of region
is called as a coronal hole . The location other than active regions and
a coronal hole is the quiet region .

Active regions are located in areas of strong magnetic field
concentrations, visible as sunspot groups in optical wavelengths and
magnetograms. Sunspot groups typically exhibit a strongly concentrated
leading magnetic polarity, followed by a more fragmented trailing group
of opposite polarity. Because of this bipolar nature active regions are
mainly made up of closed magnetic field lines. Due to the persistent
magnetic activity in terms of magnetic flux emergence, flux
cancellation, magnetic reconfigurations, and magnetic reconnection
processes, a number of dynamic phenomena such as transient brightenings,
flares, and coronal mass ejections occur in active regions. We focus the
persistent upflow seen at the edge of active regions in this thesis,
which was discovered by EUV Imaging Spectrometer (EIS) onboard Hinode .

Active regions are constructed by structures along the magnetic field,
which has been called as “coronal loops”, since X-ray observations from
the space have enabled us to see the loop appearance along the coronal
magnetic field (Rosner et al. 1978 ) . Due to the nature of the solar
corona that the plasma beta is much smaller than unity ( @xmath ), and
that thermal conduction is strongly constrained in the direction
parallel to magnetic field, the structures seen in EUV or X-ray images
are basically configurated by the magnetic field. A consequence of the
plasma heating in the transition region and the chromosphere is the
upflow into coronal part which makes the coronal loops filled with
hotter and denser plasma than the background corona. Those coronal loops
produce bright emission.

As an example of active region, a magnetogram taken by Heliospheric and
Magnetic Imager (HMI) onboard SDO and two EUV images taken by SDO /AIA
@xmath Å ( @xmath ) and @xmath Å ( @xmath ) passbands are shown in Fig.
1.3 . The active region was extracted from near the center of the Sun
shown in Fig. 1.2 . An extended structure similar to a fan can be
clearly seen at the east and west edge of the active region in the AIA
@xmath Å passband image (indicated by white characters), which is called
“fan loops”. Fan loops are often clearly seen in EUV images
corresponding to a temperature around @xmath – @xmath . In the AIA
@xmath Å passband image, there are multiple loop systems connecting the
opposite polarities with strong magnetic field in the south east–north
west direction as indicated by white characters. These loops form the
dominant emission of the active region and are called as active region
“core”.

The quiet region is the area outside active regions. It is relatively
quiet , however, various kinds of small dynamic phenomena have been
observed all over the quiet region today by virtue of high resolution,
for example, explosive events, bright points, jets, and giant arcade
eruptions. The faint areas are called “coronal holes”, where magnetic
field lines are opened into the outer space. Thus, the coronal plasma
can be ejected possibly as the solar wind. Frequently occurring soft
X-ray jets have been observed by the previous Japanese satellite Yohkoh
and X-ray telescope (XRT) onboard Hinode .

### 1.2 Active region outflows

The flows in the solar corona play a crucial role in dynamics and
formation of variable structures, and observations of their properties
constrain the coronal heating problem. Observations on the flows in the
solar corona are described here.

From observations by Solar Ultraviolet Measurements of Emitted Radiation
(SUMER) onboard SoHO , spectra of the transition region lines ( @xmath )
are known to be redshifted both in the quiet region and in an active
region core (Chae et al. 1998 ; Peter & Judge 1999 ; Teriaca et al. 1999
) . On the other hand, coronal lines ( @xmath ) indicate blueshift.
Hansteen et al. ( 2010 ) numerically showed that the redshift of
transition region lines and slight blueshift of coronal lines are
naturally produced by frequently occurring reconnections in the upper
chromosphere as a response to the production of magnetic shear due to
the braiding of magnetic fields by the photospheric convection. While
those observations by SUMER focus on the low-temperature plasmas, the
spectroscopic nature of the hotter component with @xmath is still
unclear, which is one of the main contents of this thesis (Chapter 3 ).

Flows have also been observed with imaging observations. Transition
Region And Coronal Explorer (TRACE) had enabled a discover of
persistent, intermittent flow pattern in coronal loops (Winebarger
et al. 2001 ) . Since there was no any obvious periodicity, it was
concluded that the flow is induced by magnetic reconnection instead of
the waves coming from the photosphere. The upward flows in coronal loops
are also observed recently by AIA which has much higher temporal cadence
than ever (full-Sun images at every @xmath for seven EUV wavelength
bands), which revealed the ubiquitous existence of such flows in coronal
loops extending from the edge of active regions (Tian et al. 2011 ) .

#### 1.2.1 Observations of AR outflows by Hinode/Eis

Spectral coverage sensitive to the coronal temperature and unprecedented
high signal-to-noise ratio of Hinode /EIS enabled us to reveal the
existence of upflows at the edge of active regions (Doschek et al. 2008
; Hara et al. 2008 ; Harra et al. 2008 ) . These upflows in the active
region is called “AR (active region) outflows” and considered to be the
upflows from the bottom of the corona. It has previously been confirmed
that these outflows persist for several days in the images taken by
X-Ray Telescope (XRT) onboard Hinode (Sakao et al. 2007 ) . Some authors
interpreted AR outflows as the source of the solar wind (Brooks & Warren
2011 ) .

Doschek et al. ( 2008 ) analyzed emission line profiles of Fe xii @xmath
Å and revealed that the outflows are observed at the dark region outside
an active region core as seen in Fig. 1.4 . A preliminary result from
EIS has shown that there is a clear boundary between closed hot loops in
the AR core ( @xmath ) and extended cool loops ( @xmath ) where the
blueshift was observed (Del Zanna 2008 ) . The upflows were seen in the
low density and low radiance area. Meanwhile, redshift was observed in
the AR core for all emission lines (Fe viii – xv ). This apparent lack
of signatures of any upflows at active region cores was explained as the
situation that strong rest component in line profiles hinders the signal
of upflows (Doschek 2012 ) , but it has not been proved yet.

The magnetic configuration of the outflow region has been modeled by
magnetic field extrapolation from the photospheric magnetogram (Harra
et al. 2008 ; Baker et al. 2009 ) , and it was revealed that AR outflows
emanate from the footpoints of extremely long coronal loops in txhe edge
of an active region (Harra et al. 2008 ) . Close investigation revealed
that AR outflows are located near the footpoints of quasi separatrix
layers (QSLs), which forms the changes of the connectivity of the
magnetic fields from closed coronal loops into open regions (Baker
et al. 2009 ; Del Zanna et al. 2011 ) .

The velocity of the outflow lies within the range of a few tens up to
@xmath . These velocities were derived by subtracting the fitted
single-Gaussian from raw line profiles (Hara et al. 2008 ) , and by
double-Gaussian fitting (Bryans et al. 2010 ) . By using extrapolated
magnetic fields, the real velocity was derived from Doppler velocity and
found to have a speed of @xmath – @xmath (Harra et al. 2008 ) . The
upflow velocity of AR outflows increases with the formation temperature
of which emission lines Si vii –Fe xv represent (Warren et al. 2011 ) .
The blueshift becomes larger in hotter emission line as @xmath for Fe
xii (formed at @xmath ) and @xmath for Fe xv (formed at @xmath ) (Del
Zanna 2008 ) . The appearance of the blueshifted regions often seems to
trace the loop-like structures, however, it is not completely understood
whether the AR outflows are related to fan loop structures (Warren
et al. 2011 ; Tian et al. 2011 ; McIntosh et al. 2012 ) , which will be
discussed later (Section 7.3 ).

AR outflows are observed as an enhanced blue wing component (EBW) in the
emission line profile of Fe xii – xv . An example for Fe xiv @xmath Å is
shown in the left panel of Fig. 1.5 . By fitting the line profiles by a
single Gaussian, it was revealed that there is a negative correlation
between blueshifts and line widths (Doschek et al. 2008 ; Hara et al.
2008 ) as seen in the right panel of Fig. 1.5 , which indicates the
existence of unresolved component in the blue wing emitted from the
upflowing plasma. Hara et al. ( 2008 ) investigated the line profile of
Fe xiv and Fe xv ( @xmath ) both at the disk center and at the limb (see
black and orange plots in Fig. 1.5 ), and revealed that EBWs were
clearly observed only at the disk center, which means that the upflow is
dominantly in the radial direction as to the solar surface. This EBW
does not exceed the major component at the rest by @xmath % in terms of
the intensity (Doschek 2012 ) .

Observations so far have revealed properties of the outflow from the
edge of active region such as (1) location: less bright region outside
the edge of active region core, (2) magnetic topology: boundary between
open magnetic fields and closed loops, and (3) the velocity: reaching up
to @xmath in the coronal temperature.

The velocity of the outflows in the transition region has not been
investigated which becomes important because it decides whether the
plasma in all temperature range including the transition region and the
corona flows out from the region, which will be described in Section 4 .
In addition, the density of the outflow itself has not been investigated
yet, which may be a crucial clue to reveal the driving mechanism (see
the next section), and we will measure the density in Chapter 5 .

#### 1.2.2 Driving mechanisms of AR outflows

There are several types of driving mechanism of the AR outflow proposed
so far. They are classified as (1) impulsive heating events concentrated
at the footpoints of coronal loops (Hara et al. 2008 ; Del Zanna 2008 )
, (2) the reconnection between open extended long loops located outside
AR and inner loops (Harra et al. 2008 ; Baker et al. 2009 ) , (3)
horizontal expansion of active region (Murray et al. 2010 ) , and (4)
chromospheric spicules (McIntosh & De Pontieu 2009 ; De Pontieu et al.
2011 ) .

Del Zanna ( 2008 ) interpreted that the upflow observed outside the
active region core as gentle chromospheric evaporation induced by the
reconnection ( i.e. , nanoflare) as a consequence of the braiding of
magnetic footpoints at the photosphere, though the clear evidence has
not been shown yet. While almost all of the observations on the outflow
focus on the boundary where the magnetic topology changes ( i.e. , QSL),
it was revealed that an upflow actually occurs at the footpoint of the
closed active region loop (Hara et al. 2008 ) . The existence of upflows
with a speed up to @xmath in emission line profiles of Fe xiv @xmath Å
and xv @xmath Å concentrated toward the footpoints was revealed, and
that the line widths were also broadened. From those results, it was
concluded that these observational results support the idea of impulsive
heating of the lower corona (Serio et al. 1981 ; Aschwanden et al. 2000
) instead of the uniform heating of corona loops (Rosner et al. 1978 ) .

The outflows investigated so far tend to continue several days, from
which some authors favor the interpretation of the driving mechanism in
terms of interchange reconnection between the pre-existing long magnetic
field in the quiet region and AR edge (Harra et al. 2008 ; Baker et al.
2009 ) . Once the reconnection between closed loops and open field
occurs, the dense plasma in the closed loops are no longer trapped, and
accerelated by a pressure gradient and magnetic tension into the
reconnected longer structure (Baker et al. 2009 ) . One-dimensional
hydrodynamic simulation showed that the rarefaction wave develops at the
reconnected point where the jump in the pressure exists between hot core
loop and much longer cool loop, which could produce observed velocity up
to @xmath and line width (Bradshaw et al. 2011 ) . Their simulation also
indicated the dependence of velocity on the temperature consistent with
observations. However, the emission line profiles synthesized in their
study were all symmetric, which differ from those observed at the
outflow region ( i.e. , asymmetric and have a enhanced tail in their
blue wing).

Among the driving mechanisms cited above, expansion of coronal loops
(Murray et al. 2010 ) does not need the existence of magnetic
reconnection. In their simulation, homogeneous magnetic field vertical
to the solar surface was imposed at the initial. They set a strong
magnetic flux tube with twist (which is much stronger than real AR)
beneath the solar surface, which emerges from the interior of the Sun
and expands until the magnetic pressure of the flux tube balances. The
flux emergence is often observed in magnetograms, and it is regarded as
the birth of an active region. Expanding tube pushes the initially
existing atmosphere where the gas pressure increases due to the
compression by the expanding tube. As a result, increased pressure
forces the plasma to be accelerated up to @xmath at the edge of
expanding tube. However, there is one difficulty when trying to explain
the persist nature of outflows. Their simulation only lasts for @xmath ,
which is much shorter than the whole lifetime of an active region (
@xmath ).

Different from other three mechanisms, McIntosh & De Pontieu ( 2009 )
and De Pontieu et al. ( 2011 ) suggested that the outflows are strongly
coupled with chromospheric spicules. A small fraction at the tip of
spicules observed with AIA was heated to temperature above @xmath , and
the propagating features were detected which have a speed of @xmath .
These were interpreted as a counterpart of the outflows observed with
Hinode /EIS. However, the heating mechanism of the tips of spicules has
not mentioned.

### 1.3 Motivation

In this thesis, we focus on the outflow from the edge of active region
which was discovered by Hinode /EIS. Main purpose is to clarify several
aspects of the outflow region which have not been revealed yet: (1)
Doppler velocity within a temperature range of @xmath – @xmath , and (2)
the electron density. It has been already revealed that the fast upflow
is seen in the coronal emission lines, but we do not precisely know the
behavior of the transition region lines in the outflow region, which
will be crucial information to understand the mass transport in the
outflow region. The electron density may be a clue to understand the
origin of the outflow and also can be used to evaluate the gas pressure.
It helps us to consider how the outflow could be driven, combined with
the magnetic field information.

This thesis is structured as follows. Two chapters following this
introduction treat the preparation for the analysis. Chapter 2 is a
brief introduction to the EIS instrument and the electron density
diagnostics in emission line spectroscopy. The measurement of the
spatially averaged Doppler velocity in the quiet region by investigating
the center-to-limb variation of Doppler shift will be described in
Chapter 3 . After that measurement, the Doppler velocities of emission
lines within a wide temperature range of @xmath – @xmath were measured
in the outflow region by referring the quiet region as zero-point of the
Doppler velocity which will described in Chapter 4 . The electron
density of the AR outflow was derived in Chapter 5 by using a
density-sensitive line pair Fe xiv @xmath Å/ @xmath Å. Chapter 6
describes a new line profile analysis from a different point of view (
@xmath - @xmath diagram). We discuss the nature of the outflow region in
Chapter 7 . Finally, Chapter 8 will provide conclusions of this thesis.
The potential magnetic field will be calculated around the active region
in Appendix A , which helps us to consider the morphology of the outflow
region.

## Chapter 2 Diagnostics and instruments

### 2.1 Emission line spectroscopy

#### 2.1.1 Spectral line profile

The corona, filled with highly ionized ions, produces line emissions in
the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) wavelength range. There are several
emission mechanisms such as bremsstrahlung, stimulated emission,
spontaneous emission, radiative recombination, etc. In the coronal
condition, the spontaneous emission dominates which makes an ion
decaying from an upper level into a lower level. The most important
process which causes the excitation from one energy level to upper level
in the solar corona is inelastic collisions between ions and free
electrons. Inelastic collisions are involved with almost all of the
emission lines whose wavelength is shorter than @xmath Å. An
electron-ion inelastic collision can be described as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath indicate the initial and final levels of the ion
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the initial and final energies, and
@xmath and @xmath are the initial and final energies of the free
electron. The ion in the final state can be de-excited spontaneously and
emit one photon,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Since the energy levels are discretized, a spectrum of an
emission line has a sharp peak as a function of the frequency ( i.e. ,
also the wavelength). Fig. 2.1 shows an example of EUV spectra obtained
by EUV Imaging Spectrometer (EIS) onboard Hinode . There are a number of
peaks in the spectra emitted from highly ionized ions of He, O, Mg, Si,
S, Ca, Fe, etc.

Observed spectra actually have a broadened shape ( i.e. , not the delta
function). There are several reasons which make the spectra broadened:
(1) natural broadening , (2) pressure broadening , (3) thermal Doppler
broadening , and (4) turbulence or superposition of flows , etc. Each
mechanism will be described shortly in the following.

###### (1) Natural broadening

Natural broadening essentially rises from the uncertainty in energy and
time. Here we deal with this mechanism from only a classical view point
of damped oscillation. Spontaneous emission coefficient @xmath
(Einstein’s coefficient @xmath ; unit is @xmath ) is introduced. The
irradiance of transition @xmath from an ion can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Considering @xmath , the electric field has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Taking the Fourier transform of this @xmath results in

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The spectral line profile formed by natural broadening is then
represented by the square absolute,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the coefficients are multiplied for the normalization in which the
integration of line profile becomes unity. This profile is usually
referred to as Lorentzian profile. The Full Width of Half Maximum (FWHM)
of this profile is @xmath , and in terms of the wavelength it is
converted into

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For wavelength @xmath Å and typical value @xmath , we can evaluate the
natural broadening in the wavelength as @xmath Å.

###### (2) Pressure broadening

Now we consider other mechanism which changes the phase of emission
abruptly: collision with other electrons. Using the mean free path
@xmath and thermal velocity @xmath , this process is characterized by
the time scale @xmath , inverse of which is a counterpart of the
spontaneous emission coefficient @xmath in natural broadening. The mean
free path is represented as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the particle density and @xmath is the cross section for
the collision between particles. For an ion in a ionized degree of
@xmath , the cross section @xmath can be evaluated by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the FWHM for pressure broadening @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of the wavelength,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

as same as natural broadening. Using typical values in the corona @xmath
, @xmath , and assuming @xmath Å and @xmath ( e.g. , Fe XII ¹ ¹ 1 In
spectroscopic literature, we deal a neutral atom with denoting “ I ”.
First degree ion is represented by denoting “ II ”, and so on. ), we
obtain @xmath Å. Obviously, pressure broadening is much smaller than
natural broadening. Eq. ( 2.10 ) shows that pressure broadening is
proportional to the density, and in the solar corona where @xmath ,
pressure broadening is always negligible compared to other broadening
mechanisms.

###### (3) Thermal Doppler broadening

The line-of-sight velocity of particles in plasma @xmath (we do not use
@xmath to avoid the complexity with the frequency @xmath ) obeys to the
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

after the velocity perpendicular to the line of sight is integrated. The
emission frequency from a moving particle increases (decreases) when the
particle moves toward (away) from an observer. This is the Doppler
effect of the light, and in non-relativistic case the frequency and the
wavelength are modified as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

A suffix @xmath indicates the original quantities, the prime @xmath
means the modified quantities, and positive (negative) velocity
indicates the motion away (toward) from the observer. The FWHM of
thermal Doppler broadening becomes

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.15)
  -- -- -- --------

which is written in terms of the wavelength as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath Å, @xmath , and assuming iron ions @xmath ( @xmath : proton
mass), this takes a value of @xmath . Comparing three broadening
mechanisms, it is clear that thermal Doppler broadening dominates in the
solar corona. Now we derive the spectral line profile taking into
account the Doppler-shifted natural broadening,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term @xmath in the right-hand side denotes @xmath , where the suffix
is omitted for the simplicity. The spectral line profile can be
calculated as a convolution of Eq. ( 2.17 ) and the Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution Eq. ( 2.12 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The function @xmath is
called Voigt profile

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, the center of line profile is approximately Gaussian profile, and
the wing of line profile is dominated by Lorentzian profile. However,
observed EUV line profiles are well fitted by a Gaussian profile because
the line wings are weak compared to the sensitivity of spectrometers.
Therefore, spectral line profile is represented as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, if writing it in terms of wavelength, it becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath .

###### (4) Other broadening mechanisms

The emission from plasma in isothermal ( i.e. , homogeneous temperature)
and without incoherent bulk motion forms spectral line profile
represented by a Gaussian as described above. If several plasma blobs
exist along the line of sight, the spectral line profile should be the
superposition of each Gaussian formed by each blob since the plasma in
the solar corona is optically thin. In addition, the spectral line
profile would be broadened by instrumental effects. Thus, observed line
profile are formed through these factors, and the width of observed
Gaussian @xmath can be represented as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is nonthermal width (it does not mean those of high energy
particles beyond the Maxwellian distribution, but it does mean excess
broadening which cannot be attributed to thermal Doppler motion), and
@xmath is the broadening caused by the instrument.

An example of line profiles is shown in Fig. 2.2 . Green ( Red ) profile
shows the line profile at the flare site before (during) an M-class
flare on 2011 September 9. In the wavelength range plotted in the
figure, there are two strong lines: Fe xxiv @xmath Å ( @xmath ) and Fe
xii @xmath Å ( @xmath ). Before the onset of the flare, Fe xii @xmath Å
was the only one prominent emission line. During the flare, Fe xxiv
@xmath Å increases in its strength comparable to the neighbor Fe xii
@xmath Å because the high-temperature plasma (up to @xmath ) is produced
by the flare. In addition, the spectrum of Fe xxiv @xmath Å during the
flare shows the shape far different from a single Gaussian profile. It
has a long tail in the shorter side in the wavelength direction, which
is often referred to as enhanced blue wing (EBW). This line profile is
considered to be composed of the rest component and a broadened
blueshifted component. As this example shows, line profiles change their
shapes depending on cases.

#### 2.1.2 Density diagnostics

Density of the solar corona has been often derived by two methods: EM
method and the line ratio method. In EM method, we use the intensity of
an emission line. When the assumption that the observed plasma has
uniform temperature ( i.e. , isothermal) along the line of sight, the
intensity of an emission line is expressed by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is electron density ( @xmath ), @xmath is so-called the
contribution function of emission line ( @xmath ), and @xmath is the
column depth of the observed plasma ( @xmath ). Note that the unit of
intensity is @xmath . The dependence of the contribution function on
electron density is usually much weaker than that on temperature, but
some emission lines have strong dependence on the electron density,
which can be exploited to line ratio method as described after. Using
Eq. ( 2.23 ), the electron density can be estimated as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the temperature is often assumed to be the formation temperature
of the emission line. Practically, it is difficult to know the precise
column depth in observation because the 3D morphology of the solar
corona cannot be obtained in most cases. One way to determine the column
depth @xmath is that we assume the circle cross section of coronal loops
or the semi-spherical shape of bright points (small scale loops). Then
the column depth is obtained by using the coronal imaging observation.
However, the assumption of isothermal plasma is often violated in the
solar corona because (1) the overlapping of several structures along the
line of sight, and (2) sub-spatial-resolution fine structure of the
solar corona. In addition, we obtain only the lower limit of electron
density considering that the contribution function is convex upward as a
function of temperature.

Second way for the density diagnostics of the solar corona is the line
ratio method. We use an emission line pair whose intensity ratio has
significant dependence on electron density. If the line ratio is
monotonically increases or decreases as a function of the electron
density, we can use the line ratio as a tool for the density
diagnostics.

The theory about the dependence of intensity on the electron density is
described below. An example of the emission line pair Fe xiv @xmath Å/
@xmath Å is given, both of which involve allowed transitions. The energy
levels of Fe xiv and related emissions are shown in Fig. 2.3 . In the
figure, only transitions having significant influences on the balance of
the number of electrons in each level are shown. Numbers in the
parenthesis after the characters are the index named for each energy
level, which are commonly used in the atomic physics. The transition
@xmath (which produces the emission @xmath Å) is omitted because it has
negligible contribution on the number equation in this system,
considering that almost all of the ions are at the configuration @xmath
(energy level index: @xmath or @xmath ).

We assume the equilibrium between the numbers of ions in each levels,
where the timescales of collisional excitation and radiative decay (
@xmath ) are much shorter than that of the change of temperature. It
almost always holds in the solar corona. Representing the number of ions
in the level @xmath by @xmath , the collisional excitation coefficient
by @xmath (transition from lower level @xmath to upper level @xmath )
and the radiative decay by @xmath (transition from upper level @xmath to
lower level @xmath ), the equilibrium between the numbers in each energy
level can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Only three of these equations are independent. If the relative fraction
of energy levels as to the ground state would be defined like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eqs. ( 2.26 )–( 2.28 ) are reduced to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The radiance of each emission line ( @xmath ; intensity involving the
transition from upper level @xmath to lower level @xmath ) is
represented as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

therefore, the ratio between two emission lines @xmath Å (transition:
@xmath )/ @xmath Å (transition: @xmath ) can be calculated as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.39)
              @xmath      (2.40)
              @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (2.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.43)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Now it is clear that the line ratio Fe xiv @xmath Å/ @xmath Å has a
dependence on electron density in terms of a fractional function. The
coefficients @xmath can be calculated by using the atomic data given by
Storey et al. ( 2000 ) and Tayal ( 2008 ) , which is listed in Table 2.1
. Calculated coefficients @xmath are tabulated in Table 2.2 .

The ratio of intensity from two emission lines Fe xiv @xmath Å/ @xmath Å
as a function of electron density is shown in Fig. 2.4 .

The ratio was calculated by using CHIANTI database version 7 (Dere
et al. 1997 ; Landi et al. 2012 ) . Note that calculating the ratio by
using Eq. ( 2.41 ) results in slightly larger value than CHIANTI,
however, the behavior is fundamentally the same. This discrepancy may
come from the difference in the atomic data. In this thesis, we adopt
the CHIANTI database because its data is the newest one available at
present.

### 2.2 Instruments

#### 2.2.1 Hinode spacecraft

Hinode (Kosugi et al. 2007 ) is a Japanese satellite of Institute of
Space and Astronomical Science of the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency
(ISAS/JAXA), launched on 2006 September 23 6:36 JST. Hinode has three
instruments onboard: the Solar Optical Telescope (SOT), the X-ray
Telescope (XRT), the EUV Imaging Spectrometer (EIS). The scientific aims
are: (1) to understand the processes of magnetic field generation and
transport including the magnetic modulation of the Sun’s luminosity, (2)
to investigate the processes responsible for energy transfer from the
photosphere up to the chromosphere and the corona, and (3) to determine
the mechanisms which induce eruptive phenomena, such as flares and
coronal mass ejections (CMEs), and understand these phenomena in the
context of the space weather.

The Solar Optical Telescope (SOT) (Tsuneta et al. 2008 ) consists of the
Optical Telescope and the Focal Plane Package (FPP). The SOT consists of
a @xmath -cm diffraction limit Gregorian telescope, and the FPP includes
the narrowband imager (NFI) and the broadband imager (BFI), and the
Stokes Spectropolarimeter (SP). The SOT provides unprecedented high
spatial and temporal resolution image of the photosphere and the
chromosphere by filtergram of NFI/BFI and vector magnetograms calculated
through inversion of SP data. The SOT has revealed many kinds of
magnetic activity of the Sun such as magnetic flux emergence,
submergence, cancellation, and related response of the photosphere and
chromosphere.

The X-ray Telescope (XRT) (Golub et al. 2007 ) has a grazing-incidence
optic and a CCD array. Kinds of filters are utilized: entrance aperture
prefilters and focal plane analysis filters. The entrance aperture
prefilters have two main purposes: (1) to reduce the visible light
entering the instrument and (2) to reduce the heat load in the
instrument. The focal plane analysis filters have two purposes: (1) to
reduce the visible light reaching the focal plane and (2) to provide
varying X-ray passbands for plasma temperature diagnostics. The science
objectives of the XRT are chromospheric evaporations, reconnection
dynamics, polar jets, and coronal holes.

#### 2.2.2 EUV Imaging Spectrometer onboard Hinode

The EUV Imaging Spectrometer (EIS) (Culhane et al. 2007 ) onboard Hinode
observes the solar corona and the upper transition region emission lines
in the wavelength range of @xmath Å and @xmath Å. The emission line
centroid position and the emission line width allow us to know the
Doppler velocity and the nonthermal velocity of the observed plasma. The
plasma temperature and density can be measured by using the intensity
ratio of temperature or density sensitive line pair (detail was given in
Section 2.1.2 ). The science aims of EIS is to investigate the
coronal/photospheric velocity field comparison in active regions and
understand the dynamics of flares ( e.g. , by coordination with SOT),
and to detect the heating signatures in the corona.

Previous spectrometers designed to operate in the wavelength range of
@xmath Å have employed grazing incidence optical systems, since the
normal incidence reflectivity within this wavelength range is quite
small for the usual optical materials. The microchannel plate array
detectors are commonly used, which provide high spatial resolution,
however, they have low quantum efficiencies ( @xmath %). EIS adopted
normal incidence operation through the use of multilayer coatings
applied to both mirror and gratings. Furthermore, the use of thinned
back-illuminated CCDs to register the diffracted photons make QE values
be @xmath times larger than those for micro channel plate systems. EIS
has a large effective area in two EUV wavelength ranges, @xmath Å and
@xmath Å. The optical design of EIS is displayed in Fig. 2.5 .

The solar radiation enters EIS through a thin @xmath Å Al filter which
interrupts the transmission of visible radiation ( i.e. , the brightest
wavelength range in the solar spectrum). Incident photons are focused by
the primary mirror onto a slit/slot and then on a toroidal concave
grating. Two differently optimized Mo/Si multilayer coatings are used to
matching halves of both mirror and grating. Then, diffracted photons are
registered by a pair of thinned back-illuminated CCDs. Exposure times
are controlled by a rotating shutter. Two spectroscopic slits ( @xmath
and @xmath ) and two spectroscopic imaging slots ( @xmath and @xmath )
are used in a slit exchange mechanism, which allows the selection of
four different apertures corresponding to each scientific purpose.
Raster scan observations are made by a piezoelectric drive system which
rotates the primary mirror. A raster scan has a field of view of @xmath
in the dispersion direction (the east-west direction on the solar
surface) and @xmath in the slit height direction (the north-south
direction on the solar surface) ² ² 2 The solar radius roughly
corresponds to @xmath . . There is a coarse mechanism that can offset
the mirror by @xmath from the spacecraft pointing in the east-west
direction. The overall instrumental properties are given in Table 2.3 .

EIS carries out observations in two modes: raster scan mode and
sit-and-stare mode. In raster scan mode, the slit/slot scans the
objective region on the solar surface. The obtained data will be three
dimensional ( @xmath , and wavelength), which is suitable for studying
spatial variation of the spectra. In the sit-and-stare mode, the
slit/slot is fixed at a target position on the solar surface and is
tracking the target by compensating for the solar rotation during the
observation. The data obtained in the sit-and-stare mode provide the
temporal variability of the spectra, which is suitable for investigating
phenomena like oscillations, jets, or microflares.

## Chapter 3 Average Doppler shifts of the quiet region

### 3.1 Introduction

Measurement of the Doppler shift of an emission line is an important
method to investigate the velocity of a target in astrophysics. EIS
onboard Hinode aims to measure a Doppler shift with an accuracy in the
order of @xmath Å which corresponds to several @xmath in the EUV
wavelength range. The flow speed in the corona is typically the order of
@xmath in the quiet region and up to several tens of @xmath in active
regions. The method is simple in the sense that we measure a line
centroid and calculate the difference from the rest wavelength known in
advance, however, the practical analysis is far more complex.

Since EIS does not have the absolute calibration mechanism for
wavelength, we often refer the average line centroid of the quiet region
included in the field of view as zero. This is based on the idea that
the quiet region has smaller velocity than that of active regions. The
Doppler velocity derived through this procedure should be actually
regarded as just a difference of the Doppler shift from that of the
quiet region. At present, the Doppler velocities of coronal emission
lines in the quiet region have not been investigated with an precision
better than @xmath , considering the several uncertainties described
below. We need another way to deduce the Doppler velocity in the quiet
region different from previous data analysis in the literature. For the
precise measurements of the Doppler shift, we need to take care of
several points below.

First point is a lack of our knowledge about precise rest wavelengths of
some emission lines. The database of emission lines provided by NIST ¹ ¹
1 www.nist.gov/pml/data/asd.cfm shows that the rest wavelengths are
determined in the order of @xmath Å in most cases. We actually sometimes
observe an emission line in different wavelength predicted by the
theoretical calculation. This means that it is not possible to measure
the Doppler shift more accurately than that deviation even if we can
obtain the precise line centroid with small statistical error by long
exposure time in an observation.

Second point is the drift of the spectrum signals on the CCDs which
mainly comes from the displacement of the grating component in
accordance with the thermal environment of the EIS instrument (Brown
et al. 2007 ) . The Hinode spacecraft flies in the Sun synchronous orbit
and the angle of which the spacecraft faces to the Earth changes
periodically in @xmath . The temperatures of the components in the EIS
instrument change due to the variation of the Earth radiation with that
period. This causes the quasi-periodic drift of the spectrum of @xmath Å
which corresponds to @xmath – @xmath at wavelength of @xmath – @xmath Å.
Fig. 3.1 shows an example of this effect. The displacement of the
spectrum is obviously larger than the variation in the solar corona,
therefore it becomes much important to remove the instrumental effect
before the measurement of the Doppler shift. Although the temperature
changes in the components of EIS are roughly periodic, the calibration
is never simple because the temporal behavior also changes with the
seasonal variation of the orbit of the spacecraft, and there are also
phase difference in the temperature variation in each component. The
package developed by Kamio et al. ( 2010 ) has been widely used to
correct the wavelength scale which varies in accordance with the
temperature of the instrument. They modeled the orbital variation of the
wavelength scale by a linear relationship with the temperatures of
components in the EIS instrument and some other parameters ( e.g. ,
pointing coordinates). The developed model basically reproduces the
observed spectrum drift, but there are residuals of @xmath – @xmath in
the standard deviation from the observed data.

Third point is that the model above assumes that the Doppler shift of Fe
xii @xmath Å averaged in each exposure equals zero, which may not be the
actual case precisely. The SUMER observations revealed that an emission
line Ne viii @xmath Å ( @xmath ) are blueshifted at the disk center
corresponding to the Doppler velocity ² ² 2 We follow the convention
that positive velocity indicates redshift (downward as to the solar
surface) and negative velocity indicates blueshift (upward as to the
solar surface). of @xmath – @xmath in the quiet region (Peter 1999 ;
Teriaca et al. 1999 ) . The Doppler shift of Fe xii @xmath Å was
measured by Teriaca et al. ( 1999 ) , which reported that the emission
line is blueshifted by @xmath in an active region (Teriaca et al. 1999 )
. That Fe xii emission line was too weak for the measurement in the
quiet region, and we cannot exclude the possibility that emission lines
in the coronal temperature are shifted from the rest wavelength in the
quiet region. Although the model of Kamio et al. ( 2010 ) is an useful
tool to compensate the orbital variation of the wavelength scale and it
is now included in the standard EIS software in SSW, taking into account
all three factors described above, we can not discuss the Doppler
velocity smaller than @xmath by using only their model.

In this chapter, we exploited the data which covers the meridional line
of the Sun in order to deduce the Doppler shifts at the center of the
solar disk compared to those at the solar limb where the Doppler
velocities are considered to be the best zero point at present. Such
observations enable us to study the center-to-limb variation of the
Doppler shift of emission lines, which solve the first point in the
measurement of the Doppler shift described above ( i.e. , a lack of the
knowledge about the precise rest wavelength). This analysis is based on
the idea that the corona flows statistically in the radial direction
from the global view. We analyzed the spectra by integrating with a
spatial scale of @xmath in order to compensate the non-radial motions in
a statistical sense.

Since there are only few coronal emission lines in the spectra obtained
by SUMER and its predecessors with strength enough for their line
centroids to be measured in the quiet region, previous observations
could only measure the center-to-limb variation of the transition region
lines (Roussel-Dupré & Shine 1982 ; Peter 1999 ) whose formation
temperature was @xmath . Our analysis challenges the center-to-limb
variation of the Doppler shifts of several coronal emission lines (
@xmath ), and determine the average Doppler shifts in the quiet region
at the disk center. The results in this chapter will be used as a
reference of Doppler velocities for the analysis of the outflow in an
active region (Chapter 4 ).

### 3.2 Observations

Based on the idea that emission lines are not shifted at the limb
because our line of sight passes symmetrically the solar corona (Peter
1999 ) , we can set the Doppler velocity at the limb as zero then derive
the Doppler velocities at the disk center. In order to investigate the
center-to-limb variation of the Doppler shifts and measure those at the
disk center, we exploited data taken during the coordinated observations
between three instruments onboard Hinode (usually referred to as Hinode
Observing Plan 79; hereafter we use the term HOP79). While these
observations were originally intended to investigate the variation of
solar irradiance along the 11-year solar cycle mainly by SOT
observations, EIS is requested to take spectra with long exposures.
During the observations, the pointings of the satellite are gradually
moved from the south pole to the north pole (north–south scan), or from
the east limb to the west limb (east–west scan), so that the data cover
the solar surface from one limb to the other limb.

In this analysis, we used the north–south scans which obtain the solar
spectra without spatial gap between pointing changes ( i.e., overlapping
FOVs in each pointing by @xmath ). The schematic picture of the scan is
shown in Fig. 3.2 . This observation enables us to investigate the
center-to-limb variation of Doppler shifts of emission lines by aligning
the line centroids between the overlapping locations. Note that in the
east–west scans, EIS FOVs do not overlap with each pointing so that it
is not possible to investigate the center-to-limb variation of the
Doppler shifts. Thus, we concentrate on the north–south scans in this
analysis here.

In the observations, @xmath slit was used and the FOV in each pointing
was @xmath ( i.e., five exposures at each pointing). The exposure time
was @xmath , which is enough to obtain good signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio
for many coronal emission lines even in the quiet region. The EIS
usually records the spectra with a finite width in the wavelength
direction (called as spectral window). The EIS study analyzed here
consists of 16 spectral windows with the spectral widths of @xmath –
@xmath pixels ( @xmath – @xmath Å), which were wide enough to include
whole of emission lines ( cf. typical Gaussian width of emission lines
in the quiet region does not exceed @xmath Å).

Some recent studies have challenged the precise measurement of Doppler
velocities of coronal structures by referring the centroids of emission
lines determined from EIS spectra at the limb (Warren et al. 2011 ;
Young et al. 2012 ; Dadashi et al. 2012 ) , however, there is a
remaining factor for the uncertainty in the measurement. They all used a
calibration of wavelength developed by Kamio et al. ( 2010 ) when
comparing the centroids measured at the limb with those measured at
their target coronal structures. Therefore, their results are thought to
have the error of @xmath . The analysis here is free from that problem
with overlapped scans from the south limb to the north limb, and will
help us to determine the Doppler velocities with much carefulness.

The analyzed HOP79 data were taken during 2010 close to the bottom of
the solar cycle in order to avoid the influence of active regions with
relatively larger systematic flows than the quiet region. When a
spectral scan of EIS includes some active regions, there are several
possibilities which cause the Doppler shift of an emission line.
Firstly, there can be seen many active phenomena like microflares, which
induce plasma flows up to several ten @xmath in the corona. Secondly,
the corona in active regions generally has higher electron density (
@xmath ; not flare condition) than in the quiet region ( @xmath ), which
often produces a fake shift of an emission line when another emission
line exists in the neighbor whose emissivity strongly depends on the
electron density. Obviously, this is not the indication of the real
flow. Thirdly, a persistent upflow up to several tens of @xmath is often
observed at the edge of active regions (Doschek et al. 2008 ; Harra
et al. 2008 ) which causes the blueshift of coronal emission lines.

Many of the data taken in HOP79 after 2011 include active region(s) and
its remnant in high latitude, and since the presence of active regions
in spectral scan may affect our analysis, we analyzed the spectral data
during 2010. The data including a large coronal hole or active region(s)
were not used in this analysis: January, February, March, May, July,
August, September, and November. In the analysis below, we concentrated
the data in October and December. The context images taken by SDO /AIA
are shown in Fig. 3.3 . A white vertical line in each image indicates
the location where EIS took spectral data.

### 3.3 Data reduction and analysis

In this section, the procedure of analysis is described. First, we look
over line profiles in order to check whether the single-Gaussian fitting
is suitable for each emission line or not. Emission lines within the EUV
range observed with EIS are often blended by neighboring ones, and this
effect might cause a fake shift of the target emission line.

#### 3.3.1 Line profiles

In order to decide emission lines to be analyzed, we first started from
looking line profiles taken by EIS. Fig. 3.4 shows the spatial
distribution of intensities near the south limb during HOP79 in 2010
October 7–8. The intensities shown here are calculated by integrating
over each spectral window. Panels in the figure are in the order of the
formation temperature. The vertical dashed line at @xmath in each panel
indicates the limb location which was determined from the maximum point
of Fe viii intensity since the limb was clearly seen in the transition
region lines (O iv – v , Fe viii and Si vii ) due to the well-known
“limb brightening” effect which arises from the fact that the solar
corona is optically thin. In that situation, when we move our line of
sight from the solar disk inside the limb to above the limb, the length
of our line of sight becomes twice because there are no occulting
structures above the limb. For coronal lines from Fe x – xii , the
intensity is stronger inside the limb than that off the limb, while for
coronal lines like Fe xiii and Fe xv the intensity is stronger outside
the limb compared to the disk ( i.e., inside the limb).

Line profiles on the solar disk ( @xmath ; solid line ) and above the
limb ( @xmath ; dashed line ) for all spectral windows taken by EIS
during HOP79 on 2010 October 7–8 are shown in Fig. 3.5 . Panels are in
the order of the formation temperature as same as in Fig. 3.4 . The line
profiles were integrated and averaged by the span of @xmath in the
@xmath direction and the integrated ranges are indicated by horizontal
bar in Fig. 3.4 . We note characteristics of the emission lines seen in
each spectral window below.

##### 3.3.1.1 The transition lines

###### He ii

He ii @xmath Å is known to be one of the strongest emission lines in EIS
spectra and the only one with the formation temperature below @xmath .
The emission is very weak above the limb which indicates that it comes
from the bottom of the corona or lower. As seen in the solid line
profile, He ii @xmath Å has a long enhanced red wing. This is the
contribution from Si x @xmath Å, and this blend makes the analysis of He
ii @xmath Å much complex. Ideally, we can remove this Si x by referring
Si x @xmath Å since these line pair has constant intensity ratio of
@xmath (CHIANTI ver. 7; Landi et al. 2012 ) because their upper level of
the transition are the same. The intensity ratio might be possibly
measured above the limb where He ii becomes much more weaker than inside
the solar disk. However, as seen from the off-limb spectrum ( dotted
histogram ) of Si x @xmath Å in Fig. 3.5 , it was not strong enough to
be used as a reference emission line ( i.e., noisy). Therefore, we did
not use He ii @xmath Å in this analysis.

###### O iv–v

The EIS data analyzed here includes two oxygen emission lines: O iv
@xmath Å ( @xmath ) and O v @xmath Å ( @xmath ). Previous observations
have reported that the transition region lines around @xmath – @xmath
are redshifted by up to @xmath at the disk center (Chae et al. 1998 ;
Peter & Judge 1999 ; Teriaca et al. 1999 ) , and that it is meaningful
to analyze those oxygen lines to confirm the consistency between the
previous observations and our results. Since the spectra of these
emission lines are much weaker compared to other emission lines observed
( e.g., Fe emission lines), we integrated the spectra almost all along
the slit ( @xmath ) at the expense of spatial resolution in the analysis
as described in Section 3.B . As seen from the spectra in Fig. 3.5 , the
integration of @xmath pixels obviously does not look enough to measure
the precise line centroid.

###### Fe viii and Si vii

Two emission lines Fe viii @xmath Å and Si vii @xmath Å are strong and
well-isolated from other strong ones, in addition, the formation
temperatures are similar. There is a Ca xiv emission line near the line
centroid of Fe viii @xmath Å, but its influence is thought to be very
weak in the quiet region due to its high formation temperature of Ca xiv
( @xmath ). Mg vi @xmath Å has formation temperature similar to that of
Fe viii and Si vii , but it was too noisy to achieve the precision of
several @xmath so we did not use this line.

##### 3.3.1.2 Coronal lines

###### Fe ix

At the longer wavelength side in the spectral window of Fe xi @xmath Å/
@xmath Å, there is a Fe ix @xmath Å, which is isolated and relatively
strong. We can fill the wide temperature gap between Fe viii ( @xmath )
and Fe x ( @xmath ) by using this line.

###### Fe x

There are two emission lines from Fe x : @xmath Å/ @xmath Å in the
analyzed EIS data. Both are free from any significant blend by other
lines near the line center. Note that at the red wing of Fe x @xmath Å,
a weak line Fe xi @xmath Å exists. But this line is much weaker than Fe
x @xmath Å in the quiet region.

###### Fe xi

For Fe xi emission lines, there are three spectral windows including
them: @xmath Å, @xmath Å, and @xmath Å. All these three lines
unfortunately suffer from a significant blending. Near the line center
of Fe xi @xmath Å, there is Fe x @xmath Å ( @xmath pixels apart each
other in the EIS CCD). This emission line is density sensitive and
becomes stronger at a location where the electron density is higher.
This may cause a systematic redshift compared to the result from other
Fe xi emission lines. As seen in the Fe xi @xmath spectrum in Fig. 3.5 ,
two emission lines with comparative strength are blending each other: Fe
xi @xmath Å/ @xmath Å. We fitted Fe xi @xmath Å/ @xmath Å by double
Gaussians, which is considered to be robust because these two emission
lines are both strong and their line profiles usually have two distinct
peaks. The third emission line Fe xi @xmath Å is significantly blended
by the transition region lines O v @xmath Å in the quiet region, so we
did not use that line.

###### Fe xii

Two emission lines Fe xii @xmath Å and @xmath Å are both strong and
suitable for the analysis of the quiet region. One problem in the
analysis of Fe xii @xmath Å is that there exists a blend by Fe xii
@xmath Å and the line ratio @xmath Å/ @xmath Å has a sensitivity for the
electron density. This will cause an apparent shift of the emission line
toward the longer wavelength ( i.e., redshift) especially in active
regions and at bright points where the electron density typically
becomes higher by an order of magnitude than that in the quiet region.

###### Fe xiii

Fe xiii @xmath Å is only one strong emission line from Fe xiii in this
EIS study and known to be a clean line without any significant blend.
Different from emission lines with lower formation temperature, the
spectra of Fe xiii @xmath Å above the limb and inside the solar disk
shown in Fig. 3.5 indicate that the off-limb spectrum is stronger than
the disk spectrum by approximately twice. This value is what can be
expected from the limb brightening effect.

###### Fe xiv–xv

Emission lines Fe xiv @xmath Å and Fe xv @xmath Å were very weak in the
quiet region even with the exposure time of @xmath . The off-limb
spectrum and the disk spectrum of Fe xv indicate the same behavior as
those of Fe xiii . However, the spectra of Fe xiv behave differently
from them. This is considered to be the influence of an emission line Fe
xi @xmath Å existing near the line centroid of Fe xiv . In the quiet
region, contribution from Fe xi could become relatively strong compared
to Fe xiv because the average temperature is slightly lower than that in
active regions. It is possible that Fe xv has the similar problem in the
quiet region. Therefore, we did not analyze Fe xiv and Fe xv emission
lines here in order not to derive improper results.

#### 3.3.2 Fitting

Most of the emission lines used in this analysis can be considered to be
well fitted by a single Gaussian because they are isolated and strong.
In order to reduce the fluctuations caused by the existence of coronal
structures ( e.g. , bright points) and non-radial motions, we spatially
integrated the spectra by @xmath in the @xmath direction. One example of
fitting Fe xiii @xmath Å by a single Gaussian is shown in panel (a) of
Fig. 3.6 . Upper part of the panel shows the line profile at the disk
center taken during HOP79 in 2010 October and a green line is a fitted
single Gaussian. We used a single Gaussian in the form of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Coefficients @xmath ( @xmath ) respectively represent peak, line
centroid, line width (Gaussian width), and constant background. Lower
part shows residuals from the fitted Gaussian, which do not exceed
@xmath % of the peak in the spectrum and are comparative to the errors.
Only the wavelength range used for the fitting is plotted in the lower
panel. The single Gaussian fitting was applied to the emission lines Fe
viii @xmath Å, Si vii @xmath Å, Fe ix @xmath Å, Fe x @xmath Å/ @xmath Å,
Fe xi @xmath Å, Fe xii @xmath Å/ @xmath Å, and Fe xiii @xmath Å. Each
spectra were fitted by using @xmath – @xmath pixels which include each
emission line.

As an exception, Fe xi @xmath Å and @xmath Å were fitted by double
Gaussians because they clearly overlap with each wing. In this case we
used double Gaussians with constant background. Upper part of panel (b)
shows a line profile of the Fe xi emission lines at the disk center as
same as Fe xiii @xmath Å, and a green line indicates the result of
fitting.

In order to check the robustness of our double Gaussian fitting for Fe
xi @xmath Å/ @xmath Å, the scatter plot for fitted line centroids of two
emission lines is made as shown in panel (a) of Fig. 3.7 .
Theoretically, the line centroids from the same ion have the
relationship @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath are the line centroid of two
emission lines) considering the Doppler effect cancels out because the
factor @xmath is common between the emission lines from the same ion.
The two line centroids clearly have the positive correlation with the
correlation coefficient of @xmath . In addition, the ratio of two line
centroids was @xmath in the average as shown in panel (b), which is
almost identical to the theoretical value ( @xmath ). Thus, we conclude
that the double Gaussian is reliable.

#### 3.3.3 Calibration of the spectrum tilt

The spectra taken by EIS are known to be slightly tilted from @xmath
axis when projected onto the CCDs (hereafter we call this effect as the
spectrum tilt). This arises from the subtle misalignment of the
spectroscopic slits, the grating component and the CCDs. The tilts of
the slits and the grating component should cause the same degree of the
tilts in the observed spectra. The two CCDs are known to be displaced a
little each other, which makes the spectrum of the two CCDs different.
The spectrum tilt is crudely @xmath pixel in the wavelength direction
along the full height of the CCDs ( @xmath pixels), which corresponds to
@xmath – @xmath .

The current standard EIS software calibrates this effect by referring
the spectrum tilt obtained at the off limb. It is fixed and has no
dependence on wavelength. However, the spectrum tilt may have different
characteristics on the two CCDs and even with wavelength. Since we aim
to deduce Doppler velocities in the order of a few @xmath , we carefully
investigated the spectrum tilt by analyzing the scan taken in the quiet
region at the solar disk as described in Section 3.A . The obtained
tilts were used to calibrate the north–south scan data from HOP79.

#### 3.3.4 Alignment of data between exposures

The analysis in this chapter requires carefulness by the order of @xmath
, which means we need a little more finer reduction than the procedures
provided by the standard EIS software in the SSW package. The current
SSW package includes a robust wavelength calibration developed by Kamio
et al. ( 2010 ) , but there remains an uncertainty of @xmath due to two
reasons described in Section 3.1 . In order to reduce this uncertainty,
we (1) aligned five exposures in one pointing, and (2) aligned them
between the neighboring pointings so that the sum of squared difference
in overlapped region becomes smallest. Here we assumed that the average
Doppler shift in the quiet region is independent of time. An example of
alignment is shown in Fig. 3.8 . In order to compare our reduction to
the standard package, the line centroid calibrated by SSW is plotted in
panel (a). The data after aligned are shown in panel (b), which is much
less dispersed than the data in panel (a). From this result, we
confirmed that the fluctuation up to @xmath Å ( @xmath ) is still
remained after analyzed through the standard SSW package.

Note that a systematic linear behavior remains for some emission lines
even after those careful analysis above. This may come from the residual
of the spectrum tilt removal, but we do not specify the exact reason at
present. In order to compensate the linear component appropriately as
long as possible, we adopted the idea that the Doppler shifts must be
symmetric about the disk center, which should be safe in the global FOV.

### 3.4 Center-to-limb variation

We obtained the center-to-limb variations from the north–south scan
during HOP79 after analyzing the data as described above. Here results
for five emission lines are respectively shown in Fig. 3.9 and Fig. 3.10
with an order of the formation temperature from upper panel to lower
one: Fe viii @xmath Å, Fe x @xmath Å, Fe xi @xmath Å, Fe xii @xmath Å,
and Fe xiii @xmath Å. In those observations, there were no active
regions along the meridional line on the solar disk.

Dashed lines in each panel represent the fitted curve when the
center-to-limb variation of the Doppler shift is considered to be caused
by the radial flow in the solar corona. When the flow is in the radial
direction only, the dependence of the Doppler velocity should be @xmath
where @xmath is the radial velocity and @xmath is the angle between line
of sight and normal vector as to the solar surface. The solar @xmath is
represented as @xmath . We fitted the data by converting the abscissa
into @xmath and applied the linear function. Note that the results were
fitted within the range indicated by the region between two vertical
dotted lines which indicates the quiet region. There is a small coronal
hole at the north pole on 2010 October 7–8 and emission lines are
clearly blueshifted at @xmath which may be the indication of an outflow.
The radial velocity at the disk center is written in the right upper
corner of each panel from which we see that the velocity decreases (
i.e., upflow becomes stronger) with increasing formation temperature.
The indicated errors are those calculated in the fitting procedure from
the variance of the data points. We hereafter denote these errors as
@xmath .

Fig. 3.11 shows histograms of the residual from the fitted curves in
Fig. 3.9 (October; left column ) and Fig. 3.10 (December; right column
). Residuals of Fe viii – xiii are shown from upper to bottom panels. A
number @xmath in each panel indicates the standard deviation of the
residual in the unit of @xmath . Two vertical dashed lines indicate
@xmath and the area between those is painted by gray . The values of
@xmath are around @xmath , which is much larger than the estimated error
of the fitted velocity ( @xmath ) indicated in Fig. 3.9 and Fig. 3.10 .
Considering that @xmath includes the real fluctuation of the quiet
region, we regard @xmath as an error of Doppler velocities at the disk
center.

Obtained Doppler velocities from eleven emission lines for the
temperature range @xmath – @xmath are listed in Table 3.1 and these
results were plotted in Fig. 3.12 . The October and December results are
respectively indicated by red squares and green diamonds . December
results are shifted by @xmath in abscissa ( @xmath ) to facilitate
visualization. The vertical error bars indicate @xmath . The horizontal
error bars indicate the full width of half maximum of contribution
function. The Doppler velocities of two potentially blended emission
lines Fe xi @xmath Å and Fe xii @xmath Å are indicated by black symbols
. As being considered in Section 3.3.1.2 , those emission lines are
redshifted by several @xmath compared to the isolated emission line from
the same ion. The Solid line indicates a third order polynomial function
fitted to the all data points except for Fe xi @xmath Å and Fe xii
@xmath Å. The gray region between two dashed lines shows the standard
deviation in the fitted curves. The important conclusion here is that
the Doppler velocities are almost zero or slightly positive ( i.e.,
downward) at the temperature below @xmath , and above that temperature
the emission lines are blueshifted with increasing temperature, and the
Doppler velocity reaches @xmath at @xmath (Fe xiii ).

### 3.5 Summary

In order to determine the reference velocities for emission lines in the
quiet region, we analyzed the data taken during HOP79. The consecutive
scans on the meridional line enable us to investigate the center-to-limb
variations of spectra. We derived the center-to-limb variations of the
Doppler velocities for the emission lines whose formation temperature is
above @xmath for the first time. It is concluded that below the
temperature of @xmath the Doppler velocities are almost zero or slightly
positive ( i.e., downward), while the Doppler velocity clearly becomes
negative up to @xmath above that temperature. Previous observations have
shown that the Doppler velocity in the quiet region at @xmath measured
by using Ne viii @xmath Å is @xmath (Peter 1999 ) , @xmath (Peter &
Judge 1999 ) , and @xmath (Teriaca et al. 1999 ) . Our results were in
good agreement with those studies within the error.

The results obtained in this chapter will be used as a reference for the
Doppler velocities of the outflow region at the edge of an active region
measured in the next chapter. Although the results themselves would have
much importance on the coronal dynamics as discussed in the literature
(Peter & Judge 1999 ) , we do not discuss our results further since that
is not the main purpose of this thesis.

## Appendix 3.A Calibration of the spectrum tilt

EIS slits and CCDs are known to be slightly tilted from the solar @xmath
direction, which creates a systematic shift in observed spectra
(hereafter referred to as the spectrum tilt) in CCD @xmath direction.
Since the projection of the slit is tilted clockwise on the CCDs, the
spectra is redshifted in the northern part and blueshifted in the
southern part. The standard SSW package corrects this effect by
referring the tilt derived by the study CALIB_SLOT_SLIT (EIS study No.
352) which was designed to calibrate the the slit tilt and the
instrumental width from the off-limb spectra (Young 2010 ) .

There are two remained problems in that calibration: one is that it is
unclear whether the spectrum tilt has a dependence on wavelength, and
the other is that the spectrum tilt in the long-wavelength (LW) CCD was
not investigated. The current standard EIS software uses a single set of
fitted parameters derived from Fe xii @xmath Å/ @xmath Å in the
short-wavelength (SW) CCD to calibrate the spectrum tilt. Note that
Kamio et al. ( 2010 ) investigated the tilts of both CCDs and it was
concluded that the SW CCD is more tilted than the LW CCD. In our
analysis, we analyze the same data as Kamio et al. ( 2010 ) taken at the
quiet region near the solar disk and investigate the spectrum tilt using
ten emission lines from the two CCDs. The results obtained in this
appendix are used to calibrate the spectrum tilt when we deduce the
center-to-limb variation of the line centroids (Section 3.3 ).

#### 3.a.1 Observation and data analysis

In order to calibrate the spectrum tilt, we used the data taken by the
same EIS study as that analyzed to investigate the Doppler shifts of the
quiet region (north–south scans in HOP79). The data was taken on 2009
November 26. While data taken during HOP79 recorded the spectra with the
spatial span of @xmath pixels in @xmath direction ( @xmath – @xmath on
the CCDs), this data contains spectra at all @xmath position on the
CCDs. This enables us to investigate the spectrum tilt along the EIS
slit more precisely. The analysis assumes that the variation of line
centroids in the data comes from the instrumental effect, since the
variation of the Doppler shift near the disk center is small even if the
plasma has a constant radial velocity. The region studied is within
approximately @xmath from the disk center, so the curvature produced by
the radial velocity does not exceed @xmath when the velocity is @xmath .
A context image of the Sun is shown in Fig. 3.13 in which the location
of the EIS slit is shown by white line. There were no active regions on
the solar disk during the observation.

Since EIS can obtain spectra of @xmath height in the maximum at one
exposure, the exposures are divided into three times and take the
spectra on pixels @xmath – @xmath , @xmath – @xmath , and @xmath –
@xmath from the bottom of the CCDs as shown in Fig. 3.14 . The spectra
were integrated by @xmath pixels in order to enhance S/N ratio when they
are fitted by a single Gaussian. At each @xmath position, EIS took the
spectra in neighboring five location within @xmath in the east-west
direction. The fitted line centroids in these five exposures show almost
the same behavior as seen in Fig. 3.15 . In order to compensate the
influence of the orbital variation, we aligned those five arrays of the
line centroid so that the sum of squared difference between each array
becomes the minimum. In the next, assuming that the velocity in the
quiet region is steady, we connected the three parts of the data and
obtained the line centroid as a function of all @xmath position on the
CCDs.

#### 3.a.2 Results

##### 3.a.2.1 Spectrum tilt in the short-wavelength CCD

Line centroids of the emission lines in the SW CCD are shown in Fig.
3.15 . Panels show the line centroid as a function of @xmath position on
the CCD. Data points are indicated by black dots. Gray, blue, and red
lines respectively show the spectrum tilt returned by the standard EIS
software, second order polynomial fitting, and third order polynomial
fitting. Note that the line centroids are plotted in the unit of
spectral pixel which corresponds to @xmath Å @xmath .

All emission lines analyzed here indicate the similar behavior as
clearly seen: the line centroids increases from the bottom of the CCD to
the top, and they have the curvature with upwardly convex shape. Among
them, the line centroid of Fe xi @xmath Å/ @xmath Å shows different
behavior at the top of the CCD above the pixel number around @xmath .
The curvature is larger than that of other emission lines and only the
line centroid of Fe xi @xmath Å decreases significantly at that
location. Another emission line from the same ion Fe xi @xmath Å did not
show such behavior, from which we concluded that this abnormal curvature
does not arise from the solar feature but the instrumental effect. We
concluded that third order polynomial fitting is better than second
order polynomial fitting because the spectrum curvatures seen in Fig.
3.15 may be asymmetric in the @xmath direction.

The third order polynomial functions fitted to each spectrum tilt in the
SW CCD are plotted together in Fig. 3.16 . Colors indicate the tilt
obtained from each emission line. Panel (a) shows the fitted functions
and panel (b) shows their derivative. As described above, it is easily
seen that the behavior of Fe xi @xmath Å differs from other emission
lines at the top of the CCD. The graph for Fe xii @xmath Å (indicated by
black line) has steeper gradient in the middle of the CCD as seen from
panel (b). The standard EIS software calibrates the spectrum tilt by
using the result from Fe xii @xmath Å/ @xmath Å. It means that the
spectrum tilt is usually corrected too much for emission lines other
than Fe xii @xmath Å (though the deviation could be reduced by using not
only @xmath Å but also @xmath Å). From these results, we concluded that
it is better to use each fitted spectrum tilt to calibrate each emission
line. We used the fitted parameters obtained by third polynomial fitting
for each emission line to calibrate the data in HOP79.

##### 3.a.2.2 Spectrum tilt in the long-wavelength CCD

The spectrum tilt of the LW CCD is known to have a different property
from that of the SW CCD (Kamio et al. 2010 ) , though it is not
reflected in the standard EIS software. We investigated two line
centroids of Fe x @xmath Å and Si vii @xmath Å which are shown in Fig.
3.17 . Both panels show the line centroid as a function of @xmath
position on the CCD. Data points are indicated by black dots. Gray,
blue, and red lines respectively show the spectrum tilt returned by the
standard EIS software, second order polynomial fitting, and third order
polynomial fitting. Comparing the data to gray lines, it is clear that
the spectrum tilt in the LW CCD is much smaller than that in the SW CCD.
The results shown here are consistent with those by Kamio et al. ( 2010
) . As same as for results in the SW CCD, we used the fitted parameters
for each emission line to calibrate the data in HOP79.

#### 3.a.3 Summary

We investigated the spectrum tilts from ten emission lines (eight from
the SW CCD and two from the LW CCD) using the data taken at the quiet
region near the disk center. The spectra were obtained covering all
@xmath position on the CCDs, from which we could analyze the behavior of
line centroid along the slit. Our analysis revealed that the spectrum
tilt has some characteristic dependence on wavelength. The difference of
the tilt in the SW CCD and the LW CCD was also derived which is
consistent with the result of Kamio et al. ( 2010 ) . We use the
spectrum tilt obtained here to calibrate the data since the analysis in
this chapter dealt the Doppler shifts in the quiet region which is more
or less several @xmath and requires much carefulness for the line
centroid compared to other studies. The other reason why we must be such
careful is that we investigate the center-to-limb variation of line
centroids, which means that even subtle deviation which does not matter
in the data with small field of view would become large enough to
produce systematic variation in the long distance up to @xmath .

## Appendix 3.B Oxygen lines (@xmath)

As introduced in Section 3.3.1.1 , there are two transition region lines
from oxygen ion in the EIS data analyzed in this chapter. In order to
check the consistency of our results and those from previous
observations, here we investigated a center-to-limb variation of O v
@xmath Å. This emission line is stronger than O iv @xmath Å, but in
order to obtain the spectra with high S/N ratio which leads to the
precision of @xmath , we needed spatial integration with @xmath in the
solar-Y direction ( i.e. , along the EIS spectroscopic slit). After the
integration, five spectra at each pointing were obtained, which means we
obtained @xmath spectra from twenty pointing locations in total. The
integrated spectra of O v @xmath Å at first exposure in each pointing
from October data are shown in Fig. 3.18 . Twenty spectra were obtained
in each pointing from south (#0) to north (#19). Note that the spectrum
#6 was absent in this data due to data loss. Red curves plotted over the
spectra are a fitted Gaussian. A vertical dashed line is located at the
wavelength at the limb as calculated by fitting the result as same as
for coronal lines. The spectra at the solar disk are redshifted relative
to those near both limbs.

The centroid of the fitted Gaussian as a function of the solar @xmath
coordinate is shown in Fig. 3.19 . The line centroids are basically more
redshifted at the solar disk than at the limb. Previous observations by
SUMER reported the redshift of the transition region lines whose
formation temperatures are similar to that of O v (Chae et al. 1998 ;
Peter & Judge 1999 ) . However, we notice that there is a peculiar
tendency in the center-to-limb variation of the Doppler shift. The line
centroid indeed increases ( i.e. , redshifted) from the limb to inside
the disk as expected from the previous observations, but at some point
it decreases in reversal toward the disk center.

## Chapter 4 Doppler velocity measurement for AR outflows

### 4.1 Introduction

The solar corona shows different appearance when we observe it in the
different temperatures. Focusing on an active region, patchy structures
are seen for the temperature of @xmath ( i.e. , the transition region).
For the temperature range of @xmath – @xmath , there are prominent
elongated loops structures from the edge of the active region to the
surrounding region, named “fan loops” after their appearance. They are
often observed at east or west edge of active regions. Going up to
higher temperature around @xmath – @xmath , both fan loops and the core
of the active region are bright, and loop structures at the core region
can be seen which connect positive and negative magnetic polarity. Above
the temperature @xmath , radiation from the core region dominates.

The temperature dependence of Doppler velocities gives us a clue to
understand the process occurring at the coronal structures. Fan loops
are known to indicate characteristic velocity dependence on the
temperature (Warren et al. 2011 ) . In the transition region temperature
( @xmath ), they show a redshift of @xmath which has been interpreted
that the plasma in fan loops around the transition region temperature
flows down to the footpoints. On the other hand, a blueshift of @xmath
is observed above the temperature around @xmath ( e.g. , Fe x – xv ).
McIntosh et al. ( 2012 ) think this dependence as the indication of the
coronal heating followed by cooling. Bradshaw ( 2008 ) has analytically
estimated the speed of cooling downflow by considering the balance of
enthalpy flux, which could account for the reported value of several
tens of @xmath .

Since outflow regions often takes its place adjacent to fan loops, and
the blueshift of fan loops in corona lines has been reported, outflow
regions and fan loops had been often regarded as the identical structure
(Tian et al. 2011 ; McIntosh et al. 2012 ) . Young et al. ( 2012 )
recently mentioned that the location of outflows and fan loops are
slightly displaced with each other. It was reported that there was no Si
vii emission in the outflow region (Warren et al. 2011 ) , which implies
that the outflow region could be separated from fan loops. The physical
properties of fan loops and the outflows are noted in Table 4.1 . We
analyzed the data taken at relatively initial phase of Hinode when the
sensitivity of EIS was high, and tried to measure the Doppler velocity
at the transition region temperature in the outflow region.

In this chapter, we measure the Doppler velocities of a fan loop and the
outflow region in NOAA AR10978 using a reference velocity of the quiet
region obtained in Chapter 3 and derive the temperature dependence.
Previous observations include the error up to @xmath at most, which
might produce even the reversal of the sign of Doppler velocity because
the observed values are also the order of @xmath . Our analysis in
Chapter 3 enables us to deduce the Doppler velocity within an error of
@xmath . By measuring the Doppler velocity, we aim to reveal the nature
of the outflow region and clarify differences between the outflow region
and fan loops. In this thesis, fan loops are defined as the loop
structure extending from the periphery of an active region which is
bright in the transition region lines, while the outflow region is
defined as the region where the emission line width increases in the
coronal lines and no fan loops exist.

### 4.2 Observations and data reduction

#### 4.2.1 EIS scan

A raster scan of NOAA AR10978 obtained with Hinode /EIS was analyzed to
study the temperature dependence of the Doppler velocity in the outflow
region. The active region appeared on the solar disk from the east limb
on 2007 December 6, and disappeared into the west limb on 2007 December
18. During this period, no other active regions existed, and the
observation by Hinode were focused on AR 10978 except for a few synoptic
observations. AR10978 showed overall low activities especially in the
former half of its disk passage as shown in Fig. 4.1 (one B-class flare
during the scan). There is a negative-polarity leading sunspot and
following positive-polarity strong magnetic field regions. A magnetogram
and an EUV image of the whole Sun taken by SoHO on 2007 December 11 are
shown in Fig. 4.2 .

The EIS data analyzed in this chapter was taken on 2007 December 11
10:25:42–15:44:33UT. The scan has a large-area FOV ( @xmath ) which
includes entire AR10978. The @xmath spectroscopic slit was used with an
exposure time of @xmath . The center of the field of view was @xmath ,
which is suitable to derive the Doppler velocities with less
superposition of coronal structures.

Fig. 4.3 shows (a) an MDI magnetogram, (b) an EIT @xmath Å passband
image, (c) a TRACE @xmath Å passband image, and (d)–(f) intensity maps
of three emission lines whose formation temperature is different: Si vii
@xmath Å ( @xmath ), Fe xii @xmath Å ( @xmath ), and Fe xvi @xmath Å (
@xmath ). In the Si vii map, several elongated structures from east and
west edge of the active region are seen, which is called as “fan loops”.
This structure is typical around this temperature range ( @xmath ). The
emission from Si vii is relatively dark at the core of the active
region. The morphology becomes more complex for the intensity map of Fe
xii than that of Si vii . Not only the elongated structure, which is
less clearly discernible than fan loops, but also loop-like structure
(coronal loops) connecting east and west part of the active region can
be seen. Above the temperature around @xmath , the emission from the
core region dominates over the surroundings as seen in the intensity map
of Fe xvi . Emission outside the core region from this temperature range
was very weak.

#### 4.2.2 Data reduction

We used twenty six emission lines in total whose formation temperature
ranges widely within @xmath in order to investigate temperature
dependence of the Doppler velocity in coronal structures without gaps in
temperature as long as possible. The emission lines are listed in Table
4.2 . We selected emission lines which are relatively strong, isolated
and free from significant blend by other unidentified lines. The
contribution functions of the emission lines used in this study are
shown in Fig. 4.4 . Blue , red , yellow , and green lines respectively
indicate those of Mg, Si, S, and Fe ion.

The data was calibrated through the standard EIS software to remove
hot/warm pixels, subtract dark current and CCD pedestal. Note that some
programs in the current standard software calibrate the spectrum tilt by
using same parameters in both SW and LW CCDs, however, we used different
parameters for each CCD given by Kamio et al. ( 2010 ) . The validity of
them was checked as described in Section 4.A .

We focused on four kinds of coronal structure in this chapter: active
region core, fan loop, outflow region, and the quiet region. The active
region core was defined by the loop system at the center of the active
region which is bright in the high temperature emission ( cf. panel f in
Fig. 4.3 ), which has the size of @xmath in the projected plane. In Fe
xii and Si vii intensity map (panel d and e in Fig. 4.3 ), there are no
clear loops at the active region core, while patchy structures are seen.
Fan loops are extracted from Si vii image in which they are most
distinct. We define outflow region as the location (1) where the line
width of Fe xii @xmath Å is enhanced, and (2) which can be spatially
separated from fan loops. Several regions were extracted from the raster
scan which are indicated by white boxes in Fig. 4.5 . Names written
beside the boxes respectively means C1–C3: active region core, F1–F4:
fan loop, and U1–U4: outflow region. As the quiet region, we selected
the region far from the active region as long as possible, which is
indicated by the box named QR. The size of the boxes was chosen so that
they fit to the spatial size of target structures (C1–C3, F1–F4, and QR:
@xmath , U1 and U2: @xmath , U3–U4: @xmath ). Since fan loops were well
developed at the east edge, so we carefully select the location of the
outflow regions U1 and U2 in order to avoid the influence of neighboring
fan loops.

### 4.3 Line profiles

Before measuring Doppler velocities, we look at each emission line
profile. Even visual inspection of line profiles gives us an insight
sometimes better than a fitting result. We compare line profiles from
four locations: the quiet region (QR), fan loops (F1), an active region
core (C2), and the outflow region (U3) indicated by white boxes in Fig.
4.5 . Maps in the figure show intensity, line centroid, and line width
from upper to lower panels. Left and right columns respectively show
those for Si vii @xmath Å ( @xmath ) and Fe xii @xmath Å ( @xmath ). In
the following sections, we show the emission line profiles in an order
of the formation temperature and note their characteristics. The spectra
from four regions (C2, F1, U3, and QR) were averaged within each region.

#### 4.3.1 @xmath–@xmath

Line profiles of two transition region emission lines Mg vi @xmath Å (
@xmath ) and Si vii @xmath Å ( @xmath ) are shown in Fig. 4.6 . Black ,
blue , red , and green histograms respectively indicate the line profile
in the quiet region, the outflow region, a fan loop, and the core region
which were indicated by white boxes in Fig. 4.5 . A vertical dashed line
in each panel indicates a line centroid of the emission line at the
quiet region. The line profiles for fan loops are clearly shifted toward
longer wavelength ( i.e., redshift) by around @xmath (corresponding to
@xmath Å) which corresponds to @xmath downward to the solar surface at
this wavelength. On the other hand, the line profiles in the outflow
region are blueshifted by @xmath . The line profiles look like almost
symmetric in all regions. It should be noted that those in the outflow
region are wider than those in other regions.

#### 4.3.2 @xmath–@xmath

Line profiles of two coronal emission lines Fe xi @xmath Å ( @xmath )
and Fe xii @xmath Å ( @xmath ) are shown in Fig. 4.7 . Different from
the transition region emission lines, they exhibit an enhanced component
at their blue wing in the outflow region. This enhancement can be seen
up to @xmath – @xmath pixels far from the line centroid, which indicates
that the upflow with a speed up to @xmath exists, while major portion of
the emission is located near the same centroid as the quiet region where
the plasma moves only by @xmath . Note that the line profiles look
symmetric in the quiet region.

The enhanced blue wing is more clearly seen in Fe xii than in Fe xi ,
which means that the upflow dominantly consists of plasma with a
temperature higher than the formation temperature of Fe xi . Another
noticeable feature is that the enhanced component in Fe xii has even the
same magnitude as the intensity in the core region at around @xmath Å.
We can see the similar behavior also for Fe xii @xmath Å included in
this spectral window.

#### 4.3.3 @xmath

Fig. 4.8 shows line profiles for Fe xiii @xmath Å ( @xmath ) and Fe xiv
@xmath Å ( @xmath ). While the line profiles in the quiet region ( black
), a fan loop ( red ), and the core region ( green ) all look symmetric
and their centroid position do not deviate significantly from the value
of the quiet region indicated by a vertical dashed line, those in the
outflow region ( blue ) exhibit a significant enhancement in their blue
wing (at @xmath – @xmath Å for Fe xiii and at @xmath – @xmath Å for Fe
xiv ) similar to Fe xi – xii . Note that major portion of the emission
is again located near the line centroid in the quiet region ( i.e., at
the vertical dashed line).

#### 4.3.4 @xmath–@xmath

The hottest coronal plasma seen in the non-flare condition reaches
around the temperature of @xmath , which can be observed by Fe xv @xmath
Å ( @xmath ) and Fe xvi @xmath Å ( @xmath ). Their line profiles are
shown in Fig. 4.9 . The line profiles in the quiet region, a fan loop,
and the core region respectively indicated by black, red, and green
spectrum seem to be symmetric as same as those from lower temperature.
Though an enhancement at the blue wing indeed exists around @xmath –
@xmath Å in the Fe xv emission line in the outflow region ( blue ), that
does not exceed the intensity of the core region ( green ), which
differs from the case of Fe xii – xiv ( @xmath – @xmath ).

Another important feature to be mentioned here is that the enhancement
at the blue wing does not exist in the line profile of Fe xvi in the
outflow region ( blue ). These indicates that the plasma producing the
enhancement at blue wings in the line profiles have a temperature lower
than @xmath . Though not shown in the figure, S xiii @xmath Å ( @xmath )
also indicates the same characteristic as Fe xvi ( i.e. , no enhancement
at its blue wing).

### 4.4 Measurement of the Doppler velocities of AR outflows

#### 4.4.1 Doppler velocity maps

We calculated the Doppler velocity @xmath by using the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the line centroid, @xmath is a rest wavelength, and
@xmath is the speed of the light. Here the fitting result by a single
Gaussian was used for @xmath . This means that the Doppler velocity
derived for the outflow region could be a weighted average of multiple
components in the line profile, which leads to the speed of the outflow
itself underestimated in the absolute value because there is a major
component with much little shift. The deviation from the single Gaussian
fitting for a coronal emission line is described in Appendix 4.D .

The Doppler velocity map for Si vii @xmath Å ( @xmath ), Fe xii @xmath Å
( @xmath ), Fe xiii @xmath Å ( @xmath ), and Fe xvi @xmath Å ( @xmath )
are shown in Fig. 4.10 . The line profiles were spatially integrated by
@xmath before the single Gaussian fitting for Fe emission lines. The
regions where the statistical error originated in the photon noise
exceeds @xmath are painted by black . Note that we do not refer to Fe
xii @xmath Å, which is commonly used in the literature, due to the fact
that the emission line is contributed by the neighboring Fe xii @xmath Å
at the region where the electron density becomes high ( e.g. , active
region core), and it produces a fake redshift.

The plot below each map in Fig. 4.10 shows the line centroids averaged
in @xmath direction within squares indicated by green thick line and
black dashed line in Doppler velocity maps. At some locations, the line
centroids are shifted coherently by several @xmath Å in these two
regions which may be a residual of the orbital variation. In order to
compensate those shifts, we subtracted the 5-exposures running average (
i.e. , in the solar @xmath direction) of the centroid of Fe xii @xmath Å
indicated by the green thick line in the lower plot. This emission line
was strong enough to obtain precise centroid ( @xmath ) in the quiet
region with spatial average of @xmath . As far as the orbital variation
dominantly comes from the spatial displacement of the grating component
in the EIS instrument, all emission lines should be shifted by the same
amounts. It might be too much subtraction because this process could
also remove the real fluctuation in the quiet region, so we set the
window size of @xmath exposures in order not to compensate the
statistical fluctuation of that size at least.