In this thesis we present our research in the context of multiple field
inflation. Current precision measurements of the cosmic microwave
background radiation (CMB) provide compelling evidence for the paradigm
of inflation. Simple single field inflation can fit the data well, but
the precise microphysical origin of inflation remains unknown. We are
interested in the case that single field inflation is an effective
description of a more fundamental theory containing multiple scalar
fields. Even if these extra degrees of freedom are all very heavy
compared to the Hubble scale of inflation they still might influence the
dynamics of the inflaton. This leads to features in the statistical
properties of the temperature fluctuations in the CMB. We study what the
possible effects are and how future data might be able to detect physics
beyond single field inflation. In this thesis we will first introduce
inflation and its current observational status. Then we discuss the
masterâ€™s research, which consists of two projects. The first project is
to provide an overview of studies of multiple field inflation in the
literature. We translate between the different notations and definitions
used in various papers and study the different approximation schemes and
their regime of validity. The second project is a numerical study of
concrete models of multi-field inflation from recent papers in the
literature. We study if the current and future experiments might be able
to detect the presence of the additional fields in these models.
