##### Contents

-    1 Outline Thesis
-    2 The Standard Model of Cosmology
    -    2.1 The Big Bang Model
        -    2.1.1 Evolution of the homogeneous universe
        -    2.1.2 The Big Bang theory and observations
        -    2.1.3 The initial value problems of the Big Bang theory
    -    2.2 Inflation
        -    2.2.1 Inflation as a solution to the horizon and flatness
            problems
        -    2.2.2 How to realize inflation
        -    2.2.3 An example: quadratic potential
        -    2.2.4 Inflation as the origin of structure
        -    2.2.5 How to characterize the perturbations
    -    2.3 Inflation and observations
        -    2.3.1 Evidence in favor of inflation
        -    2.3.2 Observing physics beyond the simplest models of
            inflation
-    3 Multiple Field Inflation: a Translation of Different Studies in
    Literature
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 Framework of multiple field inflation
        -    3.2.1 Set-up
        -    3.2.2 Covariant formalism
        -    3.2.3 Background equations and slow-roll and turn
            parameters
        -    3.2.4 Dictionary background equations
        -    3.2.5 Perturbation theory
        -    3.2.6 Quantization of perturbations
        -    3.2.7 Perturbation equations in terms of the slow-roll and
            turn parameters
    -    3.3 Analytical approximations
        -    3.3.1 Sub-Hubble
        -    3.3.2 Super-Hubble
        -    3.3.3 Transition
        -    3.3.4 Overview
    -    3.4 Conclusion and Discussion
-    4 Numerical Study of Concrete Models in Literature
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 Characterization of the models
        -    4.2.1 No-scale supergravity models
        -    4.2.2 A toy model in which a heavy field flattens the
            potential
    -    4.3 Why do we expect to see something and what are the
        observational consequences?
        -    4.3.1 Observational consequences
    -    4.4 Numerical study of the no-scale supergravity inflationary
        models from literature
        -    4.4.1 The modified Cecotti model
        -    4.4.2 The imaginary supersymmetric Starobinsky model
        -    4.4.3 The @xmath -extension of the imaginary Starobinsky
            inflation
        -    4.4.4 The no-scale inflationary model
    -    4.5 Numerical study of a toy model
        -    4.5.1 The potential with a bend: @xmath
        -    4.5.2 The separable potential which stabilizes @xmath at a
            constant value: @xmath
        -    4.5.3 The full toy-model
    -    4.6 Conclusion and Discussion
-    5 Conclusion and Outlook
    -    5.1 Summary of Conclusions
    -    5.2 Outlook
-    A Full Computations of the Analytical Approximations
    -    A.1 Sub-horizon
    -    A.2 Super-horizon
    -    A.3 Transition
        -    A.3.1 Case 1: effective single field description in case of
            a large mass hierarchy
        -    A.3.2 Case 2: full solution to the perturbation equations
            using the SRST approximation

## Chapter 1 Outline Thesis

Cosmology is a fascinating area of research. The last decades have
provided us with a huge amount of experimental data which in combination
with theoretical physics rapidly increased our knowledge about the
intriguing history of our universe. The redshift-distance mappings of
galaxies established the fact the universe is expanding and supported
the idea the universe originated from some extremely hot and dense
state. This so called Hot Big Bang model could in addition explain the
abundances of light elements in the universe and gained important
evidence from the observation of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB).
In combination with the galaxy surveys it turned out the history of the
universe is very well described by the @xmath CDM concordance model. On
the other hand, these observations gave rise to questions concerning the
initial homogeneity of the universe and led to the idea of inflation .
It was soon realized that inflation could also explain the origin of the
primordial density perturbations, which are responsible for the large
scale structure in the universe. These density fluctuations result into
temperature fluctuations of the CMB, because the photons need to climb
out the gravitational wells. It was a great triumph for the paradigm of
inflation when a more precise measurement of the temperature
anisotropies of the CMB established the generic predicted properties by
inflation.

Different scenarios for inflation lead to very similar predictions,
however, they differ in the more subtle details. Because the current
data is extremely precise, we can try to use the CMB as a probe for
physics beyond the simplest models for inflation. The CMB provides a
unique window into the early universe and therefore in general it is
extremely interesting to understand the observational signatures of
different inflationary models, such that we can recognize hints of new
physics or falsify classes of models in the current and future data. In
this thesis we focus on multi-field inflation and its signatures in the
CMB data.

In chapter 2 we review the basics of the standard model of cosmology. We
start with a description of the Big Bang model and explain how inflation
can solve certain problems within this theory. Then we discuss the
observational evidence of the paradigm of inflation and outline future
tests of inflation which can be used to learn more about the physics of
the early universe. From chapter 3 on we consider the case that single
field inflation is an effective description of a more fundamental theory
containing multiple scalar fields. In chapter 3 we discuss the first
research project which is an overview of studies of multiple field
inflation in the literature. This allows us to introduce multiple field
inflation in full detail. We translate between the different notations
and definitions used in various papers and study the different
approximation schemes and their regime of validity. In addition we
discuss the predictions of observables within the approximation schemes.
In chapter 4 we discuss the second research project in which we perform
a numerical study of concrete models of multi-field inflation from
recent papers in the literature. We study if the current and future
experiments might be able to detect the presence of the additional
fields in these models. Finally, in chapter 5 we summarize and discuss
our findings.

## Chapter 2 The Standard Model of Cosmology

The latest decades of precision observations have led to great advances
in the understanding of our universe. Observations of supernovae [ 1 , 2
] , maps of large scale structure (LSS) [ 3 ] and the precision
measurements of the temperature anisotropies in the cosmic microwave
background radiation (CMB) [ 4 , 5 ] have resulted in the standard model
of cosmology, the @xmath CDM model, which is a combination of the Big
Bang model and Gaussian, adiabatic and almost scale invariant initial
conditions, as predicted by the simplest models of inflation. In this
chapter we review the basics of the standard model of cosmology. We
start with a description of the Big Bang model and then focus on the
role played by inflation, how to realize inflation and its current
observational evidence.

### 2.1 The Big Bang Model

The Big Bang theory can successfully account for the expansion history
of the homogeneous universe, the existence of the CMB, the abundance of
light elements and the formation of the structure. However it cannot
explain why the universe was almost perfectly homogeneous at early times
and where the initial density perturbations come from. In this section ยน
ยน 1 This section is largely based on [ 6 , 7 ] where much more can be
found. we give a description of the Big Bang model. We first recap some
physics of the homogeneous universe and explain the successes of the Big
Bang theory and then we address the problems related to initial
conditions.

#### 2.1.1 Evolution of the homogeneous universe

Galaxy surveys [ 3 ] indicate that on the largest scales the
distribution of structure in our universe is independent of the
direction we point our telescopes. Assuming that we are not a special
observer and that we would have measured the same distribution of large
scale structure at any other position in space this results in the
cosmological principle. The cosmological principle states that the
universe is homogeneous and isotropic on the largest scales. The Big
Bang model relies on the validity of the cosmological principle and on
the universality of the physical laws, in particular the gravitational
laws of general relativity. From these symmetries of the universe it
follows that geometry of the spacetime of the universe is described by
the Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is completely determined by the scale factor @xmath and the
curvature @xmath of the spatial hypersurfaces of constant time. The
spatial slices can either be flat ( @xmath ), positively curved ( @xmath
) or negatively curved ( @xmath ). The scale factor represents the
relative size of the universe at a given time. Often the line element is
written in terms of comoving coordinates @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the spatial metric @xmath contains the information about the
curvature of the spatial slices. Comoving coordinates can be thought of
as the grid points on a coordinate grid which expands with the expansion
of the universe. This means the comoving distance between two points
stays the same all the time. The physical coordinates @xmath however
imply a growth of the physical distance between two points on the grid
as the universe expands. It turns out that the comoving frame is a very
natural frame. Using the geodesic equation one can derive that for both
massive and massless particles the physical three momentum, with respect
to the comoving frame, decays with the expansion of the universe as
@xmath . This means that in an expanding universe all particles will
eventually come to rest with respect to the comoving frame. Moreover
this means that the wavelength of light is stretched with the expansion
of the universe. Photons from distant sources will therefore be
redshifted, this is quantified by the redshift parameter @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have defined @xmath . Redshift is being used as a time variable
to describe the history of the late-time universe.

The expansion history of the universe or the evolution of the scale
factor @xmath can be found if we know the matter content of the
universe. Homogeneity and isotropy requires the stress energy tensor to
take the form of a perfect fluid

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Covariant conservation of energy-momentum yields the continuity equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the Einstein equations yield the Friedmann equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the reduced Planck mass and @xmath the Hubble parameter
for which the best estimate today is given by @xmath , using the Planck,
WMAP low- @xmath polarization and high resolution CMB data [ 5 ] . Only
two of the three equations are independent, but they can all be very
useful. From the continuity equation ( 2.3 ) we can derive how the
energy density changes in an expanding universe. If a cosmological fluid
satisfies the following equation of state @xmath then the continuity
equation gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the case of matter such as the visible nuclei and electrons we can
neglect the pressure and we find @xmath . Besides visible matter which
is called baryonic matter it is believed there is another matter
component in the universe which is called dark matter. In case of a gas
of relativistic particles we have @xmath such that @xmath . This agrees
with the fact that the energy of these particles is redshifted as the
universe expands such that it falls of with one more factor of the scale
factor. This type of cosmological fluid is called radiation and consists
of the massless particles photons and gravitons and other relativistic
particles such as neutrinos (only in the early universe). Interestingly,
it has turned out that there is another fluid component of the universe
which has a negative equation of state @xmath which leads to a constant
energy density @xmath . This mysterious cosmological fluid is called
dark energy. By use of the Friedmann equations ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.5 ) we
can determine the evolution of the scale factor in presence of these
three cosmological fluids. Defining a critical density @xmath
corresponding to a flat universe today and the density parameters @xmath
the Friedmann equation becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the matter density parameter consists of one part belonging to
baryonic matter and another part of dark matter @xmath . If we know the
values of the density parameters today then we can read off the
expansion history of the homogeneous universe. The three cosmological
fluids scale differently with the scale factor @xmath and therefore
there are different epochs in the history of the universe where its
content was dominated by one fluid. The first Friedmann equation ( 2.4 )
and the continuity equation ( 2.3 ) can be combined to find the time
evolution of the scale factor for a single fluid

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

First we had an epoch of radiation domination @xmath , then matter
domination @xmath and recently we entered an epoch of dark energy
domination @xmath .

#### 2.1.2 The Big Bang theory and observations

The key idea of the Big Bang model is that the universe is expanding
which is in agreement with the observed redshift of galaxies. Hubble was
the first (1929) to find that galaxies are receding from us at a speed
proportional to the distance, which is known as the Hubble law. To
understand the evolution of the universe from an observational point of
view one needs to determine both the redshift and the comoving distance
of the observed objects. This means additional information about distant
objects is needed. It is believed that there are standard candles which
are objects of known absolute luminosity (for example Cepheid variables
and type IA supernovaes) and standard rulers which are objects of known
physical size. The relation between the observed flux and the absolute
luminosity of a star depends on both the coordinate distance and
redshift. The more the universe has expanded and the further away the
source the fainter the observed flux becomes. Similarly the ratio of the
physical size of an object and its measured angular size yields the
coordinate distance at the moment of emission. Combining the two types
of observations one can find the coordinate distance as function of
redshift. Any matter content of the universe will predict a certain
relation between redshift and comoving distance which can be derived
using equations ( 2.2 ) and ( 2.6 ). The measurements today are good
enough to distinguish between different cosmological models and they
strongly disfavor a flat matter-only universe. The best fit from
supernovae only (SDSS, SNLS, HST and low-z) is a flat universe with
@xmath matter [ 8 ] . With the current precision measurements of the CMB
the cosmological parameters have been determined to even greater
accuracy. These observations favor a flat universe @xmath containing
@xmath baryonic matter, @xmath dark matter, @xmath dark energy and a
tiny fraction of about @xmath radiation today [ 5 ] . The determination
of the cosmological parameters using the measurements of the CMB is
explained at the end of this chapter.

If we go back in time the universe is shrinking. This means that the
universe was hotter and denser in the past and the early universe was a
thermal soup of particles. Therefore the Big Bang model can make
predictions of non-equilibrium processes in the thermal history of the
universe using the known laws of particle physics. Two big successes of
the Big Bang theory are the existence of the cosmic microwave background
radiation and the prediction of the relative abundances of light
elements produced during nucleosynthesis. At temperatures above @xmath
the universe was a plasma of photons and electrons and nuclei. The
electrons coupled the photons tightly to the baryons through Thomson and
Coulomb scattering. When the universe cooled down to @xmath neutral
hydrogen was formed such that there were much fewer electrons for the
photons to scatter with. Therefore at @xmath when the universe was 380
000 years old the photons decoupled from the matter and they could
travel freely. This is what we observe as the CMB as first discovered by
Penzias and Wilson [ 9 ] . The observed spectrum of the CMB is an almost
perfect blackbody with a temperature @xmath [ 10 ] . Going even further
back in time the lightest elements could only form when the universe
cooled below the relevant binding energies at about @xmath when the
universe was three minutes old. Using the initial conditions of the
universe and the relevant cross-sections it is possible to calculate the
abundances of these elements. It turns out that most of the predictions
of the Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN) are in reasonable agreement with
the current estimates [ 4 , 11 ] . The predictions depend on the baryon
density (proton, electron and neutron density at that time) and
therefore BBN puts constraints on the baryon density. Precision
observations of the cosmic microwave background yield an independent
measurement of the baryon density.

The universe is obviously not perfectly homogeneous otherwise there
would have been no structure in the universe like galaxies, galaxy
clusters or filaments of galaxies. Even on the largest scales of @xmath
or bigger, homogeneity is just an approximation and there are actually
very tiny inhomogeneities as shown by deep redshift surveys [ 3 ] and
the temperature fluctuations in the CMB [ 5 ] . The fact that on smaller
scales the structure becomes non-linear fits perfectly well with our
picture of gravitational instability, inhomogeneities grow due to the
attractive nature of gravity. The predicted distribution of galaxies and
their evolution within the Big Bang model agree very well with
observations [ 12 ] and therefore this is considered as another major
success of the Big Bang theory.

#### 2.1.3 The initial value problems of the Big Bang theory

The perfect blackbody spectrum of the CMB indicates that the early
universe was in local thermal equilibrium and moreover it turns out that
the CMB temperature is almost perfectly isotropic with anisotropies of
order @xmath . Within the Big Bang model this is surprising since as we
will see in a moment one would expect many causally disconnected regions
of the CMB sky so why do they appear to be in thermal equilibrium?
Moreover, where do the primordial inhomogeneities come from? In this
subsection we will further elaborate on the initial homogeneity problem
by explaining the so-called horizon problem and the flatness problem. In
the next section we will see how inflation can resolve all the problems
concerning initial conditions at the same time.

In the Big Bang theory the universe has a finite age and therefore a
special feature of the spacetime of the universe is the existence of a
causal horizon which represents the maximum distance of objects whose
signals could have reached us within the lifetime of the universe.
Moreover because of the expansion of the universe we can also define an
event horizon which represents the maximum distance light can travel if
it is emitted today. In order to understand the horizon problem we will
therefore introduce the comoving particle horizon and the comoving
Hubble radius. To study the propagation of light it is convenient to
redefine the radial coordinate @xmath such that we can rewrite the line
element ( 2.1 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the precise form of @xmath does not matter for the moment because
we will only consider radial null geodesics. The comoving particle
horizon @xmath is defined as the comoving distance a freely traveling
photon traverses between time 0 and time @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In standard Big Bang cosmology the universe has up to now been dominated
by radiation and matter, therefore a good estimate of the comoving
particle horizon is given by @xmath in the radiation era and @xmath in
the matter era. Performing the last integral for a fluid with @xmath one
can derive

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means that in all epochs of the standard Big Bang theory the
particle horizon coincides more or less with the comoving Hubble radius
@xmath . Therefore one would expect that scales beyond, say, twice the
Hubble radius are not in direct causal contact. The particle horizon at
the time of the CMB is much smaller than the full CMB sky we observe
today. One can compute the number of causally disconnected regions of
the CMB sky [ 13 ] which turns out to be about @xmath patches. On the
other hand we see the regions in the CMB sky are in almost perfect
thermal equilibrium. This is very unnatural and called the horizon
problem .

Moreover we know from the CMB measurements that the universe is very
close to flat today @xmath . Defining the critical density corresponding
to a flat universe at any time @xmath we can parameterize the flatness
of the universe by @xmath . This means the universe must have been very
flat in the far past. If there had been a tiny deviation from flatness
initially the universe would have either collapsed or become diluted too
quickly. This second part of the very unnatural initial homogeneous
conditions constitutes the flatness problem .

### 2.2 Inflation

We have seen in the previous section that the Big Bang theory can
successfully account for many observations in our universe. However,
within the Big Bang theory it cannot be explained why the universe was
so homogeneous at the time of recombination and there is no explanation
of where the primordial inhomogeneities come from. In this section we
explain how the paradigm of inflation can solve both problems at the
same time ยฒ ยฒ 2 This section is largely based on [ 14 , 15 , 16 ] . .
Furthermore, we explain the mechanism of inflation in its simplest
realization and see how its generic predictions are established by
current observations. As a historical note, an early stage of inflation
was proposed by Starobinsky [ 17 ] and Guth [ 18 ] . Guth explained that
it could solve the horizon and flatness problem, however the
inflationary models of Guth were problematic in the sense that no
radiation was produced after inflation. Shortly afterwards slow-roll
inflation was proposed by Linde [ 19 ] and independently by Albrecht and
Steinhardt [ 20 ] .

#### 2.2.1 Inflation as a solution to the horizon and flatness problems

Instead of assuming extremely fine-tuned initial conditions we actually
want a mechanism which makes sure that all the regions in the CMB are
causally connected such that causal physics can homogenize and flatten
the universe. From equation ( 2.8 ) we can deduce we need an epoch of
decreasing comoving Hubble radius in the very early universe

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means the particle horizon can become arbitrarily large depending
on how long this epoch lasts. Therefore the Hubble radius and the
particle horizon are not equivalent anymore. The particle horizon
depends on the full history of the universe and regions separated by a
distance larger than the particle horizon could never have communicated.
The Hubble radius does not know about the history of the universe which
means that regions separated by a distance larger than the Hubble radius
could have communicated in the past. However regions beyond the Hubble
radius cannot easily communicate now, because the Hubble radius is
approximately the distance a photon can travel within one expansion
time. This can be seen if you compute this distance for a fluid with
equation of state @xmath using equation ( 2.7 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is indeed equal to the Hubble radius up to a factor close to 1 for
the fluids matter, radiation and dark energy. In the case of an
decreasing Hubble radius the regions cannot communicate at all because
the Hubble radius provides a bound on the distance a photon can travel

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Hubble radius is in this case proportional to the event horizon .

An early epoch of decreasing Hubble sphere is called inflation .
Alternatively one can derive equivalent definitions for inflation from
the Friedmann equations ( 2.4 , 2.5 ) and equation ( 2.7 ). One could
define inflation as a period of accelerated expansion,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or a period where a fluid with negative pressure dominates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or finally a period of slowly varying Hubble parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This condition says that the relative change of the Hubble parameter
during one expansion time is small. We defined @xmath as the number of
expansion times of the universe (e-folds) such that @xmath . The limit
of @xmath constant is called de Sitter inflation, which results in
exponential growth of the scale factor @xmath . Since inflation has to
end we need to deviate from perfect de Sitter, instead we would like to
have quasi-de Sitter inflation, and we can introduce the parameter
@xmath to parameterize this deviation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that for successful inflation we need @xmath . Since inflation is
supposed to solve the horizon and flatness problems, inflation should
last long enough. Therefore we can introduce another kinematical
parameter @xmath which represents the relative change of the @xmath
parameter during one e-fold

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If this parameter is small then it says that @xmath does not vary much
during one expansion time and it ensures that the period of inflation is
elongated. We can compute how much inflation we need in order to solve
the horizon and flatness problem. The Hubble radius at the beginning of
inflation should be at least as big as the Hubble radius today. We
assume the Hubble parameter is more or less constant during inflation
@xmath (see the next section) and after inflation there is only an epoch
of radiation domination. Using equation ( 2.7 ) this yields the
following ratio of the Hubble radius now and at the end of inflation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the value for the Hubble radius today @xmath . Therefore
we can deduce the minimal ratio of the scale factor at the end of
inflation to the scale factor at the beginning of inflation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We need therefore @xmath to solve the horizon and flatness problems.

#### 2.2.2 How to realize inflation

Although a universe filled with a fluid with negative pressure is hard
to imagine, itโs not hard to realize inflation theoretically. The
simplest models consist of a scalar field @xmath , called the inflaton ,
minimally coupled to gravity:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We assume we will have sufficient inflation such that we can safely take
the FRW metric for @xmath such that the inflaton field is homogeneous
@xmath . The Friedmann equations yield the following equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are consistent with the equation of motion for the scalar field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us study these equations in more detail. If we would like to have a
period of slowly varying Hubble parameter we need the potential energy
@xmath to dominate over the kinetic energy @xmath . From the equation of
motion we see that a Hubble parameter acts as a friction term and the
field derivative of the potential as a force. This means that in order
to keep the kinetic energy small the acceleration of the field has to be
small or equivalently the potential should be flat enough. Because the
inflaton rolls slowly down the potential, this type of inflation is
therefore called slow-roll inflation . We can define slow-roll
parameters which keep track of whether this situation is satisfied or
not

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The slow-roll approximation consists now of taking @xmath . The second
condition implies that the friction term dominates in the equation of
motion of the scalar field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If this approximation is valid then this implies similar smallness
conditions on the gradient and Hessian of the potential and one could
equivalently define potential slow-roll parameters. If the gradient and
Hessian of the potential are small compared to the potential energy
density itself, then this implies slow-roll. This situation is however
not generalizable to any inflationary model, in particular multiple
field inflation which we will study in the main part of this thesis.
Therefore we do not discuss them in order to avoid confusion. Comparing
the slow-roll parameters with the kinematical parameters @xmath and
@xmath introduced in the previous subsection we see that if the
slow-roll approximation is valid, then we are in a quasi-de Sitter
period, as required for successful inflation. During inflation most of
the energy density is in the potential energy density. When the inflaton
reaches the minimum of the potential most of the energy is transferred
to the kinetic energy of the inflaton such that inflation ends. After
this the inflaton should decay in all the particles of the Standard
Model. This process is called reheating. After thermalization of the
particles the standard Hot Big Bang era begins.

#### 2.2.3 An example: quadratic potential

Because there are many possible models for inflation one might be
worried that it cannot be falsified. However all the different scenarios
for inflation lead to very similar predictions which are confirmed by
the data as we will explain later on. On the other hand each particular
model may differ in the more subtle details of the predictions which
allows one to learn more about the underlying physics of inflation by
the current and future cosmological precision measurements. For now we
do not worry about what the inflaton represents, but first we try to get
more understanding of the predictions of inflation by use of a
particular example of slow-roll inflation: chaotic inflation. We will
first introduce chaotic inflation in this subsection and in the next
section we will use the same model to study more advanced predictions of
inflation. Chaotic inflation is a subset of single field models of the
form ( 2.9 ) with a power-law potential which allows for slow-roll
inflation. We will take the quadratic potential as concrete example,
i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assuming we already entered the stage of slow-roll, the field equation
and Friedmann equation become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which leads to the following expression for the slow-roll parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we derived @xmath using the approximate expression for @xmath . We
can estimate how many e-folds of inflation awaits us if we start at a
particular value for the field @xmath making the assumption we have
slow-roll until the end of inflation. Then the end of inflation is given
by the field value

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now the number of e-folds until the end of inflation can be computed as
follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression will be useful when we study the generation of initial
density perturbations in the next chapter.

#### 2.2.4 Inflation as the origin of structure

The Big Bang theory can explain the distribution of galaxies and their
evolution assuming a certain distribution of initial inhomogeneities
which grow due to the attractive nature of gravity. However, the origin
of the primordial inhomogeneities remains elusive and this introduced
another problem concerning initial conditions. We have seen so far that
inflation can make the universe very homogeneous and isotropic. On the
other hand tiny quantum fluctuations in the inflaton field are
unavoidable and it was soon realized that these fluctuations can account
for all the structure in the universe. The physical picture is that
quantum fluctuations in the inflaton field are quickly stretched to
large scales by the extreme expansion of the universe. These quantum
fluctuations are frozen as soon as they reach scales beyond the Hubble
radius ยณ ยณ 3 This will be called โHubble radius crossingโ from now on.
where they become the initial density fluctuations of the universe to
seed all structure in the universe. Inflation therefore not only solves
the horizon and flatness problem, but it also provides a mechanism to
produce the initial density perturbations, which explains the structure
we see around us, which is extremely exciting. Starobinsky already noted
in his early paper [ 17 ] that quantum effects during this inflationary
epoch would be important and calculated a spectrum of gravitational
waves. Mukhanov and Chibisov calculated the spectrum of density
fluctuations for the first time [ 21 ] but it was done independently by
several groups at a workshop in Cambridge [ 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ] .
Observations of the CMB confirm these predictions to high accuracy [ 26
, 4 , 27 ] which provides compelling evidence in favor of inflation. In
this section we will outline the calculation of the lowest order
statistics of both the density perturbations and the gravitational waves
at the end of inflation.

##### Cosmological perturbation theory

We study the behavior of arbitrary quantum fluctuations with respect to
the classical spacetime background and fields. Perturbations in the
matter fields are related to perturbations in the metric by the
perturbed Einstein equations which can be very complicated to keep track
of, due to the non-linear nature of the equations. Moreover the physical
interpretation of these perturbations is a bit obscured by the freedom
in the choice of coordinates, there is no preferred coordinate system.
Perturbations can pop up if you pick different coordinates, which means
that these are actually not physical. The way to resolve this is to
introduce gauge-invariant variables, i.e. physical variables which do
not depend on the chosen coordinate system. The perturbations are
assumed to be small and for our purposes it is sufficient to expand all
equations to linear order in the perturbations and therefore we can use
standard cosmological perturbation theory โด โด 4 This subsubsection is
based on [ 28 ] . The treatment of the perturbations is a lot easier at
linear order for two reasons. First of all the Fourier modes of the
perturbations evolve independently which can be derived using the the
spatial translation symmetry of the background. Second because of the
spatial rotation symmetry of the background one can derive that the
modes with different helicity evolve independently at linear order as
well. We will explain this last statement by applying it directly to
single field inflation. The most general way to parameterize linear
perturbations in this theory is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is symmetric and traceless. The helicity of a perturbation
mode is defined by the way the amplitude changes under rotations around
its Fourier vector @xmath . The amplitude of a mode of helicity @xmath
gets multiplied by @xmath where @xmath is the rotation angle. The
helicity of different 3-tensor components can be most easily derived in
the helicity basis @xmath and @xmath , which are defined to transform as
@xmath under rotation around @xmath . Now given an arbitrary component
of a contravariant 3-tensor @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the number of plus and minus indices in
@xmath . This means the perturbations can be divided into scalar, vector
and tensor perturbations, which correspond respectively to modes with
helicity @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The scalars @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are zero-rank tensors and therefore scalar perturbations. The
3-vector @xmath can be subdivided in two vector perturbations and one
scalar perturbation. The scalar perturbation is parallel to @xmath and
the vector perturbations are orthogonal to @xmath which means that in
real space we can decompose @xmath as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the same reasoning we can decompose the symmetric and traceless
3-tensor @xmath into scalar, vector and tensor perturbations. For the
scalar perturbation we find for example

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the traceless property to eliminate one of the constants.
Furthermore we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The decomposition of the perturbations in scalar, vector and tensor
types reduces the complexity of deriving the perturbation equations. The
scalar perturbations are captured by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we absorbed a part of @xmath in @xmath . Note that there are less
true degrees of freedom because we still need to incorporate the gauge
freedom and the Einstein equations. The scalar gauge transformations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

remove two degrees of freedom. The Einstein energy and momentum
constraint equations remove in addition two more degrees of freedom.
This means we are left with one scalar degree of freedom. For the actual
computation we would like to fix a particular gauge, therefore we should
take care that we are only considering physical quantities. It turns out
to be useful to work with the following gauge invariant variable

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the so-called Mukhanov-Sasaki variable which will be the canonically
normalized quantization variable. Another very useful variable is the
curvature perturbation on uniform density hypersurfaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has the important property to freeze out on super Hubble scales.
It becomes constant at a certain time during inflation and it only
starts evolving again in an epoch of known physics much later than the
epoch of inflation. This means that the relevant modes of the curvature
perturbation are insensitive to the unknown physics after inflation and
and therefore this variable is used to compute observables. In order to
simplify the perturbed Einstein equations one can fix a gauge and
rewrite everything in terms of the gauge-invariant variables. Some
popular gauges are the Newtonian gauge ( @xmath ), the uniform density
gauge ( @xmath ) such that @xmath which explains its name and the
comoving gauge ( @xmath ) such that @xmath which explains the fact that
@xmath is also called the comoving curvature perturbation.

Solving the Einstein equations and the equations of motion of the
perturbed field leads to the linearized equations of motion for the
gauge-invariant perturbations. This computation is a bit tedious and
since we just gave all the ingredients to execute it we just state the
result. After performing a Fourier transform we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Here the prime denotes a derivative with respect to
conformal time @xmath defined by @xmath . Before studying this equation
in more detail we should not forget about the vector and tensor
perturbations. These are fortunately much easier to deal with. First of
all vector perturbations decay with the expansion of the universe,
therefore even if they were present we still can neglect them. The
tensor perturbations are described by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . It is possible to decompose @xmath in the eigenmodes of
the spatial Laplacian @xmath as @xmath such that after performing a
Fourier transformation the only equation defining the tensor
perturbations is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note we are studying Fourier modes of the perturbations with comoving
wavevector @xmath . Defining the variable @xmath we can rewrite this
equation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is almost equivalent to ( 2.12 ) and if we can solve the
equations for the scalar perturbations then we immediately have the
solution of the tensor perturbations. Therefore we will only focus on
the scalar perturbation equations and come back to the gravitational
waves in the very end. Expressing the coefficients of equation ( 2.12 )
in terms of the slow-roll parameters we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From here we can see that we can divide the evolution of the
perturbations roughly in two regimes. During inflation the Hubble radius
@xmath will decrease quasi-exponentially in time. This means that a
perturbation of sub-Hubble scale @xmath will eventually grow to a
perturbation of super-Hubble scale @xmath if there is enough inflation.
At sub-Hubble scales the coefficient @xmath dominates over @xmath and by
neglecting the @xmath -term, we can solve the equation exactly. Within
the slow-roll approximation it is possible to find an analytical
solution of the full perturbation equation. First of all we can derive

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that we get the following equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This equation is equivalent to the Bessel equation and the solution is
given by a linear combination of the Hankel functions of the first and
second kind

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The initial conditions of the perturbations are given by the underlying
physical idea that they arise as quantum fluctuations.

##### Quantizing the perturbations

To quantize the theory we first need to know the action to quadratic
order in perturbations. The simplest way to derive this is to go back to
the original action, perturb the inflaton field and ignore the spacetime
fluctuations for the moment. We take @xmath such that the relevant part
of the action ( 2.9 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The action to first order in the perturbations vanishes because of the
background equations of motion. The action to second order in the
perturbations becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Changing variables to @xmath this becomes after some manipulations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now from this action follow the same equations of motion as for the
Mukhanov-Sasaki variable @xmath as given in equation ( 2.12 ) up to some
slow-roll corrections. If you would have picked the spatially flat gauge
then @xmath which means this is very close to the quadratic action in
perturbations. The correct normalization follows from here and therefore
the full action to quadratic order in perturbations becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that we have canonical kinetic terms, which means that the
Mukhanov-Sasaki variable is the one we should use for canonical
quantization of the perturbations.

We know how to quantize the canonical coordinate and momentum fields
@xmath and @xmath . We promote them to operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and impose the standard equal-time commutation relations.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding @xmath in terms of its spatial Fourier modes @xmath ;

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the equations of motion are given by equation ( 2.12 ) which we repeat
here while keeping the index @xmath for clarity

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The solutions of the equations of motion for @xmath are given by complex
mode functions @xmath (and @xmath ) such that the general solution of
@xmath is determined by a constant complex vector @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the solution for @xmath becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the reality condition @xmath is manifestly satisfied. After
promoting the vector @xmath and its complex conjugate to the operators
@xmath and @xmath , we would like to interpret them as annihilation and
creation operators respectively, which satisfy the usual commutation
relations

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

These are consistent with the commutation relations ( 2.15 ) if and only
if the mode functions are normalized as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another constraint on the mode functions comes from imposing initial
conditions. We assume that at the beginning of inflation the initial
state of the universe is the vacuum state @xmath , defined by @xmath for
all scales @xmath of interest, such that there is no initial particle
production, i.e. the Bunch-Davies vacuum. This statement implies that at
the beginning of inflation when @xmath dominates all other scales in the
equations of motion the universe is in the state of minimal energy and
the Hamiltonian does not contain any terms proportional to @xmath and
@xmath . After some algebra the energy of the ground state is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore at the beginning of inflation @xmath , which is assumed to be
deep inside the sub-Hubble regime where we can assume @xmath , we have
in addition to ( 2.17 ) the following constraint:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Writing the sub-Hubble solution to the equations of motion for @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can derive from the constraints ( 2.17 , 2.18 ) that the initial
solution is given by โต โต 5 Strictly speaking, the Bunch-Davies initial
conditions can only be imposed when inflation is eternal, such that one
can take the limit @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some random phase @xmath . This completely determines the evolution
of @xmath . Completing now the analysis in case of slow-roll inflation
as given by ( 2.14 ) we find the following early time limit

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we have @xmath and @xmath . After the modes have crossed the
Hubble radius we find therefore the following late time solution

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Transforming to the curvature perturbation @xmath we find at late times

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

here we used the slow-roll approximation for which we have @xmath and
@xmath . It has been proven by Weinberg [ 29 ] that the curvature
perturbation @xmath freezes out at super-Hubble scales. This expression
for @xmath should therefore be evaluated for each mode at Hubble radius
crossing @xmath .

#### 2.2.5 How to characterize the perturbations

In order to relate the observed temperature anisotropies in the CMB to
the predictions of a particular theoretical model of inflation we
compute the power spectrum of the density fluctuations. The power
spectrum is the Fourier transform of the real-space two-point
correlations and contains all the information about the distribution of
density perturbations in case they are Gaussian โถ โถ 6 More precisely,
all information about a Gaussian distribution of density perturbations
is contained in the Gaussian density matrix, which is determined by the
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath two-point correlations. . For every mode
@xmath the value of the power spectrum represents a variance @xmath .
From the CMB we have learned that the distribution is very close to
Gaussian, so it is a good first characterization of the perturbations.
To learn more about the distribution of perturbations however, one
should compute higher order correlations in addition. The dimensionless
powerspectra @xmath for @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In the case of slow-roll inflation we plug in equation ( 2.20 ) into
this definition and we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The power spectrum is evaluated at Hubble radius crossing because of the
freeze out of the curvature perturbation. Since we are in the slow-roll
regime the functions @xmath and @xmath are not precisely constant but
rather slowly varying in time. This means that the power spectrum has a
slight scale dependence, since different modes cross the Hubble radius
at different times and therefore the amplitude of the power spectrum
changes slightly as well. Before we compute the scale dependence we
should not forget about the spectrum of gravitational waves. The
computation goes in a similar fashion as for density perturbations and
we wonโt repeat the full analysis. The important steps are to solve
equation ( 2.13 ), to find the canonical quantization variable which is
@xmath . Finally, after transforming back to @xmath , the power spectrum
for gravitational waves is given by @xmath because there are two
polarizations. This results in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note the difference with the power spectrum of scalar perturbations,
there is no factor of @xmath . This means that a measurement of the
amplitude of the power spectrum of gravitational waves would be a direct
probe of the Hubble scale of inflation. Furthermore the power spectrum
of tensor perturbations is also scale dependent because @xmath changes
in time. For slow-roll inflation the power spectra are determined by the
amplitude and its tilt to a very good approximation

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath are the amplitudes of the scalar and the tensor
power spectrum and @xmath denotes a pivot scale at which they are
evaluated. The parameters @xmath and @xmath represent the tilt of the
power spectra and are called the scalar spectral index and the tensor
spectral index respectively. The scalar spectral index can be computed
as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly we find the tensor spectral index

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore we can define the tensor-to-scalar ratio as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which indicates the relative amount of tensor modes compared to the
scalar modes. The observables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be
related to experiment. The observable scales cross the Hubble radius
@xmath e-folds before the end of inflation such that the slow-roll
approximation is valid. Slow-roll inflation predicts therefore two
spectra with a red tilt, i.e. more power on large scales. The tensor
power spectrum can only get a blue tilt if the weak energy condition is
violated, @xmath . Moreover, slow-roll inflation predicts a background
of gravitational waves, although the relative amplitude depends on the
precise model. In the next section we will discuss the splendid
agreement of the inflationary paradigm and the current observations, but
first we will get some feeling for the values of these observables.

##### An example: quadratic potential

Let us compute the values of the observables in case of chaotic
inflation with a quadratic potential. Since the interesting modes cross
the Hubble radius between 60 and 53 e-folds before the end of inflation
the value of the field can be estimated using equation ( 2.11 ). This
yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

plugging this into equation ( 2.10 ) the slow-roll parameters take the
approximate value

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This yields the following estimate for the value of the observables for
chaotic inflation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The measured amplitude of the power spectrum determines the value @xmath
, and therefore inflation predicts the shape of the spectra and their
relative amplitudes.

We can use the measured value of the amplitude of the power spectrum of
scalar perturbations to determine the value of the Hubble parameter if
we know the details of the inflationary model. The best fit for the
amplitude @xmath as measured by Planck is @xmath and this fixes the
value of @xmath . We can express @xmath in terms of the tensor-to-scalar
ratio @xmath as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

note that we have changed from the reduced Planck mass @xmath to the
Planck mass @xmath . In case of chaotic inflation therefore we get a
Hubble scale of inflation of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is about 6 orders of magnitude below the Planck scale.

##### The Lyth Bound

From the concrete example of chaotic inflation with a quadratic
potential we see that the inflaton has to traverse a large distance in
field space @xmath in order to create a fair amount of gravitational
waves. More quantitatively, we can deduce a relation between the
tensor-to-scalar ratio and the evolution of the inflaton field by
inserting the definition of @xmath into @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assuming we have at least 30 e-folds of slow-roll inflation from the
time @xmath where the observable modes cross the Hubble radius we find
the Lyth bound [ 30 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the measured value of the tensor-to-scalar ratio. The
Lyth bound provides a lower bound of the distance the inflaton moves in
field space for a given tensor-to-scalar ratio. This means that if the
tensor-to-scalar ratio turns out to be large enough to be detectable
@xmath , then the inflaton will traverse a large distance in field space
and therefore the inflaton will therefore explore a larger part of the
potential. In particular if inflation is embedded in a multi-field
inflationary model it means the inflaton is expected to be more
sensitive to the other degrees of freedom. Moreover, we saw in the
example of a quadratic potential that the Hubble scale will be about 6
orders of magnitude below the Planck scale if @xmath . If these extra
degrees of freedom are much heavier than the Hubble scale, then the
dynamics of the inflaton might be sensitive to physics only a couple of
magnitudes below the Planck scale.

### 2.3 Inflation and observations

In the previous section we have seen that inflation can resolve the
initial homogeneity problem of the Big Bang theory. At the same time,
inflation also creates tiny initial inhomogeneities which seed all
structure in the universe. In this section we explain how precision
observations of the CMB provide compelling evidence for inflation and
moreover how we can use these observations to learn more about the early
universe.

#### 2.3.1 Evidence in favor of inflation

The standard model of cosmology, the @xmath CDM model, is the simplest
model which combines the Big Bang theory and inflation. It is described
by only six free parameters: the density parameters of baryonic matter,
dark matter and dark energy, the optical depth (which we do not discuss
here), the scalar amplitude @xmath and the scalar spectral index @xmath
. Everything else can be derived from these parameters. This simple
model agrees well with the cosmological data. The Planck collaboration [
5 ] has determined all six parameters to high accuracy by measuring the
temperature anisotropies. In particular for the inflationary parameters
Planck has found

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are evaluated at the pivot scale @xmath . A scale-invariant power
spectrum has been ruled out with almost @xmath . However, the
tensor-to-scalar ratio is assumed to be negligible. Gravitional waves
contribute to the temperature power spectrum in a specific way and
therefore including them in the analysis is expected to weaken the
constraints on @xmath . The Planck collaboration analyzed also an
extension of the standard model with @xmath as an additional parameter
and found @xmath with @xmath certainty, which makes the result very
solid. Together with the observation of super-Hubble correlations with
coherent phases this provides strong evidence in favor of inflation. We
will explain these latter statements in words in the section on CMB
anisotropies below.

Concerning primordial gravitational waves, Planck has set an upper limit
on the tensor-to-scalar ratio assuming the @xmath CDM model extended
with the tensor-to-scalar ratio and found @xmath with @xmath certainty.
Probing the value of @xmath requires a measurement of the so-called
@xmath -mode polarization of the CMB as we explain in the section on CMB
anisotropies. Recently a detection of primordial @xmath -modes has been
reported by the BICEP2 collaboration [ 31 ] with the best-fit value of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is disfavored at @xmath . If this is a true detection of
primordial @xmath -modes, this will be a revolution for the paradigm of
inflation. There is some tension with the upper bound provided by
Planck, but the measurement of Planck comes from the temperature power
spectrum and is therefore model dependent. Moreover, it is noted by the
BICEP2 team that accounting for the contribution of foreground dust
might shift this value down.

##### CMB Anisotropies

The anisotropies of the CMB temperature and polarization can provide
very accurate information about the matter content of the universe and
the initial conditions laid down by inflation โท โท 7 This subsection is
an excert of [ 32 ] where everything is explained in much more detail.
See also [ 7 ] . . We will explain what information on the cosmological
parameters we can extract from the CMB anisotropies and make more clear
why the observations are in outstanding agreement with inflation.

The temperature fluctuations of the CMB are described by the power
spectrum which contains all information about the statistical properties
if the fluctuations are Gaussian. The fluctuations are expanded in
spherical harmonics. The power spectrum for a given multipole @xmath is
proportional to the absolute value squared of the multipole moment of
the temperature fluctuation field @xmath . For low values of @xmath
there is an absolute limitation to the accuracy of the power spectrum
because there are only few samples to take the mean of. This is called
cosmic variance. Furthermore when the measurement is averaged over bands
@xmath this leads to another error. For @xmath we already have a very
precise measurement if the other sources of noise can be suppressed.
Letโs see what information we can extract from the temperature power
spectrum. Before decoupling the universe consisted of a tightly coupled
photon-baryon plasma. By analyzing the behavior of this cosmological
fluid it is possible to understand the existence of the peaks and
troughs and their location. These properties depend not only on the
matter contents of the universe but also on the initial conditions for
which a particular form is assumed, namely a nearly scale-invariant
power spectrum as predicted by simplest models for inflation. The
initial distribution of density perturbations sets the initial
conditions for the oscillator equation of the photon-baryon fluid. The
pressure gradients in the photon density will act as a restoring force
and any initial perturbation will therefore oscillate with the speed of
sound @xmath . The temperature perturbation @xmath at the end of
recombination in the most idealized case is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the largest scales @xmath the perturbations are still frozen and
therefore this provides a direct measure of the initial conditions. On
the smaller scales the fluctuations evolve until the end of
recombination, such that some of the modes are catched at their maximum
and some at their minimum. These spatial inhomogeneities appear as an
angular anisotropy today and we see a series of acoustic peaks. The peak
locations depend very sensitively on the curvature of the universe. The
spatial curvature of the universe acts like a lens, a positive curvature
makes objects look closer than they actually are. The converse holds for
a negative curvature. The position of the first peak therefore strongly
suggests a flat universe. This is another breakthrough for inflation
since it predicts flatness of the universe. At the same time in order to
get those peaks there should have been initial fluctuations with
super-Hubble correlations with a nearly scale invariant spectrum and
furthermore perturbations which start to evolve as soon as they enter
the Hubble radius which uniquely determines the relationship between the
phases of the oscillations. Inflation explains all these non-trivial
observations at the same time. If you would consider an alternative
theory where curvature perturbations are generated only inside the
Hubble radius where the phases of the perturbations are arbitrary, the
peaks would be washed out.

The gravitational potential also provides a gravitational force to the
oscillator. Gravity compresses the fluid and pressure resists. This
means we will have both pressure gradients @xmath and potential
gradients @xmath . In addition one should take into account the redshift
of the photons by the gravitational potential. In the absence of baryons
the oscillator equation remains the same as without gravity, but then
for the โeffective temperature perturbationโ @xmath . This is also the
measured temperature perturbation since after recombination the photons
need to climb out of the potential wells and therefore redshift in
temperature. The initial temperature perturbation can be deduced from
the initial gravitational potential perturbation. The initial Newtonian
potential can be interpreted as a local time shift @xmath . The
temperature of the photons goes like the inverse of the scale factor.
Therefore, using equation ( 2.7 ), the initial temperature fluctuation
is given by @xmath which equals @xmath in the radiation era and @xmath
in the matter era. This means for a potential well @xmath the effective
temperature is negative which means the plasma begins rarefied in
gravitational wells. Due to the gravitational potential the fluid will
get compressed and by the resistance of the pressure it gets rarefied
again. This means the first peak corresponds to the mode where the fluid
exactly has compressed once at recombination.

When baryons are included they provide extra inertia to the oscillator.
The resulting effect can be understood by understanding the oscillation
equations as a spring in a gravitational field where the inclusion of
baryons increases the mass. This leads to enhanced oscillations and a
shift of the mean value to @xmath . Here @xmath is the photon-baryon
momentum density ratio. Since we still observe the effective temperature
@xmath only the peaks are enhanced so this has obvious observational
consequences. The value of @xmath and hence the amount of shifting
depends on the baryon density.
Taking into account the correct matter-to-radiation ratio changes the
history of the universe and hence the size of the sound horizon at
recombination, which is ambiguous with other effects. Fortunately there
is another distinguishable effect of radiation, namely it makes the
gravitational force evolve with time. The Poisson equation governs the
evolution of the gravitational potential. Because of the radiation
pressure the background density decreases with time which makes the
gravitational potential decay. This induces a driving effect, because
when the fluid is compressed the gravitational potential has gone and in
addition the redshifting goes away. As soon as the universe is matter
dominated the gravitational potential becomes dominated by the behavior
of the dark matter. This means the amplitudes of the peaks are increased
with a decreasing value of the dark matter-to-radiation ratio. In
addition, when the gravitational potential is destroyed, the baryon
loading effect should also be eliminated. Therefore the third peak
indicates that dark matter exists and that it dominates at
recombination.

Then finally there is another effect which damps the oscillations. It
can be thought as a random walk of the photons that makes hot regions
colder and cold regions hotter. The photons exchange momentum with
electrons by Thomson scattering and they drag along the protons because
of the tight Coulomb coupling. Anisotropies of the order of the damping
scale or less therefore decrease and the oscillations beyond the third
peak are suppressed. The damping length depends on the amount of
baryonic matter.

Besides temperature fluctuations in the CMB it is expected that a part
of the photons are polarized due to Thomson scattering before the
surface of last scattering. Polarization is a vector field therefore and
it turns out to be convenient to decompose it in the so-called @xmath
-modes and @xmath -modes [ 33 , 34 ] , which are defined as the parity
even and odd components of the photon polarization. Scalar perturbations
only produce @xmath -modes and tensor perturbations create both. This
means that a detection of @xmath -modes would be an unique signature of
primordial gravitational waves. Moreover, the peaks in the @xmath -mode
spectrum are related to the peaks in the temperature spectrum because
they originate from the same physics and therefore a combined probe
provides an important cross check of the assumptions of the underlying
model. The cross-correlation of the temperature fluctuations and the
@xmath -modes have been measured and this has provided the strongest
check of phase coherence of the initial conditions which is in striking
agreement with canonical single field inflation.

It should be noted that the observed temperature fluctuations and
polarization of the CMB photons also carry along information about the
physics after recombination. These are called secondary temperature and
polarization anisotropies. This means we can in addition learn many
things about the evolution and structure of the universe. On the other
hand this limits the precision of the predictions because the primordial
physics can be degenerate with foreground effects.

#### 2.3.2 Observing physics beyond the simplest models of inflation

We have seen that precision observations of the CMB provide compelling
evidence in favor of inflation. The generic predictions given by single
field slow-roll inflation are confirmed by the data. However, if we
would like to learn more about the precise microphysical origin of
inflation it is necessary to deviate from the standard assumptions. We
summarize the main observables to look for signatures beyond canonical
single field inflation. Canonical single field inflation is defined as
single field slow-roll inflation with canonical kinetic terms, minimally
coupled to gravity and with Bunch-Davies initial conditions.

##### Deviation from a power law spectrum

Standard inflation assumes a power law scaling of the power spectrum. A
deviation from slow-roll could result in a detectable correction to the
power spectrum which allows for a change in the tilt

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The parameter @xmath is called the spectral running and for slow-roll
inflation it is expected to be very small because it is second order in
the slow-roll parameters. Using the Planck data alone there are no signs
of a deviation from power law. The BICEP2 result however could point out
there is a running to compensate for the high value of @xmath , which
requires new physics to explain. Another possibility to deviate from a
power law spectrum is to have features on top of it. This is something
we are interested in for this thesis.

##### Non-Gaussianity

The distribution of perturbations is fully characterized by the power
spectrum if it is Gaussian. Single field inflation predicts a negligible
amount of non-Gaussianity โธ โธ 8 In canonical single field inflation,
interactions are suppressed by slow-roll parameters and therefore the
bispectrum is suppressed by a combination of the slow-roll parameters
times the square of the power spectrum, which is too small to be
detectable. and therefore much can be learned from a detection of
non-Gaussianity, in particular on interactions of the inflaton with
other fields. The main observable related to non-Gaussianities is the
@xmath -point correlator or its Fourier transform, the bispectrum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the delta-function comes from translational invariance of the
statistics. The three momenta therefore form a triangle and one can
consider different shapes if also scale invariance of the bispectrum is
assumed. The Planck collaboration has tested for different shapes. Local
non-Gaussianity corresponds to the limit of squeezed triangles and such
a detection would rule out all single field models. Planck [ 35 ] has
put very tight constraints on this type of non-Gaussianity and this
excludes for example many multi-field models with more than one light
field. Equilateral non-Gaussianity is constrained by Planck but there is
room for a future detection. This type of non-Gaussianity can arise in
single-field models, so we need a detection or more precise constraints
to say more. The Planck collaboration has not published the full
bispectrum, which means that there might be more information in the
observational data in case the bispectrum is scale dependent.
Furthermore, future experiments of large scale structure such as the
Euclid mission [ 36 ] are designed to probe non-Gaussianity to higher
accuracy.

##### Non-adiabatic perturbations

Single-field inflation predict only fluctuations in the total energy
density of the matter, or equivalently only fluctuations in the net
curvature perturbation. This is because there is only one field
involved. If one would allow for multiple light fields it is possible to
have fluctuations in the relative densities of the different matter
components. These type of fluctuations are called non-adiabatic
perturbations @xmath . The effect of a surviving spectrum of
non-adiabatic perturbations @xmath on the spectrum of temperature
fluctuations is that they will result in peaks which are out of phase
with the acoustic peaks coming from @xmath . By means of a detection of
the cross-correlation of the @xmath -modes spectrum and the temperature
spectrum the relative ratio of the power spectrum of non-adiabatic
perturbations compared to the power spectrum of adiabatic perturbations
is strongly constrained by Planck [ 27 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

How this exactly translates into a constraint on multi-field inflation
is model-dependent. Isocurvature perturbations present at the end of
inflation can get partially converted to curvature perturbations. This
means that inflationary models which produce isocurvature perturbations
are not necessarily ruled out. For example, in curvaton models of
inflation a significant fraction of the observed adiabatic perturbations
could originate from isocurvature perturbations. This is discussed in
section 10.3.2 of [ 27 ] . Moreover, the evolution of the non-adiabatic
perturbations depends presumably on the physics after inflation.

##### Tensor tilt

If future polarization experiments can confirm the detection of a
tensor-to-scalar ratio of order @xmath then there is hope to detect the
tensor spectral index as well from the temperature power spectrum. In
single field slow-roll inflation we have the following relation between
the tensor tilt and the tensor-to-scalar ratio

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that a disagreement with this relation would also be a hint of new
physics.

## Chapter 3 Multiple Field Inflation: a Translation of Different
Studies in Literature

### 3.1 Introduction

In the previous chapter we have seen that inflation can explain why the
universe is so homogeneous and flat and that it can account for tiny
primordial density fluctuations which are the seeds of all structure in
the universe. Moreover, the current observations of the temperature and
polarization anisotropies of the CMB provide compelling evidence in
favor of inflation [ 27 , 31 ] . Now we have very precise measurements
of the CMB and hints that inflation took place only a few orders of
magnitude below the Planck scale, it is interesting to investigate if we
can learn more about fundamental physics beyond the standard model by
using the observational data. Since inflation is formulated in a field
theoretical framework it is in particular possible to study models
motivated by supergravity and string theory. These models typically
consist of multiple scalar fields [ 16 ] . This means that the dynamics
of the inflaton could have been influenced by the other degrees of
freedom and therefore it is highly interesting to explore observational
distinguishable effects compared to canonical single field inflation ยน ยน
1 Canonical single field inflation is defined as single field slow-roll
inflation with canonical kinetic terms, minimally coupled to gravity and
with Bunch-Davies initial conditions. . For this we need to have a good
theoretical understanding of multiple field inflation. In this chapter
we provide an overview of a part of the literature on multiple field
inflation. The studies use different notations and definitions which can
give rise to much confusion when one would like to understand which
approximations are precisely made. In the first part we recap the
general framework of inflation and discuss the slow roll and turn
parameters while we provide dictionaries which translate between the
different notations and definitions used in the literature. In the
second part the different approximations and their regimes of validity
are discussed. An overview of the literature studied can be found in
table 3.1 . The shortcuts listed in this table are used in the
dictionaries to denote the corresponding part of the literature.

### 3.2 Framework of multiple field inflation

In this section we recap the general formalism of multiple field
inflation with Einstein gravity. We fix our notation and give the
translation to notation used in the selected papers in table 3.4 .

#### 3.2.1 Set-up

We study multiple field inflation in which the matter content of the
universe is described by an arbitrary number of fields @xmath with
possible non-canonical kinetic terms which are minimally coupled to
gravity. The full theory is given by the following action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the determinant of @xmath , @xmath is the reduced Planck
mass and @xmath the Ricci scalar constructed from spacetime quantities.
Latin indices are used to denote the scalar fields which are at the same
time treated as coordinates on the field manifold they span. Greek
indices are used for the usual spacetime coordinates. We assume the
universe is homogeneous and isotropic on large scales and spatially
flat, which means that the background is described by the
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matrix @xmath describing the non standard kinetic terms is
symmetric, positive-definite and smooth and therefore can be interpreted
as a field metric belonging to a smooth field manifold. The potential
@xmath is continuous and bounded from below, but besides that completely
arbitrary.

#### 3.2.2 Covariant formalism

In order to derive compact and field coordinate invariant equations
describing the evolution of the classical background and the quantum
fluctuations we use the covariant formalism with respect to the field
manifold developed in [ 38 ] . Moreover, to understand the properties of
the background field trajectory it is convenient to change basis in
field space by defining directions along and perpendicular to the
background trajectory first introduced in [ 37 ] .

We rewrite the equations manifestly in tensor form to make all the
equations field coordinate invariant. We use @xmath and its inverse
@xmath for the shorthand notation to lower or raise indices when we take
dot products. Furthermore since @xmath for some arbitrary tensor @xmath
does in general not transform like a tensor, we need to define a
covariant derivative @xmath such that when applied on tensors it will
return another tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The connection coefficients @xmath are chosen as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the covariant derivative is metric compatible. Furthermore we
can also define a covariant derivative on the field manifold with
respect to any of the spacetime coordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which still creates tensorial quantities because @xmath transforms as a
scalar under spacetime coordinate transformations. Finally all
information of the curvature of the field manifold is contained in the
Riemann tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be contracted to the Ricci tensor @xmath and the Ricci scalar
@xmath .

Let us now study the basis induced by an inflationary trajectory.
Consider an arbitrary curve in field space parameterized as @xmath .
This allows us to define a proper field distance along the curve given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is strictly increasing in time for a quasi de Sitter inflationary
trajectory. This defines a field speed along the curve

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we use @xmath as parameter along the curve we get the following
tangent vector along the curve

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is automatically normalized. We can define the directional
covariant derivative

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be used to define parallel transport of tensors along this
curve as having a vanishing directional covariant derivative. Geodesics
in field space can be defined as paths which parallel transport their
own tangent vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We know the evolution of the fields will be along geodesics unless a
force pushes them off. This role is fulfilled by the potential term in
the action. If minus the gradient does not point in the same direction
as tangent vector of the field trajectory, it will deviate from a
geodesic. Therefore it is useful to define a normal unit vector to the
trajectory as follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is only well defined when @xmath is nonzero. This is the reason
the function @xmath is introduced ยฒ ยฒ 2 As pointed out in [ 41 ] . ,
which indicates the orientation of @xmath with respect to @xmath . We
let @xmath just take some initial value at a given time where @xmath is
nonzero such that we know the initial orientation of @xmath . During the
intervals where @xmath vanishes @xmath will be defined such that it is a
continuous function of @xmath , furthermore @xmath may flip sign such
that when @xmath becomes nonzero again, @xmath stays a continuous
function of @xmath . This corresponds to a right-handed or left-handed
orientation in the two dimensional case. The rate of change of the
tangent unit vector @xmath can therefore be in both the @xmath direction
and in the @xmath direction and will be proportional to the gradient of
the potential in the normal direction.

In this chapter we try to keep our expressions as concise as possible,
which means we will introduce some more simplifying notation, likewise
as done in the papers we study in this overview. In particular, a
potential source of confusion is the notation used for the gradient and
higher order derivatives of the potential and its projection along the
tangent and normal directions. For clarity, we fix our notation here.
The gradient and Hessian of the potential are denoted by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In case of two fields, the projections of the gradient and the Hessian
of the potential along the tangent vector @xmath and the normal vector
@xmath are written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will use similar notation if we project other quantities, which have
not been defined yet, along the tangent and normal directions by using
the indices @xmath and @xmath .

As a final note, the equations are given as function of coordinate time
@xmath , but one could equivalently use another time variable. Two
particularly useful time variables in the context of inflation are
conformal time @xmath as defined by the relation @xmath and number of
e-folds of inflation @xmath as given by @xmath . We donโt work with a
special time coordinate but interchange between @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath depending on which variable is most convenient. Derivatives with
respect to these time variables are denoted as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A dot, a prime and a semicolon denote derivatives with respect to time
@xmath , conformal time @xmath and number of e-folds @xmath
respectively.

In the rest of this section we first explain how to derive the equations
describing the evolution of the classical background and introduce the
slow-roll parameters and the notion of turns. Then we continue with the
perturbations equations and their quantization for any number of fields.
In the end we simplify to the case of two fields and we project the
perturbations equations along the tangent and normal directions to study
the influence of the background dynamics on the evolution of the
perturbations. We provide dictionaries to translate between the
different notations and definitions used in literature along the way.

#### 3.2.3 Background equations and slow-roll and turn parameters

Assuming the cosmological principle and that the universe is spatially
flat, we can use the spacetime metric defined in equation ( 3.2 ).
Minimizing the action yields the homogeneous equations of motion for the
scalar fields and the Friedmann equations,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.5)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the Hubble parameter @xmath a short-hand notation for
the gradient of the potential @xmath . In order to solve the equations
of motion for the perturbations later on, we need to understand how the
perturbations are influenced the background dynamics. Based on our
intuition from single field inflation we can use a slow-roll
approximation to simplify the equations. Since the inflaton is in
general not moving in a single field direction it is convenient to
change basis by using the unit vectors pointing along and perpendicular
to the background trajectory as defined in section 3.2.2 . This allows
us to define slow-roll parameters in multiple field inflation.
Furthermore the trajectory can be forced to deviate from a geodesic in
field space by the shape of the potential and therefore the tangent and
perpendicular basis vectors may rotate into each other. This can be
parameterized by so called turn parameters. We now make the notion of
slow-roll and turns more precise and compare our definitions with the
definitions used in the literature.

##### Geometric slow-roll parameters and turn parameters

We project the background equations of motion ( 3.5 ) along the tangent
@xmath and normal direction @xmath and find

with @xmath . The first equation coincides with the equations of motion
for single field inflation. The second equation shows that the
inflationary trajectory deviates from a geodesic when the normal
component of the gradient of the potential is nonzero. This motivates
the following definitions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be divided into the slow roll parameters @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the turn parameter @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Only if the background trajectory is a geodesic of field space then
@xmath and therefore @xmath parameterizes the deviation of the
inflationary trajectory from a geodesic. For later use we also define a
third slow roll parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and a second turn parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are only well defined if both @xmath and @xmath are nonzero, but
in all the equations they will appear as @xmath and @xmath anyway so we
do not need to worry about this. Note that the definition of the normal
vector @xmath implies the following signatures

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means that for any equation the number of @xmath โs and @xmath โs
in front of each term should be all odd or even.

The slow roll approximation can now be defined as @xmath . The first two
approximations @xmath represent that the potential is flat in the
tangent direction, such that the field rolls slowly down the potential.
To see this rewrite the first order slow roll approximation as

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (3.12)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath , which is the projection of the gradient of the potential
along the tangent direction. The approximation @xmath assures the first
two approximations will be prolonged because it says that the field
acceleration @xmath does not change much during an expansion time.
Similarly we can define the slow-turn approximation @xmath , but note
that this approximation has nothing to do with facilitating quasi de
Sitter inflation as the slow-roll approximation does. Moreover, if the
slow-turn approximation is valid it will suppress the multi-field
effects, because they are parameterized by @xmath .

##### Kinematical slow-roll parameters

Equivalently one can use a kinematical definition of the slow roll
parameters in order to define various orders of the slow roll
approximation. This is in particular useful if @xmath changes
adiabatically during the times where the observable modes cross the
Hubble radius. In this case one can construct a derivative expansion of
@xmath where the corrections will be suppressed. The first slow roll
parameter @xmath parameterizes the deviation from the de Sitter
inflation such that the zeroth order slow roll approximation @xmath is
equivalent to the de Sitter inflation. Since inflation should end this
parameter is in general nonzero and at the end of inflation it becomes
of order 1. Many e-folds before the end of inflation we expect it is
possible to assume the first order slow-roll approximation @xmath and
@xmath , which means we assume quasi-exponential inflation, i.e. the
Hubble parameter does not change much during one expansion time. The
second order slow roll approximation allows @xmath to vary in time but
assures the quasi-de Sitter regime will be prolonged. We extend the same
reasoning to the third order slow-roll approximation. This motivates the
alternative definition of the slow roll parameters

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.13)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the index @xmath belongs to the kinematical slow-roll parameters.
We expressed the kinematical slow roll parameters in terms of the
geometric ones to be able to easily interchange them. From the
expressions in terms of the field speed and its accelerations it seems
that, when the background and perturbation equations are expressed as
function of number e-folds, these slow roll parameters will appear
naturally, therefore we will choose to work with these parameters later
on. Similarly to the various orders of the slow roll approximation we
can define a zeroth, first and second order slow turn approximation. We
list all order slow roll approximations in table 3.2 .

##### Slow-Roll-Slow-Turn (SRST) approximation

The SRST approximation is defined as taking both the slow roll and the
slow turn approximation [ 44 ] . We define the first (or second order)
SRST approximation as a combination of the first (second) order
slow-roll and the first (second) order slow-turn approximation. Within
this approximation we can express the non-geometric slow roll parameters
and slow turn parameters in terms of the gradient and the Hessian of the
potential. Assuming @xmath we get the following SRST approximation of
the background equations of motion for the fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the semicolon denotes a derivative with respect to the number of
e-folds @xmath and where we denoted @xmath . This yields the following
expressions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.14)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here we used the notation @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Plugging these
expressions into the background equations we get the following improved
expressions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.15)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

This allows us to express the observables in terms of the original model
defined by the potential and field metric. The tangent and normal vector
are however not determined without solving the background equations.

We notice that the SRST approximation implies that the gradient squared
@xmath and the Hessian of the potential @xmath , except for @xmath , are
small along the inflationary trajectory. We expect that a converse
relation also holds. If one assumes the slow roll approximation and if
the full Hessian of the potential is small, we expect that the turn
parameters are of the same order as the slow roll parameters. We did not
manage to find a solid proof, but presumably the argument goes as
follows. The slow roll approximation implies that @xmath is small along
the trajectory. Assuming there is one point along the trajectory where
the turn rate vanishes such that @xmath we expect that the smallness of
the Hessian implies that @xmath can only increase by @xmath times the
distance along the trajectory by the estimate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A more physical argument is that we expect that a very flat potential
cannot force the inflationary trajectory to deviate from a geodesic too
much.

##### Useful expressions

We derive a couple of useful expressions which we often use for
manipulating the equations. First of all the derivatives of @xmath and
@xmath can be used to convert from the geometric to the kinematical slow
roll parameters

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which gives in particular

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next we can express the slow-roll parameters in terms of the field speed
and its accelerations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With the following expression we can easily convert the Hubble parameter
to the potential and vice versa.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally during the transition regime we can express @xmath and @xmath
explicitly in conformal time. We assume the second order slow-roll
approximation and a Taylor expansion of @xmath around Hubble radius
crossing yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the time of Hubble radius crossing for a given mode
@xmath and @xmath the value of @xmath at that time. We can neglect
@xmath in the second order slow-roll approximation (see section 3.2.3
and Table 3.2 ) and therefore we can derive

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.16)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we fixed the value of the conformal time at Hubble radius crossing
for each mode @xmath in order to keep the expressions as simple as
possible. The first order slow-roll approximation renders the same
expressions but then up to linear order in @xmath .

##### Dictionary slow-roll and turn parameters

Finally we compare our slow-roll parameters with the ones used in the
other papers in Table 3.3 . Note that the slow-roll parameters used in
the papers of TG and PT are โcontaminatedโ with turn parameters. This
means their slow-roll approximation implicitly makes use of the
slow-turn approximation. Their parameters can therefore only be used in
the SRST approximation. In the more general case where one would like to
study the influence of turns, one could use one of the sets of slow-roll
parameters and the turn parameters defined section 3.2.3 . These
parameters allow one to study the slow-roll contributions and the
contributions from turns in the trajectory separately. This is important
in order to understand the observational signatures of multi-field
inflation.

#### 3.2.4 Dictionary background equations

A translation of all notation introduced so far to the notation used in
the other papers can be found in Table 3.4 . In this dictionary we
exclude the slow-roll and turn parameters, since these are already
translated in Table 3.3 . Besides the slow-roll and turn parameters, the
definitions of the quantities introduced so far to describe the set-up
of multiple field theory are equivalent in all papers. This means the
dictionary is a pure translation of symbols.

#### 3.2.5 Perturbation theory

Ultimately we would like to compare the predictions from multi-field
inflation with the small anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background
radiation. The background fields are responsible for a spatially
homogeneous and isotropic universe. Therefore we have to study the
behavior of arbitrary quantum fluctuations with respect to the classical
spacetime background and fields. Assuming they are small we can expand
all equations to linear order in the perturbations. The observed
temperature fluctuations can be related to these quantum perturbations.
By assumption the expectation value of the perturbations vanishes
therefore we can characterize the perturbations by the Fourier transform
of the two-point correlation function which is a measure of the variance
of their distribution. In this subsection we explain how to derive the
equations of motion for the perturbations and in section 3.2.6 they will
be quantized and related to observables. There will be overlap with
chapter 2 section 2.2.4 , in particular when we discuss the
quantization, but we repeat this in order to have a consistent chapter.

##### Cosmological perturbation theory

Because we treat the perturbations to linear order we can therefore use
standard cosmological perturbation theory, see for instance [
Baumann2013 ] . Using the spatial translation symmetry of the background
it follows that at linear order the Fourier modes of the perturbations
evolve independently. Moreover because of the spatial rotation symmetry
of the background one can derive that the modes with different helicity
evolve independently at linear order as well. This means the real
perturbation of the metric can be divided into scalar, vector and tensor
perturbations, which correspond respectively to modes with helicity
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The most general way to parameterize linear
scalar perturbations is then given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note there are fewer true degrees of freedom because we still need to
incorporate the gauge freedom and the Einstein equations. The scalar
gauge transformations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

remove two degrees of freedom. The Einstein energy and momentum
constraint equations set in addition two more degrees of freedom to
zero. This means we are left with @xmath scalar degrees of freedom,
where @xmath is the number of scalar fields in our multiple field model.
For the actual computation we would like to fix a particular gauge,
therefore we should take care that we are only considering physical
quantities. It turns out to be useful to work with the following gauge
invariant variables

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or equivalently the generalized Mukhanov-Sasaki variables @xmath . By
using the basis induced by the inflaton trajectory we can separate
@xmath into perturbations @xmath along the trajectory and @xmath
perturbations orthogonal to the trajectory of which @xmath is one.
Adiabatic or curvature perturbations proportional to @xmath correspond
to perturbations in the total energy density or to the curvature of
equal time hypersurfaces. The entropy or isocurvature perturbations
(proportional to @xmath and the other components of @xmath ) correspond
to relative perturbations in the energy densities of the different
fields while leaving the total energy density and curvature of the
spatial slices unchanged. In the end we will compute the two point
correlation function of the curvature perturbation on uniform density
hypersurfaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has the important property to be conserved on super-Hubble scales
@xmath when the isocurvature perturbations are negligible. If that is
the case it means that the curvature modes can be evaluated after they
are well outside the Hubble radius and they will only evolve in time
when they enter the Hubble radius again at late times where the physics
determining their dynamics is well understood. What we precisely mean by
entering the Hubble radius will be explained after we derived the
perturbation equations. Next one can fix a gauge to simplify the
calculations. Some popular gauges are the Newtonian gauge ( @xmath ),
the uniform density gauge ( @xmath such that @xmath , which explains its
name) and the comoving gauge ( @xmath such that @xmath and therefore it
is also called the comoving curvature perturbation).

##### Perturbation equations

Computing the Einstein equations and the equations of motion of the
perturbed fields leads to the following linearized equations of motion
for the gauge-invariant perturbations.

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (3.17)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

In conformal time these equations simplify by using the Mukhanov-Sasaki
variables:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Besides the scalar perturbations we also have tensor
perturbations. Since the extra fields do not provide any additional
tensor perturbations compared to canonical single field inflation, we
can get exactly the same equations as we found in section 2.2.4 .
Because we will be working in the slow-roll regime this means it reduces
to the single field slow roll expression for the power spectrum of the
tensor perturbations. Expressed in terms of the slow-roll parameters,
the tensor power spectrum is the same for every multi-field model. The
definition of the power spectrum and the solution for tensor
perturbations are given in section 3.2.6 . Going back to the scalar
perturbations we can divide the evolution of the perturbations roughly
in three regimes. This can be most easily seen when the equations are
expressed in terms of e-folds because then the coefficients are all
dimensionless

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the covariant derivative on the field manifold with
respect to the number of e-folds @xmath , which is not equal to @xmath .
Note we are studying Fourier modes of the perturbations with comoving
wavevector @xmath . During inflation @xmath will increase
quasi-exponentially with @xmath , where @xmath is the so-called Hubble
radius. This means we can identify three scales of interest, sub-Hubble
scales @xmath , transition scales @xmath and super-Hubble scales @xmath
. At sub-Hubble scales the coefficient @xmath dominates over the other
coefficients, which means the differential equations decouple and we can
solve them exactly. One has to be careful though with additional mass
scales which may introduce another regime of interest. At super-Hubble
scales we can neglect @xmath which allows us in certain cases to
estimate the behavior of the solutions. During the transition region the
curvature modes under consideration cross the Hubble radius and get
frozen if the isocurvature modes are small enough. We will go into more
detail in solving these equations in section 3.3 , but first we will
discuss the quantization of the perturbations in section 3.2.6 and
express the coefficients of the perturbations equations in terms of the
slow-roll and turn parameters in section 3.2.7 .

#### 3.2.6 Quantization of perturbations

We use canonical quantization to quantize the perturbation fields.

##### Canonical coordinates and momenta of @xmath in any frame

The equations of motion for @xmath can be expressed in any frame, given
by a set of vielbeins @xmath . In this section we stay with a general
frame but keep in mind that there is a preferred frame given by the
tangent and normal directions defined by the inflationary trajectory
@xmath . Defining @xmath the equations of motion become:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equations of motion for @xmath correspond to the following
Lagrangian density

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the overall time-independent factor is fixed by the limiting
single field case, see for instance [ 15 ] . The Lagrangian has no
canonical kinetic terms, but that can be resolved by a redefinition of
the fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now the equations of motion for @xmath reduce to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Lagrangian density becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has standard kinetic terms. Therefore we know how to quantize the
canonical coordinate and momentum fields @xmath and @xmath . We promote
them to operators and impose the standard equal-time commutation
relations. From this we can derive that the pair @xmath are the
corresponding coordinate and momentum fields in the non-canonical frame.

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            @xmath            (3.23)
                 @xmath            @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### Creation and annihilation operators and initial conditions

Before we quantize the theory, we rewrite the solution to the equations
of motion for @xmath and @xmath in a convenient way. Expanding @xmath in
terms of its spatial Fourier modes @xmath ;

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the equations of motion become

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.24)
  -- -- -- --------

The solutions of the equations of motion for @xmath are given by complex
mode functions @xmath (and @xmath ) , where @xmath runs from @xmath to
@xmath . Each @xmath represents a set of solutions @xmath (possibly
zero) such that the general solution of @xmath is determined by a
constant complex vector @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and the solution for @xmath becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the reality condition @xmath is manifestly satisfied. After
promoting the vectors @xmath and their complex conjugates to the
operators @xmath and @xmath , we would like to interpret them as
annihilation and creation operators respectively, which satisfy the
usual commutation relations

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

These are consistent with the commutation relations ( 3.23 ) if and only
if the mode functions are normalized as follows:

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (3.26)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

Another constraint on the mode functions comes from imposing initial
conditions.

###### Assumption 1.

At the beginning of inflation the initial state of the universe is the
vacuum state @xmath , defined by @xmath for all scales @xmath of
interest, such that there is no initial particle production, i.e. the
Bunch-Davies vacuum.

Since we are only interested in the observable modes which are
sub-Hubble at the beginning of inflation (UV modes) and we are working
in the linear approximation where different modes do not interact, this
statement implies that we assume an initial state of minimal energy for
these UV modes ยณ ยณ 3 This means we do not specify the initial conditions
for the infrared modes @xmath . It is however possible to define a
global Bunch-Davies vacuum following the lines of [ 46 ] . . Therefore
the Hamiltonian does not contain any terms proportional to @xmath and
@xmath . After some algebra the Hamiltonian can be written as:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

The energy of the ground state is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we interpret @xmath as the infinite total volume of space โด โด 4 See
[ 47 ] p.72. @xmath and we factor it out by demanding that the energy
density @xmath is minimized. Therefore at the beginning of inflation
@xmath , which is assumed to be deep inside the sub-Hubble regime where
we can assume @xmath and @xmath , we have in addition to ( 3.26 ) the
following constraints:

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (3.27)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

Writing the sub-Hubble solution to the equations of motion for @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and denoting @xmath and @xmath as the matrices @xmath and @xmath , we
can rewrite the constraints ( 3.26 , 3.27 ) as the following matrix
equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining the first and third equation and using the cyclic property of
the trace we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and since @xmath and @xmath are real matrices this trace is always
nonnegative and therefore the solution is given by @xmath . We are free
to choose @xmath and we can deduce that at early times @xmath the full
solution is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some random phase @xmath . This completely determines the evolution
of @xmath , however the equations of motion are not exact solvable
therefore we provide an overview of analytical approximations in the
next chapters.

##### Power spectrum

In the end we would like to compare theory to observations, therefore
the main quantities of interest are the @xmath -point correlation
functions characterizing the distribution of the fluctuations. The
lowest order statistics are given by two-point correlators. The power
spectrum is the dimensionless Fourier transform of the two-point
correlation function and corresponds to the variance of the distribution
of fluctuations of a given mode @xmath . The powerspectra @xmath for
@xmath are defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This will in particular yield the following powerspectrum for the
comoving curvature perturbation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In case of two fields we define the isocurvature perturbation as @xmath
and this yields in addition the following power spectra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The power spectra for the curvature and isocurvature modes are evaluated
at the end of inflation which is equal to their value shortly after
Hubble radius crossing if the isocurvature modes decay quickly enough.
The gravitational waves are characterized by the power spectrum @xmath
which is expressed in terms of the slow-roll parameters the same for
every multi-field model, namely

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.32)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath Eulerโs constant and where the asterisk denotes that the
quantities are evaluated at Hubble radius crossing. In this expression
first order slow-roll corrections โต โต 5 More precisely, the
multiplicative factor reflects corrections to @xmath and @xmath as
stated at the very the end of section 2.2.4 . are taken into account
compared to our computations in section 2.2.5 and therefore we get the
multiplicative factor @xmath , see for example [ 48 ] . The power
spectra evaluated at Hubble radius crossing depend on the wavenumber
@xmath . Assuming the powerspectrum can be approximated by a power law,
it is convenient to write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the scalar and tensor amplitudes, @xmath and
@xmath the scalar and tensor spectral index and @xmath and @xmath the
running of the scalar and the tensor spectral indices. The Planck
collaboration [ 27 ] has found

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

but the BICEP collaboration [ 31 ] contradicts this latter assumption by
the following claimed measurement of the tensor-to-scalar power ratio

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means one should take into account the degeneracy between @xmath
and @xmath . The scales which can be related to the CMB measurements and
to future large scale structure surveys [ 49 ] run from @xmath to @xmath
corresponding to scales which leave the Hubble radius 60 to 53 e-folds
before the end of inflation.

##### Dictionary perturbation equations

Let us take stock of the variables introduced to describe the
perturbation equations and the quantization procedure discussed in
sections 3.2.5 and 3.2.6 . A translation of all notation introduced in
these section to the notation used in the literature is given in Table
3.5 . Most of the definitions are equivalent, so for these the
dictionary is a pure translation of symbols. When there is a difference
in definition however, this is indicated in blue and with an underline.

#### 3.2.7 Perturbation equations in terms of the slow-roll and turn
parameters

Finally we project the perturbations equations along the tangent and
normal directions to get more insight in the behavior of these equations
by rewriting the coefficients in terms of the slow roll and turn
parameters. From now on we will only consider the case of two fields and
leave the case of more fields to future work. We will see that @xmath
couples the curvature mode to the isocurvature mode whenever there is a
mismatch between the geodesics of field space and the valley of the
potential. Therefore @xmath parameterizes the multi-field effects as
expected. In order to keep things clear we choose to work with the
kinematical slow roll parameters. We will however switch between the
time variables, depending on what is most convenient for the next
section, in which we discuss analytical approximations of the solutions.

##### Projection of the perturbation equations with two fields

We simplify our analysis to two fields and project the perturbation
equations ( 3.17 ) and ( 3.18 ) along the tangent @xmath and normal
direction @xmath , which are defined in section 3.2.2 . Therefore we
first express the entries of the @xmath matrix defined in ( 3.19 ) in
terms of the slow-roll and turn parameters. We give the four components
@xmath and @xmath , separately where the index @xmath or @xmath stands
for a projection along the tangent or normal direction, e.g. @xmath .
Because @xmath is symmetric we have @xmath and the four entries are
therefore fully specified by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Moreover, if we wish to express the perturbation equations
in the preferred basis @xmath , we can see from equation ( 3.20 ) that
we also should express the @xmath matrix in terms of the slow-roll and
turn parameters. The @xmath matrix, which is defined in equation ( 3.21
), is anti-symmetric and therefore in case of two fields it is given by
@xmath , if we pick the vielbeins @xmath to be @xmath .

Now projecting the equations for the generalized Mukhanov-Sasaki
variables ( 3.18 ) as function of conformal time along the tangent and
normal direction, we get the following system of coupled differential
equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.33)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

These are the equations describing the evolution of the perturbations
which are canonically quantized and therefore useful to study during the
sub-Hubble regime in section 3.3.1 where the initial conditions are
imposed. We see that the differential equations couple to each other as
soon as @xmath , i.e. if the inflationary trajectory is curved with
respect to the geodesics in field space. If there are no turns, then the
equations decouple and the equation for @xmath becomes equal to the
canonical single field version. As expected, the turn parameter @xmath
carries the most important information about the multi-field effects and
therefore should be considered separately from the slow-roll parameters.
The variables we are ultimately interested in to compare with experiment
are the curvature and isocurvature perturbation @xmath and @xmath . We
can rewrite the full equations of motion for the perturbations ( 3.35 )
in terms of @xmath and @xmath and get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Remember that the curvature perturbation @xmath corresponds to
fluctuations in the fields along the inflationary trajectory and
represents the spatial curvature perturbation in the uniform density
gauge. The isocurvature perturbation @xmath keeps the spatial curvature
perturbation and total energy density of the fields constant, but mixes
up the relative ratios of the energy densities of the fields. If the
isocurvature perturbations decay on super-Hubble scales, then the
curvature perturbation will freeze out [ 29 ] . This means the value of
the mode functions of @xmath evaluated shortly after Hubble radius
crossing will stay constant until the mode enters the Hubble radius
again in an epoch of known physics and therefore we can relate the
predicted distribution of the curvature modes to the observed
temperature fluctuations in the CMB. The same remarks on the
perturbation equations ( 3.33 ) for @xmath also apply here. Concerning
the signs of coefficients, whether the turn is to the right or to the
left it should not change the way the curvature and isocurvature modes
are affected, because it is just a matter of convention. Note that we do
not need to take absolute values of @xmath for the source terms of the
differential equations, because each projection on @xmath also contains
the same left/right information given by @xmath . All the terms in the
curvature perturbation equation therefore contain an even number of
@xmath โs and @xmath โs whereas all the terms in the isocurvature
perturbation equation contain an odd number. The equations ( 3.34 ) will
be extensively used to discuss the analytical approximations of the
solution of the perturbation equations in the super-Hubble regime in
section 3.3.2 and for one of the approximation schemes in the transition
regime in 3.3.3 . Besides equations ( 3.34 ), sometimes the equations
for the variables @xmath ( 3.17 ) as function of number of e-folds are
used to describe the super-Hubble evolution

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (3.35)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

We will only use these equations to study the โslow-roll approximation
on perturbationsโ in section 3.3.2 . Finally, during transition the
equations can be simplified when we assume for example the first order
SRST approximation. Using use the expressions ( 3.16 ) we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.36)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we kept everything to linear order in @xmath and @xmath . This is
useful for one of the approximation schemes to solve the perturbation
equations in the transition regime studied in section 3.3 .

##### Dictionary perturbation equations with two-fields

Some of the papers we include in this overview consider the particular
case of two fields. In Table 3.6 we provide a dictionary to translate
the variables introduced in section 3.2.7 to the notation used in these
particular papers. When there is a difference in definition of the
variables we indicate this in blue and with an underline.

### 3.3 Analytical approximations

Now we have introduced all the relevant notions, in particular the
important turn parameter which parameterizes the multi-field effects, we
continue studying the various approximation schemes to solve the
perturbation equations in case of two fields. In this section we mainly
work with the time variable number of e-folds of inflation @xmath and
the dimensionless positive time variable @xmath . We denote a derivative
with respect to @xmath as semi colon and a derivative with respect to
@xmath exactly like we denoted the derivative with respect to @xmath ,
with a prime. As explained at the end of section 3.2.5 the evolution of
the modes of the perturbations can be divided into three regimes,
sub-Hubble @xmath , transition @xmath and super-Hubble @xmath . We will
denote the beginning and the end of transition as @xmath and @xmath , or
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. A quantity @xmath evaluated at Hubble
radius crossing is denoted by @xmath . We fix the value of @xmath at
Hubble radius crossing at @xmath as explained in section 3.2.3 . Finally
we will be sloppy with jargon and entitle all variables @xmath as the
curvature or adiabatic perturbation and all variables @xmath as the
isocurvature or entropy perturbation.

It turns out that only two types of approximations are made in the
papers under consideration. The approximation schemes can roughly be
summarized as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In all papers the slow-roll approximation is assumed to be true from
deep inside the sub-Hubble regime until far beyond the transition regime
in the super-Hubble regime. One part of the literature (CT, AP, see
Table 3.1 ) assumes a large mass hierarchy and an effective single field
description is derived. The other part of the literature (GW, TG and PT)
assumes a slow-turn approximation and the perturbation equations are
solved by treating the slow-roll and turn parameters on equal footing.
We study the regime of validity of the two approximation schemes by
rederiving their analytical solutions of the perturbation equations.
Many details on the computations can be found in Appendix A . We will
first discuss the early and late time evolution of the perturbations and
then solve the equations in the transition regime in the two
approximation schemes. Finally in section 3.3.4 the approximations and
their validity and the predictions are summarized in Table 3.7 .

#### 3.3.1 Sub-Hubble

In the sub-Hubble regime we have @xmath or equivalently @xmath and the
perturbation equations ( 3.33 ) reduce to โถ โถ 6 Remember we are working
with the variable @xmath and a prime denotes a derivative with respect
to @xmath in this section.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the solution is determined by assuming the initial state of the
universe is the Bunch-Davies vacuum

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

like we found in section 3.2.6 .

This is not the complete story however, because if there exists a mass
hierarchy @xmath , the frequency of the isocurvature modes changes
before the beginning of the transition region. This happens at the scale
@xmath . In this case the sub-Hubble regime should be divided into two
regimes, one where @xmath dominates all other scales in the perturbation
equations @xmath and where we can impose the initial conditions, the
other where the isocurvature mass scale dominates @xmath . In the second
part of the sub-Hubble regime we expect the following behavior of the
solution of the perturbations equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath when there are no turns. In case of a
constant turn rate @xmath we find that the high frequency dissociates
even more from the low frequency such that in any case @xmath . The
solution becomes approximately

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (3.37)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

Using the quantization conditions ( 3.26 ) we can estimate @xmath and
@xmath , which means that the high frequency modes are relatively
suppressed. Since the difference between the frequencies becomes larger
in case of a constant turn rate we expect that these conclusions also
apply for the more general case of slow roll inflation and any turn rate
which does not vary too quickly in time. In the next section we will
show in addition that the high frequency modes will decay on
super-Hubble scales. This means we can neglect the high frequency
solutions as soon as the mode enters the part of the sub-Hubble regime
where @xmath which allows us to compute an effective theory in section
3.3.3 . More calculational details can be found in Appendix A .

#### 3.3.2 Super-Hubble

We now study the behavior of the perturbation equations in the
super-Hubble regime where we can neglect @xmath or equivalently take
@xmath . We start with a simplified case where we assume that the zeroth
order slow roll approximation is valid and that both @xmath and @xmath
are constant. Therefore we can use the perturbation equations ( 3.36 )
where we put @xmath and change variables to @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Using the ansatz @xmath , where @xmath are constants and @xmath some
power, we find four solutions to the perturbation equations. The full
solution is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

to zeroth order in slow roll. Note that the constants @xmath and @xmath
are determined by the initial conditions for @xmath and therefore the
combinations @xmath and @xmath have a sign independent of the convention
for @xmath at the beginning of inflation. From this example we read off
the general behavior of the perturbations at super-Hubble scales. We
have a growing mode @xmath and a decaying mode @xmath whose frequencies
goes to zero. If there is no mass hierarchy @xmath and a very small turn
rate @xmath , then we have another pair of growing and decaying modes
@xmath and @xmath , which means the isocurvature modes will not decay
and for non vanishing @xmath they will keep sourcing the curvature
perturbations. If there is a large mass hierarchy @xmath then the other
modes are decaying @xmath with a high frequency determined by the
effective mass squared @xmath . In this case we find that after Hubble
radius crossing the curvature mode freezes out, @xmath , while the
isocurvature modes oscillate rapidly and decay, @xmath . In Appendix A
we derive the full solution to first order in slow roll and we find the
same behavior.

Next we study the more general super-Hubble solution. We use the full
equations of motion ( 3.34 ) for the curvature and isocurvature
perturbations @xmath and @xmath as function of number of e-folds. These
equations yield the following exact solution in the super-Hubble regime

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the exponential corresponds to the decaying solution @xmath we
found above and if there are no turns the isocurvature modes stop
sourcing @xmath and it will become constant. Assuming we pick @xmath
large enough, such that we can neglect the decaying part, the system
reduces to

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (3.38)
                    
  -- -- -------- -- --------

We will approximate the solutions in case of a mass hierarchy @xmath and
in case of the SRST approximation.

##### Case 1: a mass hierarchy @xmath

In first order slow roll and when @xmath is heavy enough we expect
@xmath in the super-Hubble regime because @xmath and we found two
decaying solutions @xmath in case of constant turns and constant mass.
This means all the isocurvature perturbations decay and we have a freeze
out of the curvature perturbation on super-Hubble scales. Assuming
@xmath and approximately constant we can derive the conditions on @xmath
such that this expectation is true. Rewriting the equation as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can use the WKB approximation to find

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the functions @xmath and @xmath expressed in the slow-roll and
turn parameters take the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Only if @xmath is varying rapidly this might lead to a non-decaying
solution for @xmath , therefore we can derive the following rough
constraint on @xmath to assure that the isocurvature modes will decay on
super-Hubble scales

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the decaying solutions are also oscillating as @xmath while
the frequency of the curvature mode goes to zero. As remarked in section
3.3.1 the frequency of the isocurvature mode changes after a time @xmath
. The curvature and isocurvature modes are described by a system of
coupled harmonic oscillators, but do not โsynchronizeโ because they are
coupled by a derivative interaction. Instead they will tend to oscillate
with a low frequency and a high frequency which dissociate even more if
the coupling is turned on. Based on the analysis in this section and in
section 3.3.1 we expect the high frequency modes to be highly suppressed
with respect to the low frequency modes already after a time @xmath and
therefore they do not contribute to the final amplitude of @xmath .
Therefore one only needs to take into account the low frequency mode for
which the time derivatives of the isocurvature perturbations can be
neglected, because they correspond to the slowly varying oscillations
with a frequency much smaller than @xmath . In section 3.3.3 we will
integrate out the heavy mode which basically comes down to neglecting
the high frequency solutions and approximating the low frequency
solution using the mass hierarchy.

##### Case 2: the SRST approximation

In the studies (TG, PT) the slow roll approximation on perturbations is
made, which comes down to neglecting @xmath and @xmath in the
perturbation equations. It is based on the observation that on
super-Hubble scales the background fields @xmath satisfy the same
equations of motion as the perturbed fields @xmath . Assuming both the
slow-roll and the slow-turn approximation we can neglect @xmath . This
means we can use the same approximation on the perturbed fields and
therefore the difference, the equation for @xmath given in ( 3.17 ),
does not contain a double derivative. This means the perturbation
equations ( 3.35 ) for two fields become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Transforming back to the the variables @xmath and @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The equation for @xmath does not simplify so we only use the second
equation for @xmath and stay with @xmath which yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath times the exponential is the solution for @xmath .
Therefore at super-Hubble scales we have the following expression for
the curvature perturbations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the decaying solution @xmath is automatically discarded. If
there is no large mass hierarchy @xmath , but a nonzero (small) turn
rate, the curvature mode does not freeze out completely and its
evolution needs to be tracked until the end of inflation. If there is a
small mass hierarchy @xmath then it is expected that the curvature mode
will freeze out quickly after Hubble radius crossing.

#### 3.3.3 Transition

Next we need to solve the perturbation equations in the transition
regime in order to match the sub-Hubble initial conditions to the
super-Hubble solution. In case of a mass hierarchy between the curvature
and isocurvature mode we can compute an effective single field
description from the moment that @xmath . If we assume the SRST
approximation we can try to solve the full differential equation in this
regime.

##### Case 1: effective single field description in case of a large mass
hierarchy

As explained in section 3.3.2 we integrate out the heavy modes when
@xmath . The low frequency solution allows us to neglect the time
derivatives of @xmath resulting in an effective equation for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation has a variable speed of sound @xmath and therefore differs
from the equations which follow from a canonical single field
inflationary theory. The speed of sound @xmath in terms of the
background quantities is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

This allows us to derive the effective action for the perturbations up
to quadratic order where we can fix the overall normalization by putting
@xmath and using the canonical single field result discussed in chapter
LABEL:Chapter:The_Standard_Model_of_Cosmology

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The calculational details to find the effective action ( 3.43 ) can be
found in Appendix A .

Next we discuss the validity of the effective single field description.
This effective single field description only holds for times @xmath
which means the number of e-folds before Hubble radius crossing at
@xmath equals @xmath . If you want to impose initial conditions on
@xmath deduced from the sub-Hubble solution you need therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, we can express the validity of the effective theory in terms
of adiabatic conditions on the turn rate and the speed of sound
following [ 43 ] . The derivations can be found in Appendix A . We find
the following constraints on the speed of sound

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (3.45)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath and independent on the fact whether @xmath is small or not.
When @xmath it is also possible to express these adiabatic conditions in
terms of the turn parameter and its derivatives and we get approximately

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (3.46)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

These conditions ensure that the timescale of the duration of the turn
is much bigger than the period of the oscillations about the flat
direction of the potential and therefore we can safely neglect the high
frequency oscillations.

If the adiabatic conditions are satisfied it is possible to solve the
effective single field equation ( 3.41 ) for @xmath . We consider two
cases, one for which we have a constant turn rate @xmath for all times
and another in which we have a transient turn for which @xmath is
assumed to go to 1 for the limits @xmath and @xmath . For the case of a
constant turn rate, the initial conditions for the low frequency
solution @xmath change in the second part of the sub-Hubble regime
@xmath as explained in section 3.3.1 . Moreover, when @xmath the modes
will cross the Hubble radius earlier because the sound horizon decreases
with @xmath which can be seen in equation ( 3.41 ). Taking both effects
into account, we find the following power spectrum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is about @xmath times the powerspectrum @xmath one would achieve
when naively computing the truncated single field version. Actually one
should also take into account the change of @xmath and @xmath , because
if @xmath the modes will cross the Hubble radius earlier which means
that @xmath becomes bigger and @xmath smaller compared to the value one
gets in the truncated single field version. This means the amplitude of
the power spectrum will be enlarged even more. This effect is negligible
when @xmath is close to 1 and this approximation is therefore valid for
a large mass hierarchy in case of a constant turn rate satisfying @xmath
. For values of @xmath which are smaller we expect to have another small
correction on top of this. In section LABEL:section:predictions we will
discuss how the observables change.

Assuming a transient turn rate and the adiabatic conditions ( 3.45 ) we
can interpret the contribution of the change in the speed of sound to
the effective quadratic action for perturbations ( 3.43 ) as a small
perturbation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Using the in-in formalism, see for example [ 50 ] , the
change in the power spectrum to first order in @xmath is found [ 51 ] to
be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means in case of a transient turn we get a slight scale-dependent
power spectrum as in canonical single field inflation but with features
on top of that.

##### Case 2: full solution to the perturbation equations using the SRST
approximation

We now solve the perturbation equations in the transition regime while
assuming the first order slow-roll and slow-turn approximation, see
Table 3.2 . We can diagonalize the perturbation equations ( 3.36 ) which
become in this approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

by rotating the fields to the new fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the rotation matrix is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In Appendix A the derivation of equation ( 3.49 ) can be found. In the
studies TG and PT this equation is solved by Hankel functions, which are
solutions to the Bessel equation. However, this equation is only
equivalent to the Bessel equation if @xmath , which is true if there are
no turns during the transition period. Therefore in general we actually
should start from equation ( 3.22 ) and diagonalize it such that we can
solve it with Hankel functions. It turns out that the turn rate must be
very small in order to make this identification. In Appendix A we derive
the following constraints on the slow-roll and turn parameters which are
necessary to solve the perturbation equations in the transition regime
by Hankel functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

We assumed @xmath as the beginning and the end of the transition regime.
If these conditions are fulfilled the solutions of the equations of
motion for @xmath are given by a linear combination of the Hankel
functions of the first and second kind

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constants @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here we assumed first order slow roll and @xmath , where the latter
assumption is motivated by the discussion in section 3.2.3 , although we
would rather expect from this discussion that @xmath . We come back to
this later. The constants @xmath and @xmath in equation ( 3.51 ) can be
found by matching the solution to the initial conditions for @xmath when
@xmath . It turns out that the coefficients @xmath in front of the
Hankel function of the first kind become zero. To find the solution at
the end of transition we can use the asymptotic behavior of the Hankel
function of the second kind in the limit @xmath . We neglect the
decaying solution @xmath and transforming back to @xmath we get at the
end of transition

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is defined at the beginning of this subsection and the
functions @xmath and @xmath are introduced to shorten the expressions
and given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now there are multiple possibilities. If @xmath then @xmath and we can
neglect the decaying solution @xmath as well, but the first term is
obviously a growing solution and this might produce a large spectrum for
the isocurvature modes. If @xmath then the real part of @xmath becomes
zero and both terms @xmath go like @xmath and these modes decay like
massive modes. We consider both cases separately.

If @xmath we can approximate @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we find that the
curvature perturbation is completely frozen out at @xmath such that we
can derive the following power spectra at the end of inflation

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (3.52)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

In this limit, the power spectrum of the isocurvature modes can be
neglected and the power spectrum of the curvature modes are
indistinguishable from canonical single field inflation because the turn
rate is extremely small compared to @xmath .

If @xmath we can approximate @xmath and we find both curvature and
isocurvature perturbations which evolve independently. Therefore we both
get a spectrum of curvature modes and isocurvature modes at the end of
the transition regime

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

What happens after @xmath depends on what value the turn rate will take
in the super-Hubble regime and on the physics after inflation. This
makes it very hard to make any predictions of observables. The fact that
the curvature modes and isocurvature modes evolve independently comes
from the assumption @xmath , which means in this case that we have put
@xmath to zero during transition. This assumption should be weakened to
@xmath and we expect that the biggest effects of the turn appear when
@xmath . However, since we still expect to get a sizable spectrum of
isocurvature modes which we do not know how to relate to experiment, we
do not perform the calculation.

#### 3.3.4 Overview

We summarize the approximation schemes and their regime of validity in
Table 3.7 . In the papers we have been studying, two different
approximation schemes are being used. In the studies TG, PT and GW the
perturbations equations are solved by assuming both the slow-roll
approximation and the slow-turn approximation (SRST approximation). In
the studies CT and AP the slow-roll approximation and a large mass
hierarchy is assumed. We found that the computations performed in the
corresponding studies are valid if the conditions in the second column
of the Table are satisfied. Moreover, we computed the power spectrum of
the curvature mode at the end of inflation which are shown in the third
column.

Let us discuss each study of multi-field inflation separately to see how
they fit in this overview. Pioneering studies of curvature perturbations
and isocurvature perturbations in multiple field inflation were
performed by GW and TG [ 37 , 52 ] . In these papers the general
formalism is developed to describe the evolution of both types of
perturbations. The importance of @xmath as carrier of multi-field
effects is recognized as it turns on the coupling between the curvature
and isocurvature perturbations. However, only super-Hubble effects are
taken into account and moreover, the turn parameter is treated as a
slow-roll parameter. A few years later it was realized that the role of
the turns can be more important and lead to observable features which
can be tested against the data. In the studies of AP, CT and PT [ 39 ,
41 , 44 ] the effects of turns during Hubble radius crossing are taken
in account and analytical expressions for the power spectra at the end
of inflation are derived. In the extensive treatment provided by PT [ 44
] the slow-turn approximation is introduced and the equations are solved
to second order in the slow-roll and turn parameters. One of their
conclusions is, however, that a large turn rate results in a decay of
the isocurvature modes. This can be understood since their approximation
scheme is actually only valid in case of negligible turns during the
transition regime and during the super-Hubble regime the isocurvature
modes will indeed decay if the turn rate is large for a sufficient
period of time according to equation ( 3.40 ). However, it is not so
generic that the turn rate is negligible until the end of the transition
regime whereafter it becomes large. If the turn rate became nonzero
during transition, then we have seen that we get different effects. In
the papers [ 39 , 42 , 53 , 43 ] the slow-roll approximation and a large
mass hierarchy is assumed which results in an effective single field
description with a reduced speed of sound. The results of CT apply for
constant turn rates and the results of AP are more general and in
particular valid for transient turn rates, but constant turn rates can
also described within their formalism.

Finally, we will elaborate a bit more about the predictions of
observables within the two approximation schemes. In case of the SRST
approximation we have seen that we either get the same predictions for
canonical single field inflation or we donโt know how to compute the
power spectrum at the end of inflation and after inflation because of
the presence of isocurvature modes. Considering that non-Gaussianities
of the local form and isocurvature modes are ruled out by observations
we expect that the second case is ruled out by the data. But of course
one can always argue that the turn rate can stay very small for all
times and the isocurvature modes might decay after inflation. In the
case of the slow-roll approximation and a large mass hierarchy we have
studied the constant turn @xmath and the transient turn for which @xmath
goes to zero at early and late times. For a constant turn we have found
a rescaling of the power spectrum of scalar perturbations. Since the
power spectrum for tensor modes is unchanged this means we get the
following values for the observables

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means a constant turn changes the consistency relation between
@xmath and @xmath . Moreover, another observational consequence is that
the bispectrum gets renormalized

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means that the relative amplitude of the power spectrum and
bispectrum changes with respect to canonical single field inflation โท โท
7 Canonical single field inflation is defined as single field slow-roll
inflation with canonical kinetic terms, minimally coupled to gravity and
with Bunch-Davies initial conditions. . Arguably, the largest observable
effects are created by a transient turn rate during or very close to the
transition regime. The change in the power spectrum is given by equation
( 3.48 ) which tells us that a transient turn will result in
oscillations in the power spectrum. If the width of the oscillation is
small compared to the size of the observable power spectrum, then the
power spectrum can be described by a canonical single field power
spectrum with oscillations. In this case the amplitude, spectral indices
and tensor-to-scalar ratio are unchanged, but new parameters are needed
to describe the oscillations. If the width of the oscillation is large
compared to the size of the observable power spectrum, then this might
change the scalar spectral index and the amplitude. Moreover, it has
been shown [ 51 ] that the bispectrum will have correlated oscillations
and therefore a joint analysis of both spectra could reveal the
signatures.

### 3.4 Conclusion and Discussion

In this chapter we have studied different papers of multiple field
inflation in literature given in Table 3.1 . The notation and
definitions used in these studies differ and therefore we provide
dictionaries to translate between the papers. These dictionaries can be
found in Table 3.3 , 3.4 , 3.5 , and 3.6 . In particular the definition
of the slow-roll and the turn parameters vary among the papers. We
define a turn as a deviation from a geodesic of the inflaton in field
space, which will couple the inflaton to the other degrees of freedom.
This means the turn parameter is very important to describe the
multi-field effects and should be considered separately from the
slow-roll parameters. However, some papers mix up the slow-roll
parameters and the turn parameters as can be seen in Table 3.3 .

Moreover, we studied the approximation schemes used in the papers which
are used to solve the perturbation equations. We find that only two
different approximation schemes are used and we study their regime of
validity and the analytical predictions of the power spectrum of the
curvature mode. The overview of the approximation schemes can be found
in Table 3.7 . In the studies TG, PT and GW the perturbations equations
are solved by assuming the Slow-Roll-Slow-Turn (SRST) approximation (see
section 3.2.3 ). In the studies CT and AP the slow-roll approximation
and a large mass hierarchy is assumed. The first approximation scheme
turns out to be valid if the turn rate is negligible during the
transition regime. This results in a power spectrum for the curvature
mode which is either indistinguishable from single field inflation or
unknown at the end of inflation due to the presence of the isocurvature
modes. The second case is most likely ruled out by the current
experimental data. This means that this approximation scheme is very
limited in the sense that it can only be used to describe multi-field
inflationary models which are effectively canonical single field models.
The second approximation scheme is valid when the isocurvature mass is
heavy enough and when certain adiabatic conditions on the turn rate are
satisfied. For a constant turn rate this results in a renormalization of
the power spectrum. In case of a transient turn rate this leads to
oscillations in the power spectrum. Both cases influence also other
observables. This means that this approximation scheme can be used to
study multi-field inflationary models which might have distinct
signatures compared to canonical single field models.

The two approximation schemes do not cover the full range of possible
multi-field models. In particular, it would be interesting to get more
understanding of the intermediate case with semi heavy fields @xmath and
the possibility of turns. In this case the isocurvature modes will
probably decay on super-Hubble scales which means it is possible to make
predictions which can be related to experiment. First of all one could
look for a method to solve the perturbation equations analytically.
Moreover, it is possible to improve our understanding by consulting
numerical methods.

In this overview we focused mainly on the case of two fields. It would
be interesting to generalize the second approximation scheme to more
than two fields where one field is light and the others much heavier,
for two heavy fields see [ 54 ] . In this case one could try to
integrate out all the heavy fields which we expect to induce similar
corrections to the final single field version as in the two field case.
These corrections will presumably only depend on additional turn rates
and masses coming from the additional fields.

Finally, we should perform numerical studies of concrete models for
multi-field inflation in order to check the analytical results and to
improve our understanding of multi-field inflation under less
restrictive conditions. We already made a start with this and describe a
numerical study in the next chapter.

## Chapter 4 Numerical Study of Concrete Models in Literature

### 4.1 Introduction

We have seen in chapter 2 that the latest precision measurements of the
CMB put inflation on a firm footing. Canonical single field inflation ยน
ยน 1 Canonical single field inflation is defined as single field
slow-roll inflation with canonical kinetic terms, minimally coupled to
gravity and with Bunch-Davies initial conditions. can fit the current
CMB data very well, however the precise microphysical origin of
inflation remains a mystery. Single-field models could be fundamental
theories but from a theoretical point of view they have their
limitations, because they have no ultraviolet completion and, with the
possible exception of Higgs inflation, no connection with the rest of
physics [ 16 ] . We are interested in the case that single field
inflation is an effective description of a more fundamental theory
containing multiple scalar fields. The current precision data puts
strong constraints on the possible interactions terms in a multi-field
model. However if one can find something in the data which is distinct
from canonical single field models, this indicates the presence of new
physics during inflation and this might a big step towards understanding
physics of the very early universe. Therefore we would like to
understand the falsifiable observational signatures of multiple field
inflation in the current and future data. We have seen in chapter 2 that
if the detection of B-mode polarization by BICEP2 is a result of a
tensor-to-scalar ratio of order @xmath then this suggests a high Hubble
scale of inflation @xmath and a super-planckian excursion of the
inflaton in field space. This latter implication means that the dynamics
of the inflaton is more sensitive to features in the potential or more
generally to any mismatch between the geodesics in field space and the
valley of the potential. In chapter 3 we have seen that for multi-field
models where one field is light and the others much heavier compared to
the Hubble scale of inflation it is possible to integrate out the heavy
fields to get an effective single field description under the conditions
( 3.44 ) and ( 3.46 ). When there are sudden turns in the trajectory
this will result in oscillatory features in the power spectrum and
correlated features the bispectrum [ 51 ] . In [ 55 ] a search for these
correlated oscillations in the Planck CMB data has been performed which
shows that there are hints of oscillatory features in the data. However
the full data on the bispectrum has not been released yet.
Interestingly, this shows that the current data might already be precise
enough to detect signatures of new physics. This motivates us to
continue the study of multi-field inflation and much can be learned by
studying concrete models for multi-field inflation. It is highly
interesting to understand what kind of turns appear in these models and
how they will influence the observables. At the same time these models
can be used to check if our theoretical understanding is correct. In
various models of inflation in supergravity, inflation is embedded in a
multiple scalar field theory with non-canonical terms. Because of the
presence of non-canonical kinetic terms the trajectory of the inflaton
in field space could easily be curved. We study some models from recent
papers in the literature [ 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] . In general, once the
heavy fields are stabilized, the possibility of presence of multi-field
effects due to turns is not taken into account in these papers. We would
like to study whether their naรฏve single field truncation is valid
within the current observational constraints or that we might be able to
detect the presence of the additional fields in these models.
Furthermore we study another model given in [ 60 ] which is a toy model
for certain aspects of axion monodromy for which we would like to study
the same question.

### 4.2 Characterization of the models

In this section we give a description of the models we have been
studying. The specifications of [ 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] are different from
[ 60 ] and therefore we discuss them separately.

#### 4.2.1 No-scale supergravity models

The papers [ 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] all provide examples of no-scale
supergravity models [ 61 ] which have a Kรคhler potential of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a superpotential @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which imply a vanishing cosmological constant. This can be seen by
deriving the scalar potential from the Kรคhler potential and the
superpotential (see for example [ 62 ] ) through

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

such that we indeed have a vanishing cosmological constant ยฒ ยฒ 2 Be
aware of the fact that @xmath denotes a matter field and not the tangent
vector used in the previous chapter, moreover, @xmath denotes a partial
derivative with respect to the field @xmath , i.e. @xmath . . Terms with
additional matter fields are then added to the Kรคhler potential which
determine the final scalar potential. The overall exponential factor
@xmath in front of the potential will result in a tendency to minimize
@xmath and therefore the additional fields get probably fixed at zero
which means their influence on the inflaton dynamics will be negligible.
Of course this depends on the precise form of these extra terms and it
should be checked that their influence can be ignored for each model.
The kinetic term for the two components of the complex field @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we split @xmath in a real and imaginary part because the kinetic
term only depends on the real part of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The exponent and the factor @xmath are introduced in order to make the
kinetic term belonging to @xmath canonical. We see a non-canonical
kinetic term @xmath arises naturally from no-scale supergravity models.

Let us now see what matter fields are added to the Kรคhler potential and
what kind of superpotentials are used in the papers. In [ 56 , 57 , 58 ]
the โCecotti modelโ [ 63 ] and โimaginary Starobinksy modelโ are studied
for which the Kรคhler potential and superpotential are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where it is assumed that the field @xmath is stabilized at @xmath .
However, this is not shown explicitly but a reference to [ 64 ] is given
in which is explained how this can be realized. We expect that the value
of @xmath plays a role here, but after putting @xmath its precise value
is irrelevant and by a rescaling of @xmath we can put @xmath to one,
which we will do later on. Under this assumption the kinetic part of the
Lagrangian is given by ( 4.1 ) and the potential energy density becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the imaginary part of @xmath is zero along the inflationary
trajectory then this model coincides with the Starobinsky model. If
inflation happens along the imaginary part of @xmath instead, one will
get a chaotic inflationary model. This is exactly what is aimed at in
these papers. In order to realize this the real part of @xmath should be
stabilized and therefore the Kรคhler potential is modified. This is done
in several ways and the Kรคhler potential together with the resulting
Lagrangians are listed in Table 4.1 .

In [ 59 ] the โno-scale inflationary modelโ is studied with the
following Kรคhler potential and superpotential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where by studying some slices of the potential it is concluded that the
field @xmath is stabilized at @xmath . The function @xmath presumably
plays a role here, where for small enough values @xmath the exponential
factor in front of the potential constraints the value of @xmath ,
namely @xmath . In this paper several stabilization terms are considered
as parameterized by @xmath which represents a line in the @xmath -plane.
The Kรคhler potential is given in Table 4.1 . We do not show the
resulting Lagrangian density, because we havenโt studied this model in
more detail yet.

#### 4.2.2 A toy model in which a heavy field flattens the potential

In [ 60 ] it is explained how interaction of heavy fields with the
inflaton can flatten the potential. The motivation comes from string
theory which provides many heavy scalar fields and some light scalar
fields which can play the role of the inflaton. An example of a light
field is the axion and the flattening effect can be realized in axion
monodromy inflation. This is studied in this paper in section 3. As a
toy model to explain the flattening effect they use the following
potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The idea is that the heavy fields @xmath will try to minimize the
potential at any given value of the light field @xmath . For large
values of @xmath this will eat the first term and the potential gets
flattened. Computing the valley of the potential assuming @xmath is
massive enough and that it takes the value @xmath you get the following
effective potential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are two different regimes of this effective potential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Indeed the potential gets very flat in the regime @xmath as is visible
in Figure 4.1 .

The bending of the potential from one regime into the other regime takes
place around the value @xmath .

For the kinetic terms the following form is assumed

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which also captures the kinetic terms studied in subsection 4.2.1 . Two
specific examples mentioned in the introduction are canonical kinetic
terms @xmath and one example of non-canonical kinetic terms @xmath which
is actually introduced to give an example in which there is steepening
instead of flattening. The non-canonical kinetic term comes without
motivation and is furthermore not always positive so one should be
careful while studying this example. For now we do not worry about the
physical relevance because we use it as a toy model to see whether there
are detectable effects coming from the heavy field.

### 4.3 Why do we expect to see something and what are the observational
consequences?

Before we continue describing our numerical studies we first outline our
expectations. As we have seen in the previous chapter any mismatch
between the geodesics in field space and the minimum of the potential
leads to turns in the trajectory. In the models of inflation described
in sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 the kinetic terms are of the following form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The deviation from a geodesic can occur when the kinetic terms are
non-canonical, i.e. when @xmath and really depends on @xmath . In the
models from section 4.2.1 the @xmath -field gets stabilized at a
particular value, in the model from section 4.2.2 we expect this to
happen in the regime @xmath . To see intuitively why we expect turns in
case of a stabilized @xmath -field, suppose we have @xmath . This
corresponds to an interpretation of the @xmath -field as a radial
coordinate and the @xmath -field as an angular coordinate. If the @xmath
-field takes a constant value then it means the radius is constant and
inflation happens only along the flat angular direction. We expect that
the radial-angular intuition also holds for more general forms of @xmath
and therefore we expect that the inflaton will have a constant turn rate
throughout its trajectory if @xmath is stabilized, assuming @xmath is
constant.

Moreover in the model discussed in section 4.2.2 we also expect a turn
due to the bend in the potential when the inflaton goes from the flat
regime to the second regime. In this case we expect a turn rate which
varies in time.

#### 4.3.1 Observational consequences

We will discuss the observational consequences and detectability for
both expected types of turns. In case of a constant turn rate and a
large mass hierarchy we have seen in the previous chapter that the power
spectrum and bispectrum will get renormalized with respect to the single
field spectra (denoted with an index 0)

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore one could compare the relative amplitudes of the power
spectrum and the bispectrum to see if there is a deviation from
slow-roll. So far only upper bounds on non-Gaussiantity are given and
with the current constraints a speed of sound below @xmath is ruled out
ยณ ยณ 3 In order to see this we compare equation (97) of [ 35 ] with
equation (1.1) of [ 54 ] . This yields @xmath for a small speed of sound
for the type of models we consider, which allows us to read of the graph
given in Figure 25 of [ 35 ] . This means that for a speed of sound of
@xmath we are outside the @xmath confidence region and we find the
constraint @xmath . . If the polarization measurement of BICEP2 is a
result of primordial gravitational waves with, then an much stronger
bound of @xmath is derived in [ 65 ] . It is hard to detect
non-Gaussianity, but future measurements [ 66 ] might be able to detect
non-Gaussianity at a level corresponding to @xmath at first sight โด โด 4
If one takes equation @xmath from [ 35 ] and put in @xmath , which
corresponds to the value of @xmath we computed in the previous footnote,
then one can solve @xmath for any given value for @xmath . At the same
time, considering Table @xmath from [ 66 ] it might be possible in
future to constrain @xmath with @xmath , such that an detection of
@xmath or below should be possible. For @xmath we find @xmath , for
@xmath we find @xmath . . Moreover, the tensor-to-scalar ratio becomes
@xmath and together with a measurement of tensor spectral index @xmath
this could also reveal a value of @xmath different from 1. Although
@xmath might have been detected by BICEP2 [ 31 ] , we are probably not
so close to a precise estimate of the value of both quantities. In the
near future โต โต 5 In [ 65 ] it is argued that @xmath is the critical
value below which one can still differentiate between canonical single
field models and effective theories with a constant speed of sound and
that experimental improvements are necessary to be able to detect it.
therefore we probably can only measure this signal when @xmath is below
@xmath . Therefore in order to measure the presence of the heavy fields
we need a reduction in the speed of sound of about 80 percent. However
the effective single field description is only valid under the
assumption that there is a large mass hierarchy. In case the mass of the
additional field is comparable but larger than the Hubble scale we
cannot speak in terms of the speed of sound and we should compute the
rescaling of the power spectrum numerically. Therefore more generally in
order to measure the presence of the heavy fields we need the amplitude
of the power spectrum to increase by a factor of about 5 with respect to
the canonical single field prediction.

In case of a localized turn induced by the bend of the potential we
expect oscillations in the power spectrum and bispectrum which might be
well detectable in a joint analysis of the spectra in the near future if
the turn happens within or just before the regime where the observable
modes cross the Hubble radius and if the turn is sudden enough [ 55 ] ,
therefore we think that any sudden turn within the observational regime
cannot be neglected and should be taken into account.

### 4.4 Numerical study of the no-scale supergravity inflationary models
from literature

We first study the no-scale supergravity models from the literature
without modifications as listed in Table 4.1 and summarize our findings.

#### 4.4.1 The modified Cecotti model

The modified Cecotti model is given in the first row of Table 4.1 . We
pick @xmath as in the paper which means that the @xmath sign in the
table becomes a @xmath sign. Note that by redefining the fields such
that @xmath we can put @xmath . This model leads to chaotic inflation
because there is a potential barrier at @xmath which stabilizes the
field @xmath at some value close to zero. We need @xmath in order to
have a potential barrier. Inflation is supposed to happen for @xmath
because the inflaton will first go in the positive @xmath direction
until it comes close to the barrier where it gets obstructed and then it
inflates along the @xmath direction. Therefore we should take @xmath
such that @xmath to enforce that the absolute minimum of the potential
stays within reach of the inflaton field to avoid that we end up with
some nonzero cosmological constant. We vary @xmath such that @xmath for
which the kinetic term for @xmath will deviate more strongly from
canonical for increasing @xmath . We find however that there is not much
difference and for each case the trajectory enforced by the potential is
curved with a constant turn rate of order @xmath . The isocurvature mass
is about @xmath and we find a negligible renormalization of the power
spectrum. We show one example in Figure 4.2 where we choose @xmath .

#### 4.4.2 The imaginary supersymmetric Starobinsky model

The imaginary supersymmetric Starobinsky model is given in the second
row of Table 4.1 . Again we put @xmath and take the @xmath sign to be
@xmath . In order to have a potential barrier @xmath has to be negative.
In the corresponding paper [ 56 ] they choose @xmath such that the
potential is minimized at @xmath independent of the value of @xmath .
More generally parameterizing @xmath we have a potential barrier at
@xmath . We take @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath in order to have
inflation without a cosmological constant when @xmath gets stabilized
slightly below @xmath . We pick @xmath and for each value of @xmath we
choose @xmath equal to, less than and higher than @xmath . In each case
we find a very low turn rate @xmath and an isocurvature mass of about
@xmath . The results of this model should therefore be reproduced by the
SRST approximation in which case we expect and find indeed a negligible
correction to the amplitude of the power spectrum compared to the single
field approximation. We show one particular example in Figure 4.3 where
we choose @xmath and @xmath .

#### 4.4.3 The @xmath-extension of the imaginary Starobinsky inflation

The @xmath -extension of the imaginary supersymmetric Starobinsky model
is given in the third row of Table 4.1 . Note that @xmath is in units of
@xmath . Again we put @xmath and take the @xmath sign to be @xmath . The
overall normalization fixes @xmath and therefore the parameter space
consists of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The potential barrier stays the
same as in the imaginary Starobinsky model and parameterizing @xmath we
have @xmath . We pick @xmath and for each value of @xmath we choose
@xmath equal to, less than and higher than @xmath . We get the same
results as for the imaginary supersymmetric Starobinsky model: in each
case we have a very low turn rate @xmath and an isocurvature mass of
about @xmath . Therefore we do not consider it further.

#### 4.4.4 The no-scale inflationary model

The no-scale inflationary model is given in the last row of Table 4.1 .
We havenโt studied this particular model yet. In this case @xmath is not
stabilized at a constant value but rather a line in the @xmath -plane is
stabilized. This will probably result in a turn rate which increases or
decreases in time. It is interesting to see whether the change in the
turn rate is visible in the regime when the observable modes cross the
Hubble radius. Besides a renormalization of the power spectrum this
could for example lead to a change in the spectral index as well. We
should investigate this model in the future.

### 4.5 Numerical study of a toy model

For the first three models given in Table 4.1 we havenโt found so far
interesting deviations from the single field approximation. We are
however also restricted by choosing the value where @xmath is
stabilized, the value of the isocurvature mass and the form of the
kinetic terms because we only worked with the particular models offered
by the papers. In order to have more grip on these parameters we
therefore continue studying a toy model. The potential must allow for
tunability of the isocurvature mass and the value where @xmath gets
stabilized. Furthermore we will also include the potential which has a
bend in this toy model. We study non-canonical kinetic terms which only
depends on one of the fields @xmath i.e. @xmath but we restrict to the
forms found in literature. We can now make the research question more
precise.

Research question

We study a toy model described by the the Lagrangian density

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for which we allow the following kinetic terms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The potential energy density @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and two interesting limiting cases are such that the field @xmath gets
stabilized at a constant value ( @xmath ) or such that it has a bend (
@xmath ). In the case @xmath and in the flat regime of the potential
given by @xmath : can the non-canonical kinetic terms induce a
renormalization of the power spectrum with a factor of about 5? In the
case @xmath : does the bend in the potential lead to a sudden turn in
the trajectory in the regime where the observable modes cross the Hubble
radius?

The full parameter space of our toy model is given by @xmath plus the
three choices for the kinetic terms. Since the overall normalization of
the power spectrum is given by experiment, this means the overall
normalization of the potential is fixed and therefore this reduces the
number of parameters by one. Moreover, as a starting point in this study
we focus on the case @xmath and the case @xmath , which means we are
left with two continuous parameters and one discrete parameter for each
case.

#### 4.5.1 The potential with a bend: @xmath

We get the following potential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is given in [ 60 ] and illustrates that the heavy fields can
flatten the potential. This effect is explained in section 4.2.2 . In
the flat regime we can estimate the mass of the isocurvature mode

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used that the normal points towards @xmath because inflation
happens in the @xmath direction. During the bend the isocurvature mass
will presumably decrease judging the plot of the potential shown in
Figure 4.1 . However from this lower bound on the isocurvature mass we
are probably safe in saying that the mass of the isocurvature mode
depends on the value of @xmath : the smaller @xmath the bigger the
isocurvature mass with respect to the Hubble scale. Besides the overall
normalization of the potential the two parameters we can vary are @xmath
and the ratio @xmath . The bigger the ratio @xmath the more inflation we
have in the regime @xmath and the longer it takes for the inflaton to go
from @xmath to @xmath because the radius of the bend of the potential
increases. The bigger @xmath the bigger the change in @xmath so probably
there will be more turning in this case. At the same time the
isocurvature mass decreases, so here something interesting might happen
already with canonical kinetic terms.
Let us now think for a moment about the allowed ranges for the
parameters. The mass scales should be well below the Planck scale @xmath
. If the interesting scales cross the Hubble radius during the flat
regime then the value of the Hubble parameter is given by @xmath , at
@xmath it becomes half this value. In the flat regime @xmath is small so
in order to compensate for @xmath to get the right amplitude of the
power spectrum we know the Hubble parameter must be small indeed. In the
regime of the bend it is a bit unclear what the value for @xmath will be
but say in the most optimistic case we end up with @xmath (corresponding
to @xmath and such that @xmath ). This means if we get @xmath we are
safe, so we can choose @xmath very close to 0, but of course every time
we need to check that this condition is satisfied. On the other hand we
would like @xmath in the regime of the bend such that the effective
description applies. If this does not hold one also needs to do a full
computation of the bispectrum in order to understand the effects on the
observables. Of course it is interesting to see what will happen to the
power spectrum when you enter the regime @xmath but that is a different
question. We study this potential for several kinetic terms.

##### Canonical kinetic terms: @xmath

We choose @xmath and @xmath . We find that the turn rate is either too
low to be visible or too far away from the inflationary regime where the
observable modes cross the Hubble radius: 60 to 53 e-folds before the
end of inflation. One example where we have a (too sharp) turn at the
end of inflation is for @xmath and @xmath is illustrated by Figure 4.4 .
This would have led to oscillations in the power spectrum - although an
effective description is not possible here - if it happened much
earlier. It makes sense that this happens at the end of inflation
because if the turn in the potential is traversed fast enough it means
at the same time that inflation ends quickly afterwards, because the
bend is positioned close to the end of the trajectory.
Studying the regime where the observable modes cross the Hubble radius,
in each case the turn rate is too low compared to the isocurvature mass
and you can neglect its influence on the observables. We give an example
for @xmath and @xmath as illustrated by Figure 4.5 . Considering the
plot of the trajectory in field space this configuration might lead to a
decreasing turn rate in the case of non-canonical kinetic terms.

##### Non canonical kinetic terms: @xmath

This kinetic term is not always positive so we need to be careful. If
@xmath gets very close to 0 the quantum fluctuations of the fields can
render the kinetic term negative, so this is something we should keep
track of during the numerical computations. To omit this difficulty we
first study examples in which @xmath comes not so close to 0 and we
choose @xmath and @xmath . We find that if @xmath gets smaller the
@xmath -field will traverse larger distances in field space. This has to
do with the fact that @xmath will be very large if @xmath is small,
which is precisely the case if @xmath is small. During the regime where
the observable modes cross the Hubble radius we find a speed of sound
very close to 1 for all cases. So the turn rate might be large but this
is compensated by a much larger isocurvature mass. We illustrate one
example @xmath and @xmath in Figures 4.6 and 4.7 . Furthermore we do a
non-rigorous check of what happens if we decrease @xmath and we find
that we get very large turn rates for which the speed of sound reduces
considerably. This seems to be an interesting regime and we should do a
more careful analysis in future.

##### Non canonical kinetic terms: @xmath

In case of @xmath we have a very low turn rate with heavy masses when
@xmath is small. If you want a bigger turn rate you need to increase
@xmath to a rather high value such that the exponential becomes small,
but then you will only get some effect at the end of inflation and
moreover the isocurvature mass becomes extremely low, so this is not
what we are looking for. In case of @xmath we always have a small turn
rate because @xmath , so here you only get @xmath to a very good
approximation. Conclusion: for the kinetic terms @xmath the single field
description is fine as long as the isocurvature mass is not small.

#### 4.5.2 The separable potential which stabilizes @xmath at a constant
value: @xmath

We put @xmath to get the following potential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where one field is stabilized such that inflation is only along one of
the fields. The potential is separable and therefore much easier to
understand. We take @xmath large compared to @xmath such that @xmath is
the heavy field which gets stabilized at the โnaiveโ value @xmath . If
due to non-canonical terms the turn rate is large we expect that the
inflaton gets pushed uphill such that the โnaiveโ computation
underestimates the amplitude of the power spectrum for scalar
perturbations.
Assuming that @xmath gets fixed at some value close to @xmath we know
the normal points in the @xmath -direction and we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore for any non-canonical kinetic term of the form @xmath we can
deduce in the slow-roll regime

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the fact that in this case we have @xmath and plugged this
into equations ( 3.3 ) and ( 3.6 ). For constant @xmath we can integrate
this equation to find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath such that @xmath . This gives the following estimate for
the Hubble parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

at the time where the observable modes cross the Hubble radius. We are
therefore interested in the ranges of the parameters for which

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For chaotic inflation we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For given kinetic terms the normalization of the power spectrum fixes
@xmath and we can vary the parameters @xmath and @xmath .

##### Non canonical kinetic terms: @xmath

We choose @xmath and @xmath . The speed of sound gets only reduced
considerably in the case @xmath . For example for @xmath and @xmath we
find @xmath and @xmath . However this kinetic term becomes negative for
negative values for @xmath including the quantum fluctuations so we
should do a more careful analysis in this case to check whether this
example is reliable. For @xmath the turn rate is about @xmath and
therefore for @xmath this effect is certainly not visible. The constant
turn might cause some trouble when the isocurvature mass gets closer to
the Hubble scale. For example taking @xmath and @xmath we get @xmath and
@xmath . The isocurvature mass is expected to be high enough for the
isocurvature modes to decay quickly after Hubble radius crossing but the
effective theory does not apply. We can compute the power spectrum for
this case, but we donโt know precisely what will happen to the
bispectrum because we cannot speak in terms of a speed of sound. On the
other hand if we just compute the speed of sound as if we are working
with an effective single field description it is about @xmath which is
too close to 1 to be detectable. We show one example where we choose
@xmath in between the values discussed in this section in Figure 4.8
where we take @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . We also
show the displacement of @xmath from the โnaiveโ value @xmath . The
resulting power spectrum is shown in Figure 4.9 and compared with the
theoretical expected power spectrum given in section 4.3.1 and the
โnaiveโ single field approximation. We see the power spectrum gets
renormalized by a few percent which is not detectable but motivates us
to explore what happens for lower values for @xmath in future.

##### Non canonical kinetic terms: @xmath

In case of @xmath we have a very low turn rate even when @xmath takes
the values such that the exponential becomes equal much less than 1. The
same applies for @xmath . We conclude that for the kinetic terms @xmath
the single field description is fine because the turn rate is extremely
low.

#### 4.5.3 The full toy-model

Let us think for a moment about the full potential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assuming @xmath is massive enough and that it takes the value @xmath you
get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have again the two regimes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The potential still gets flatter in the regime @xmath but always has the
additional chaotic term @xmath . The reasoning applied to the
non-canonical kinetic terms @xmath to the model without @xmath should be
still the same so we wonโt explore that part of parameter space. In case
of @xmath the turn rate might get cranked up so that is something to
check. In case of canonical kinetic terms we again expect for the same
reasons that the turn in the potential is either too mild or otherwise
it will be close to the end of inflation. But we should check this
because the additional chaotic term will speed up the inflaton. This
region of parameter space should therefore also be explored in future.

### 4.6 Conclusion and Discussion

In this chapter we have addressed the question โถ โถ 6 The research
question is more precisely posed in section 4.5 . whether certain types
of two-field inflationary models, one described by a potential with a
bend and the other described by a potential which stabilizes one of the
fields and where we allow for non-canonical kinetic terms, will lead to
observable signatures in the CMB data, distinguishable from canonical
single field inflation. Based on the explored part of parameter space so
far we arrive at the tentative conclusion that the single field
approximation without taking into account the turns is fine and the
heavy degrees of freedom present in these models wonโt be detectable in
the current or near future data because:
1) The turn rate is constant but too low to be distinguishable from a
single field model
2) There is a sudden turn but it happens close to the end of inflation
and therefore it does not influence the observable modes.
In particular we found no sizable turn rates for the non-canonical
kinetic terms @xmath and the single field description ignoring the
influence of turns seems to be very good as long as the isocurvature
mass is large enough. However for the kinetic term @xmath we found hints
of large turn rates which should be investigated in more detail in
future. Moreover although the studied models cannot be distinguished
from single field models from an observational point of view so far one
should actually take into account the rescaling of the tensor-to-scalar
ratio @xmath when computing the observables in order to study the
validity of the particular model under consideration.

The data analysis performed in this chapter has not finished yet,
however. In order to arrive at a more precise conclusion we need to
explore more regions in the parameter space as given in section 4.5 for
which we expect that it could describe models which allow for observable
effects of the additional fields. For example in case of the
non-canonical kinetic term @xmath we should explore what happens if we
choose @xmath closer to 0. Another possibly interesting region in
parameter space is when we consider the full toy model where both @xmath
and @xmath are nonzero.

Furthermore, going back to the original study of the models in
literature outlined in sections 4.2 and 4.4 we have not studied the
โno-scale inflationary modelโ yet. This model might reveal detectable
effects because the stabilization used in the respective paper is
different than the stabilization used in the other models from
literature and the toy model we studied in section 4.5 .

Finally in section 4.2.1 where we derived the two-field Lagrangians from
the Kรคhler potential and superpotential we assumed that the field @xmath
can be stabilized at @xmath and that we can neglect them in the final
theory. For the same reason that turns can reveal the presence of
additional fields we should carefully check whether this field is really
stabilized there.

## Chapter 5 Conclusion and Outlook

### 5.1 Summary of Conclusions

In this thesis we have studied two projects. The first project, as
discussed in chapter 3 , was to compare and translate between studies of
multiple field inflation in the literature. The notation and definitions
used in these studies differ and therefore we provided dictionaries to
translate between the papers. These dictionaries can be found in Table
3.3 , 3.4 , 3.5 and 3.6 . We stressed that the turn parameter is very
important to describe the multi-field effects and should be considered
separately from the slow-roll parameters. However, historically the
slow-roll parameters and the turn parameters are mixed up as can be seen
in Table 3.3 . Moreover, we studied the approximation schemes used in
the papers which are used to solve the perturbation equations. We find
that only two different approximation schemes are used and we study
their regime of validity and the analytical predictions of the power
spectrum of the curvature mode. The overview of the approximation
schemes can be found in Table 3.7 . We concluded that the SRST
approximation scheme is very limited in the sense that it can only be
used to describe multi-field inflationary models which are effectively
simple single field models. The second approximation scheme on the other
hand, which is a combination of the slow-roll approximation and a
assuming a large mass hierarchy, can be used to study multi-field
inflationary models which might have distinct signatures compared to
simple single field models.

The second project, as discussed in chapter 4 , was a numerical study of
concrete models of multi-field inflation from recent papers in the
literature. We investigated whether the current and future experiments
might be able to detect the presence of the additional fields in these
models or not. We arrived at the tentative conclusion that the single
field approximation without taking into account the turns is fine and
the heavy degrees of freedom present in these models wonโt be detectable
in the current or near future data for two possible reasons. Either the
turn rate is constant but too low to be distinguishable from a single
field model, or there is a sudden turn but it happens close to the end
of inflation and therefore it does not influence the observable modes.

### 5.2 Outlook

There are many possibilities of new projects as a continuation of this
masterโs research. First of all the two projects discussed in this
thesis leave much room for improvement. Moreover, there are extensions
to these projects which place this work in a broader research area and
connect it to future developments.

The numerical analysis of multi-field models described in chapter 4 is
still in its infancy. The analysis has not saturated all possibly
interesting possibilities yet. Some regions of parameter space might
reveal interesting physics and should be explored in more detail. In
addition, several aspects of the original models on which the data
analysis is based, need to be studied more carefully. Moreover, we
should continue our quest for multi-field effects in concrete models to
understand what kind of turns appear and how they will influence the
observables.

The analytical study of multi-field models in chapter 3 does not cover
the full range of possible multi-field models. In particular, it would
be interesting to get more understanding in case that the additional
fields are heavy enough for the isocurvature modes to decay, but where
the effective theory is expected to break down. By should study these
type of models by means of an analytical analysis in parallel with a
numerical study. Moreover, we focused mainly on the case of two fields.
It would be interesting to generalize the analytical expressions to the
case of a multi-field theory containing one light field and the others
much heavier.

As an extension to these projects, it is highly interesting to learn how
to search for signatures of turns in the CMB. Assuming an effective
single field description with a reduced speed of sound, we should be
able to match different shapes of the speed of sound to the current and
future CMB data as in [ 55 ] . When more data is released we should be
able to falsify models and find support for models consistent with
observation in order to learn more about the physics of the early
universe.

Another important probe of cosmology in the near future will be high
precision LSS surveys, e.g. Euclid [ 36 ] . These surveys will provide a
huge amount of cosmological data and are the most promising datasets to
establish the presence of non-Gaussianity. The next years it will be
worth to specialize on many aspects related to LSS, considering the fact
it will become the main probe for cosmology. For example, the
interpretation of the measurements comes with some complicating issues
of theoretical and astrophysical character and it is important to get
more theoretical understanding about these problems. In addition, in
order to deal with the complexity of the data it will be extremely
useful to consult numerical methods.

## Acknowledgements

Ana, I am very grateful to you for being such a fantastic supervisor.
You gave me many learning experiences of how to work as a researcher by
coaching me in many aspects of the actual research, in the preparation
of important presentations and in finding the right attitude of writing.
Moreover, you embedded me in your research group and involved me with
all kinds of meetings. I really liked our meetings where you shared your
physical insights with me and equally enjoyed the non-physics
conversations we had. Thanks for your confidence, patience and your
great kindness. I am very happy to continue working with you.

Tomislav, thanks for keeping an eye on the project and for your
extensive and very useful feedback on the final presentation and this
thesis, all provided on a very short notice, even when you were having
holidays.

Pablo, it was great to start working with you on a project. You are a
very amiable person and a good teacher. I am looking forward to really
kick off this project.

Furthermore, I would like to thank all my colleagues in Leiden and
Utrecht for the wonderful time, the physics conversations and all the
useful feedback you gave me. In particular I would like to thank Pablo,
Vicente, Jesรบs, Drian, Drazen, Wessel, Bart, Artem, Mark and Bin.

Finally, many thanks to my family, friends and Martijn, which always
have been most important for me.