##### Contents

-    Introduction
-    1 Notation
    -    1.1 Basic notation
    -    1.2 Split index and good position for automorphic pairs
-    2 Unitary groups and base change
    -    2.1 Unitary groups
    -    2.2 General base change
    -    2.3 Base change for unitary groups and similitude unitary
        groups
-    3 Rational structures and Whittaker periods
    -    3.1 Rational structures on certain automorphic representations
    -    3.2 Rational structures on the Whittaker model
    -    3.3 Rational structures on cohomology spaces and comparison of
        rational structures
    -    3.4 Shahidi’s calculation on Whittaker periods
    -    3.5 First discussions on archimedean factors
    -    3.6 Special values of tensor products in terms of Whittaker
        periods, after Grobner-Harris
-    4 CM periods and arithmetic automorphic periods
    -    4.1 CM periods
    -    4.2 Construction of cohomology spaces
    -    4.3 The Hodge structures
    -    4.4 Complex conjugation
    -    4.5 The rational paring
    -    4.6 Arithmetic automorphic periods
-    5 Special values of automorphic @xmath -functions: the start point
    -    5.1 Special values of automorphic @xmath -functions for
        similitude unitary group
    -    5.2 Special values of automorphic @xmath -functions for @xmath
    -    5.3 Arithmetic automorphic periods for conjugate self-dual
        representations
-    6 Motives and Deligne’s conjecture
    -    6.1 Motives over @xmath
    -    6.2 Motivic periods over quadratic imaginary fields
    -    6.3 Deligne’s conjecture for tensor product of motives
    -    6.4 Motivic periods for automorphic representations over
        quadratic imaginary fields
    -    6.5 Deligne’s conjecture for automorphic pairs over quadratic
        imaginary fields
    -    6.6 The picture for general CM fields
    -    6.7 Motivic periods for Hecke characters over CM fields
-    7 Factorization of arithmetic automorphic periods and a conjecture
    -    7.1 Basic lemmas
    -    7.2 Formula for the Whittaker period: even dimensional
    -    7.3 Formula for the Whittaker period: odd dimensional
    -    7.4 Factorization of arithmetic automorphic periods: restricted
        case
    -    7.5 Factorization of arithmetic automorphic periods: complete
        case
    -    7.6 Specify the factorization
-    8 Functoriality of arithmetic automorphic periods
    -    8.1 Period relations for automorphic inductions: settings
    -    8.2 Relations of global periods for automorphic inductions
    -    8.3 Relations of local periods for automorphic inductions
    -    8.4 Period relations under Galois action
    -    8.5 Relations of global periods for base change
    -    8.6 Relations of local periods for base change
-    9 An automorphic version of Deligne’s conjecture
    -    9.1 A conjecture
    -    9.2 Compatibility with Deligne’s conjecture over quadratic
        imaginary fields
    -    9.3 Simplify archimedean factors
    -    9.4 More discussions on the archimedean factors
    -    9.5 From quadratic imaginary fields to general CM fields
-    10 Special values of @xmath -functions for automorphic pairs over
    quadratic imaginary fields
    -    10.1 Settings, the simplest case
    -    10.2 Calculate the Whittaker period, the simplest case
    -    10.3 Calculate the arithmetic automorphic periods and conclude,
        the simplest case
    -    10.4 Settings, the general cases
    -    10.5 Simplify the left hand side, general cases
    -    10.6 Simplify the right hand side, general cases
    -    10.7 Compare both sides, general cases
    -    10.8 Final conclusion: general cases
-    11 Special values at @xmath of @xmath -functions for automorphic
    pairs over quadratic imaginary fields
    -    11.1 Settings
    -    11.2 Simplify the left hand side
    -    11.3 Simplify the right hand side
    -    11.4 Final conclusion

## Introduction

Special values of @xmath -functions play an important role in the
Langlands program. Numerous conjectures predict that special values of
@xmath -functions reflect arithmetic properties of geometric objects.
Most of these conjectures are still open and difficult to attack.

At the same time, concrete results on the special values of @xmath
-functions appear more and more in automorphic settings. For example, in
[ Har97 ] , M. Harris constructed complex invariants called arithmetic
automorphic periods and showed that the special values of automorphic
@xmath -function for @xmath could be interpreted in terms of these
invariants.

We generalize his results in two ways. Firstly, the arithmetic
automorphic periods have been defined over general CM fields. Secondly,
we show that special values of arithmetic automorphic periods for @xmath
can be interpreted in terms of these arithmetic automorphic periods in
many situations. In fact, we have found a concise formula for such
critical values. This is our first main automorphic result. One possible
application is to construct @xmath -adic @xmath -functions.

We remark that we have not finished the proof for @xmath over general CM
fields in the current article. We shall do it later. We have assumed
Conjecture 5.1.1 throughout the text. This is one important ingredient
for automorphic results over general CM fields.

The results over quadratic imaginary field follow from the ideas in [
GH15 ] and some technical calculation. Over general CM fields, one can
still follow such arguments and get formulas for critical values in
terms of arithmetic automorphic periods. But these formulas are ugly and
complicated. In fact, we don’t know how to write down a formula adapted
to most cases. However, if one can show that the arithmetic automorphic
periods can be factorized as products of local periods over infinite
places, then the generalization to CM fields is straight forward.

The factorization of arithmetic automorphic periods was actually a
conjecture of Shimura (c.f. [ Shi83 ] , [ Shi88 ] ). One possible way to
show this is to define local periods geometrically and prove that
special values of @xmath -functions can be interpreted in terms of local
periods. This was done by M. Harris for Hilbert modular forms in [ Har93
] . But it is extremely difficult to generalize his arguments to @xmath
. Instead, we show that there are relations between arithmetic
automorphic periods. These relations lead to a factorization which is
our second main automorphic result.

We remark that the factorization is not unique. We show that there is a
natural way to factorize such that the local periods are functorial for
automorphic induction and base change. This is our third main
automorphic result. We believe that local periods are also functorial
for endoscopic transfer. We will try to prove this in the near future.

Although our local periods are not defined geometrically, they must have
geometric meanings. This may be done by defining certain geometric
invariants and show that they are related to our local periods with the
help of special values of @xmath -functions. It is likely to show that
our local periods are equal to the geometric invariants defined in [
Har93 ] for Hilbert modular forms in this way.

On the other hand, Deligne’s conjecture related critical values for
motives over @xmath and Deligne’s period (c.f. [ Del79 ] ). When the
motive is the restriction to @xmath of the tensor product of two motives
over a CM field, we may calculate Deligne’s period in terms of motivic
periods defined in [ Har13 ] . The formula was first given in [ Har13 ]
when the motives are self-dual. We have dropped the self-dual condition
here.

If the two motives are associated to automorphic representations of
@xmath and @xmath respectively, we may define motivic periods which are
analogues of the arithmetic automorphic periods. We get a formula of
Deligne’s period in terms of these motivic periods. Our main motivic
result says that our formula for automorphic @xmath -functions are at
least formally compatible with Deligne’s conjecture.

#### Theorems:

Let @xmath be a quadratic imaginary field and @xmath be a CM field of
degree @xmath over @xmath . We fix an embedding @xmath . Let @xmath be
the set of embeddings @xmath such that @xmath is the fixed embedding.

Let @xmath be a number field. Let @xmath , @xmath be two families of
complex numbers. Roughly speaking, we say @xmath if @xmath up to
multiplication by elements in @xmath and equivariant under @xmath
-action.

Let @xmath be a cuspidal cohomological representation of @xmath which
has definable arithmetic automorphic periods (c.f. Definition 5.3.2 ).
In particular, we know that @xmath is defined over a number field @xmath
. For any @xmath , we may define the arithmetic automorphic periods
@xmath as the Petersson inner product of a rational vector in a certain
cohomology space associated to a unitary group of infinity sign @xmath .
It is a non zero complex number well defined up to multiplication by
elements in @xmath .

We assume that Conjecture 5.1.1 is true. Our second main automorphic
result mentioned above is as follows (c.f. Theorem 7.6.1 ):

###### Theorem 0.0.1.

If conditions in Theorem 7.5.1 are satisfied, in particular, if @xmath
is regular enough, then there exists some complex numbers @xmath unique
up to multiplication by elements in @xmath such that the following two
conditions are satisfied:

1.  @xmath for all @xmath

2.   and @xmath

where @xmath is the central character of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is
the CM period (c.f. Section 4.1 ).

We now introduce our first main automorphic result. Let @xmath be a
cuspidal cohomological representation of @xmath which has definable
arithmetic automorphic periods. For any @xmath , we may define the split
indices @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath (c.f. Definition 1.2.1
). Roughly speaking, we have:

###### Theorem 0.0.2.

If @xmath is critical for @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the following cases:

1.  @xmath and @xmath is bigger than the central value.

2.  @xmath and @xmath , both @xmath and @xmath are conjugate self-dual
    and the pair @xmath is in good position (c.f. Definition 1.2.2 ).

3.  @xmath , both @xmath and @xmath are conjugate self-dual and the pair
    @xmath is regular enough.

Our third main automorphic result says that the periods are functorial
for automorphic induction and base change. Roughly speaking, we have:

###### Theorem 0.0.3.

(a) Let @xmath be a cyclic extension of CM fields of degree @xmath and
@xmath be a cuspidal representation of @xmath . We write @xmath for the
automorphic induction of @xmath . We assume both @xmath and @xmath have
definable arithmetic automorphic periods.

Let @xmath . We may define @xmath as in Lemma 8.2.1 . Or locally let
@xmath be an integer and @xmath be as in Definition 8.3.1 . We have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(b) Let @xmath be a cuspidal representation of @xmath . We write @xmath
for its strong base change to @xmath . We assume that both @xmath and
@xmath have definable arithmetic automorphic periods.

Let @xmath . We write @xmath the composition of @xmath and the
restriction of complex embeddings of @xmath to @xmath .

We then have:

  -- -- -- -------- --
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- --

Consequently, we know

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an algebraic number whose @xmath -th power is in @xmath
.

We now introduce the motivic results. Let @xmath , @xmath be motives
over @xmath with coefficients in @xmath and @xmath of rank @xmath and
@xmath respectively. We assume that @xmath has no @xmath -class. We may
define motivic periods @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . We can calculate
Deligne’s period of @xmath in terms of these periods. If @xmath and
@xmath are motives associated to @xmath and @xmath , Deligne’s
conjecture is equivalent to the following conjecture:

###### Conjecture 0.0.1.

If @xmath is critical for @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see that it is compatible with Theorem 0.0.2 . The main point of the
proof is to fix proper basis. Deligne’s period is defined by rational
basis. The basis that we have fixed are not rational. But they are
rational up to unipotent transformation matrices. We can still use such
basis to calculate determinant.

#### Idea of the proof for automorphic results:

Blasius has shown that special values of @xmath -functions for Hecke
character are related to CM periods. The proof of our automorphic
results involve this fact and the following three main ingredients:

Ingredient A is Theorem 5.2.1 . If follows from Conjecture 5.1.1 . It
says that if @xmath is a Hecke characters then critical values @xmath
can be written in terms of the arithmetic automorphic periods of @xmath
and CM periods of @xmath .

Ingredient B is Theorem @xmath of [ GH15 ] . It says that if @xmath is a
certain automorphic representation of @xmath such that @xmath is in good
position then critical values @xmath are products of the Whittaker
period @xmath , @xmath and an archimedean factor. The advantage of the
results in [ GH15 ] is that we don’t need @xmath to be cuspidal. This
gives us large freedom to choose @xmath .

Ingredient C is a calculation of Whittaker period @xmath when @xmath is
the Langlands sum of cuspidal representations @xmath . Following the
idea in [ Mah05 ] and [ GH15 ] , we know @xmath equals to product of
@xmath and the value at identity of a certain Whittaker function.
Shahidi’s calculation in [ Sha10 ] shows that the latter is related to
@xmath .

The proof of the case (a) in Theorem 0.0.3 is relatively simple. It is
enough to take suitable algebraic Hecke character @xmath of @xmath and
calculate @xmath by ingredient A.

The idea for the case (b) is similar. But we have to show that the
arithmetic automorphic periods of @xmath are @xmath -invariant. This is
due to the fact that @xmath itself is @xmath -invariant.

We now explain the proof for Theorem 0.0.1 and Theorem 0.0.2 .

Step 0: determine when a function can factorize through each factor.

For example, let @xmath , @xmath be two sets and @xmath be a map from
@xmath to @xmath . Then there exists functions @xmath and @xmath such
that @xmath for any @xmath and @xmath if and only if @xmath for any
@xmath and @xmath . Therefore, to show that the arithmetic automorphic
periods factorize is equivalent to show that there are certain relations
between these periods.

Step 1: interpret @xmath in terms of arithmetic automorphic periods.

The idea is the same as in [ GH15 ] . We take @xmath to be the Langlands
sum of Hecke characters @xmath . We have @xmath .

Ingredient B says that the left hand side equals to the product of
@xmath , @xmath and an archimedean factor. Ingredient C tells us that
@xmath is almost @xmath which equals to product of CM periods by
Blasius’s result. Therefore, the left hand side equals to product of
@xmath , the CM periods of @xmath and an archimedean factor.

We may calculate the right hand side by Ingredient @xmath . We get that
the right hand side equals to product of the arithmetic automorphic
periods of @xmath , the CM periods of @xmath and a power of @xmath .

Comparing both sides, we will see unsurprisingly that the CM periods of
@xmath in two sides coincide. We will get a formula for @xmath in terms
of arithmetic automorphic periods. Varying the Hecke characters @xmath ,
we get different formulas for @xmath in terms of arithmetic automorphic
periods. We then deduce relations between arithmetic automorphic
periods. The factorization property then follows.

We remark that the above procedure can only treat the case when @xmath
or @xmath for all @xmath . The proof for general case is more tricky
(see section 7.5 ).

Step 2: repeat step 1 with suitable @xmath .

For example, if @xmath and the pair @xmath is in good position, we may
take @xmath to be the Langlands sum of @xmath and some Hecke characters
@xmath where @xmath such that @xmath is in good position. We have @xmath
.

Again, we calculate the left hand side by ingredient B and ingredient C.
We apply step @xmath to @xmath and @xmath and we will get that the left
hand side equals to product of arithmetic automorphic periods for @xmath
and @xmath and CM periods of @xmath .

We then apply ingredient A to @xmath and compare both sides. We will get
a formula for @xmath .

For the case where @xmath , we may take @xmath to be the Langlands sum
of @xmath and @xmath . We know that @xmath then appears in the
calculation of @xmath by ingredient @xmath .

Step 3: Simplify the archimedean factors.

Once we get a formula of @xmath in terms of arithmetic automorphic
periods, we may replace @xmath and @xmath by representations which are
automorphic inductions of Hecke characters. Blasius’s result says that
@xmath is equivalent to the product of a power of @xmath and some CM
periods. On the other hand, the arithmetic automorphic periods of @xmath
are related to CM periods by Theorem 0.0.3 . We shall deduce that the
archimedean factor is equivalent to a power of @xmath if @xmath and
@xmath are induced from Hecke characters. We can finish the proof by
noticing that such representations can have any infinity type.

#### Plan for the text:

In chapter @xmath we introduce our basic notation, in particular, the
split index.

In chapter @xmath we introduce the base change theory for similitude
unitary groups which will help us understanding the descending condition
in the definition of arithmetic automorphic periods.

We summarize some results on rational structures in Chapter @xmath .
They play an important role in the proof. In particular, the ingredients
@xmath and @xmath are introduced in the second half of this chapter.

In chapter @xmath we construct the arithmetic automorphic periods. We
generalize the construction of [ Har97 ] to general CM fields.

Chapter @xmath contains the details for ingredient @xmath . We remark
that we have made a hypothesis here (c.f. Conjecture 5.1.1 ). We will
prove it in a forthcoming paper.

The motivic results are contained in Chapter @xmath . This chapter is
independent of others. We show that our main automorphic results are
compatible with Deligne’s conjecture for motives.

We prove the factorization of arithmetic automorphic periods in Chapter
@xmath (c.f. Theorem 0.0.1 ). This result itself is very important. It
is also the crucial step to generalize our results to CM fields.

In chapter @xmath we prove that the global and local arithmetic periods
are functorial for automorphic induction and base change (c.f. Theorem
0.0.3 ). This is a direct corollary of the ingredient @xmath in chapter
@xmath and the factorization property in chapter @xmath .

In chapter @xmath we claim our main conjecture which is an automorphic
analogue of Deligne’s conjecture. We also claim our main theorem there,
namely, Theorem 0.0.2 . Moreover, in the last section of this chapter,
we explain why the generalization from quadratic imaginary fields to CM
fields is direct by the factorization property.

The last two chapters contain the details of the proof for Theorem 0.0.2
. The calculation is not difficult but technique.

## Chapter 1 Notation

### 1.1 Basic notation

We fix an algebraic closure @xmath of @xmath and @xmath a quadratic
imaginary field. We denote by @xmath the complex conjugation of the
fixed embedding @xmath .

We denote by @xmath the complex conjugation on @xmath . Via the fixed
embedding @xmath , it can be considered as an element in @xmath .

For any number field @xmath , let @xmath be the adele ring of @xmath and
@xmath be the finite part of @xmath . We denote by @xmath the set of
embeddings from @xmath to @xmath . If @xmath contains @xmath , we write
@xmath for the subset of @xmath consisting of elements which is the
fixed embedding @xmath when restricted to @xmath .

Throughout the text, we fix @xmath an algebraic Hecke character of
@xmath with infinity type @xmath such that @xmath (see Lemma @xmath of [
CHT08 ] for its existence). It is easy to see that the restriction of
@xmath to @xmath is the quadratic character associated to the extension
@xmath by the class field theory. Consequently our construction is
compatible with that in [ GH15 ] .

Let @xmath be totally real field of degree @xmath over @xmath . We
define @xmath a CM field. We take @xmath an algebraic Hecke character of
@xmath with infinity type @xmath at each @xmath such that @xmath .

For @xmath , we write @xmath for its complex conjugation. For @xmath ,
we define @xmath the complex conjugation of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a Hecke character of @xmath . We define @xmath and @xmath
two Hecke characters of @xmath .

Let @xmath be an integer greater or equal to @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.1.

Let @xmath be an integer and @xmath be an automorphic representation of
@xmath . Let @xmath be an element in @xmath . We denote the infinity
type of @xmath at @xmath by @xmath . We may assume that @xmath for all
@xmath . The representation @xmath will be called:

1.   pure of weight @xmath if @xmath for all @xmath and all @xmath ;

2.   algebraic if @xmath for all @xmath and all @xmath ;

3.   cohomological if there exists @xmath an irreducible algebraic
    finite dimensional representation of @xmath such that @xmath (see
    section 3.3 for more details);

4.   regular if it is pure and @xmath for all @xmath and all @xmath .

5.  @xmath -regular if it is pure and @xmath for all @xmath and all
    @xmath .

Finally, let @xmath be a number field. We now define the relation @xmath
.

Let @xmath , @xmath be two families of complex numbers.

###### Definition 1.1.2.

We say @xmath if one of the following conditions is verified:

1.   [label=()]

2.  @xmath for all @xmath ,

3.  @xmath for all @xmath , or

4.  @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath and there exists @xmath such that
    @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Remark 1.1.1.

1.   Note that this relation is symmetric but not transitive. More
    precisely, if @xmath and @xmath , we do not know whether @xmath in
    general unless the condition @xmath is provided.

2.   If @xmath with @xmath , we see that @xmath is contained in the
    Galois closure of @xmath . In particular, it is an algebraic number.

3.   If moreover, @xmath for @xmath such that @xmath , we can then
    define @xmath for @xmath by taking any @xmath , a lifting of @xmath
    , and define @xmath . We identify @xmath with @xmath . We consider
    @xmath as an element in @xmath .

    We assume the same condition for @xmath and define @xmath for @xmath
    similarly. It is easy to verify that @xmath if and only if one of
    the three conditions is verified: @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath and
    @xmath .

    We remark that our results will be in this case.

###### Lemma 1.1.1.

We assume @xmath for all @xmath . We also assume that @xmath and @xmath
if @xmath . We have @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath .

### 1.2 Split index and good position for automorphic pairs

###### Definition 1.2.1.

( Split Index )

Let @xmath and @xmath be two positives integers.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two regular pure representations of @xmath and
@xmath respectively. Let @xmath be an element of @xmath . We denote the
infinity type of @xmath and @xmath at @xmath by @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath respectively. We assume that @xmath for all @xmath all
@xmath and all @xmath .

We split the sequence @xmath with the numbers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This sequence is split into @xmath parts. We denote the length of each
part by @xmath , and call them the split indices .

###### Lemma 1.2.1.

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be as in the above definition.
Let @xmath be an element in @xmath . Let @xmath be an algebraic Hecke
character of @xmath . Let @xmath be an integer. We have the following
formulas:

1.  @xmath .

2.  @xmath .

3.   For any @xmath , @xmath .

4.  @xmath and @xmath . Similarly, @xmath .

The first two points of the above lemma are direct. For the remaining,
we only need to notice that calculating the split index is nothing but
comparing @xmath with @xmath .

###### Example 1.2.1.

1.   If @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We verify
    that @xmath as expected by the previous lemma.

2.   If @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath for all
    @xmath .

    Moreover, @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

    We verify that @xmath and @xmath as expected.

###### Definition 1.2.2.

We assume that @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be as before. We say the
pair @xmath is in good position if for any @xmath , the @xmath numbers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

lie in different gaps between @xmath .

It is equivalent to saying that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . In
particular, if @xmath , we know @xmath is in good position if and only
if @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Unitary groups and base change

### 2.1 Unitary groups

In this section, let @xmath be an arbitrary number field and @xmath be a
quadratic extension of number fields.

Let @xmath be the quasi-split unitary group over @xmath of dimension
@xmath with respect to the extension @xmath . We want to know the local
behavior of inner forms of @xmath . More generally, we will answer the
following question:

Let @xmath be a connected reductive group over @xmath . If we are given
@xmath , an inner form of @xmath over @xmath for each place @xmath of
@xmath , when does @xmath , an inner form of @xmath over @xmath such
that @xmath for all @xmath , exist?

The answer is given in section @xmath of [ Clo91 ] . We recall some
results there. We also refer to section @xmath [ HL04 ] for further
details in the unitary group case.

The isomorphism classes of inner forms are classified by Galois
cohomology. Let @xmath be a place of @xmath . Let @xmath or @xmath .
There exists a bijection between the set of isomorphism classes of inner
forms of @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the global inner form exists if
and only if the element in @xmath corresponding to the local datum is in
the image of @xmath .

We remark that if @xmath is local then the quasi-split class corresponds
to the trivial element of @xmath .

If we can calculate this Galois cohomology, then everything is done.
Otherwise Kottwitz has given an alternate choice as follows.

For @xmath a connected reductive group over @xmath , we define @xmath
the dual of @xmath where @xmath is the neutral component of the dual
group of @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.1.1.

There exists a natural map @xmath . Moreover, it is an isomorphism when
@xmath is finite.

The above proposition gives a morphism @xmath where the latter is given
by restriction.

###### Theorem 2.1.1.

The following sequence is exact:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, the image of the first map equals the kernel of the
second map.

By this theorem, our question turns to determine the kernel of the
second map.

Let us now focus on unitary groups, namely when @xmath . Clozel has
calculated @xmath in the case when @xmath is totally real and @xmath is
a quadratic imaginary extension over @xmath . We call it the CM case .
This is enough for our purpose. Let us list some facts from [ Clo91 ] :

-   If @xmath is odd, then @xmath . In other words, any local datum
    @xmath which is quasi-split at almost all places come from a global
    unitary group.

-   If @xmath is even, then

    1.  @xmath .

    2.  @xmath if @xmath is finite and inert. The non quasi-split
        unitary group corresponds to the non trivial element of @xmath .
        The map @xmath is identity if we identify both groups with
        @xmath .

    3.  @xmath if @xmath is finite and split. The element corresponding
        to the unitary group of a division algebra generates @xmath .
        The map @xmath is the mod @xmath map from @xmath to @xmath .

    4.  The real unitary group @xmath has image @xmath in @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.1.

1.   The idea of the proof for the last point is to consider the
    surjective map @xmath where @xmath is the maximal elliptic torus
    over @xmath .

The above calculation leads to the following theorem:

###### Theorem 2.1.2.

Let @xmath Let @xmath be as before. Let @xmath be a finite place of
@xmath inert in @xmath and split in @xmath . There exists a Hermitian
space @xmath of dimension @xmath over @xmath with respect to @xmath such
that the unitary group @xmath over @xmath associated to @xmath
satisfies:

-    At each @xmath , @xmath is of sign @xmath .

-    For @xmath , a finite place of @xmath , @xmath is unramified;

-    If @xmath is even and @xmath , then @xmath is a division algebra.
    Otherwise @xmath is also unramified.

We denote by @xmath the restriction of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath and
@xmath the rational similitude group associated to @xmath , namely, for
any @xmath -algebra @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 2.2 General base change

Let @xmath and @xmath be two connected quasi-split reductive algebraic
groups over @xmath . Let @xmath be the complex dual group of @xmath .
The Galois group @xmath acts on @xmath . We define the @xmath -group of
@xmath by @xmath and we define @xmath similarly. A group homomorphism
between two @xmath -groups @xmath is called an @xmath -morphism if it is
continuous, its restriction to @xmath is analytic and it is compatible
with the projections of @xmath and @xmath to @xmath . If there exists an
@xmath -morphism @xmath , the Langlands’ principal of functoriality
predicts a correspondence from automorphic representations of @xmath to
automorphic representations of @xmath (c.f. section @xmath of [ Art03 ]
). More precisely, we wish to associate an @xmath -packet of automorphic
representations of @xmath to that of @xmath .

Locally, we can specify this correspondence for unramified
representations. Let @xmath be a finite place of @xmath such that @xmath
is unramified at @xmath . We fix @xmath a maximal compact hyperspecial
subgroup of @xmath . By definition, for @xmath an admissible
representation of @xmath , we say @xmath is unramified (with respect to
@xmath ) if it is irreducible and @xmath . One can show that @xmath is
actually one dimensional since @xmath is irreducible.

Denote @xmath the Hecke algebra consisting of compactly supported
continuous functions from @xmath to @xmath which are @xmath invariants
on both sides. We know @xmath acts on @xmath and preserves @xmath (c.f.
[ Min11 ] ). Since @xmath is one-dimensional, every element in @xmath
acts as a multiplication by a scalar on it. In other words, @xmath thus
determines a character of @xmath . This gives a map from the set of
unramified representations of @xmath to the set of characters of @xmath
which is in fact a bijection (c.f. section @xmath of [ Min11 ] ).

We can moreover describe the structure of @xmath in a simpler way. Let
@xmath be a maximal torus of @xmath contained in a Borel subgroup of
@xmath . We denote by @xmath the set of cocharacters of @xmath defined
over @xmath . The Satake transform identifies the Hecke algebra @xmath
with the polynomial ring @xmath where @xmath is the Weyl group of @xmath
(c.f. section @xmath of [ Har10 ] ).

Let @xmath be a connected quasi-split reductive group which is also
unramified at @xmath . We can define @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
similarly. An @xmath -morphism @xmath induces a morphism @xmath and
hence a map @xmath . The latter gives a morphism from @xmath to @xmath
and thus a morphism from @xmath to @xmath . Its dual hence gives a map
from the set of unramified representations of @xmath to that of @xmath .
This is the local Langlands’s principal of functoriality for unramified
representations.

In this article, we are interested in a particular case of the
Langlands’ functoriality: the cyclic base change. Let @xmath be a cyclic
extension, for example @xmath is a quadratic imaginary field. Let @xmath
be a connected quasi-split reductive group over @xmath . Let @xmath . We
know @xmath equals to @xmath . The diagonal embedding is then a natural
@xmath -morphism @xmath . The corresponding functoriality is called the
base change.

More precisely, let @xmath be a place of @xmath and @xmath a place of
@xmath over @xmath . The local Langlands’s principal of functoriality
gives a map from the set of unramified representations of @xmath to that
of @xmath . We call this map the base change with respect to @xmath .

Let @xmath be an admissible irreducible representation of @xmath . We
say @xmath , a representation of @xmath , is a (weak) base change of
@xmath if for almost all @xmath , a finite place of @xmath , such that
@xmath is unramified at @xmath and all @xmath , a place of @xmath over
@xmath , @xmath is the base change of @xmath . In this case, we say
@xmath descends to @xmath by base change.

###### Remark 2.2.1.

The group @xmath acts on @xmath . This induces an action of @xmath on
automorphic representations of @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath an
automorphic representation of @xmath , we write @xmath to be the image
of @xmath under the action of @xmath . It is easy to see that if @xmath
is a base change of @xmath , then @xmath is one as well. In particular,
we have @xmath for almost every finite place @xmath of @xmath . So if we
have the strong multiplicity one theorem for @xmath , we can conclude
that every representation in the image of base change is @xmath -stable.

### 2.3 Base change for unitary groups and similitude unitary groups

Recall that @xmath . The following result on base change comes from
Theorem @xmath of [ KMSW14 ] . We also refer to Corollary @xmath of [
Mok15 ] for the quasi-split case.

###### Proposition 2.3.1.

Base change for unitary group

Let @xmath be a cuspidal conjugate self-dual and cohomological
representation of @xmath . If @xmath is odd then @xmath descends to a
cohomological representation of @xmath unconditionally. If @xmath is
even then it descends if @xmath descends locally.

We have an exact sequence @xmath which is split over @xmath . Indeed, by
Galois descent, it is enough to define @xmath , a Galois automorphism on
@xmath such that the subgroup of @xmath fixed by @xmath is isomorphic to
@xmath . We now define @xmath as follows:

For @xmath a @xmath -algebra, note that @xmath . We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by sending @xmath to @xmath where @xmath is the adjoint of @xmath with
respect to the Hermitian form. It is easy to verify that @xmath
satisfies the condition mentioned above.

We then have that @xmath . In particular, @xmath . For @xmath a cuspidal
representation of @xmath and @xmath a Hecke character of @xmath , @xmath
defines a cuspidal representation of @xmath . Conversely, by the tensor
product theorem, every irreducible admissible automorphic representation
of @xmath is of the form @xmath . The following Lemma is shown in [ HT01
] @xmath and [ Clo12 ] Lemma @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.3.1.

If @xmath is algebraic and conjugate self-dual, then there exists @xmath
, an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath such that @xmath is @xmath
-stable.

#### Proof

It is easy to verify that @xmath is @xmath -stable if and only if @xmath
for any @xmath where @xmath is the central character of @xmath .

We define @xmath the torus over @xmath such that @xmath . We have @xmath
by Hilbert 90.

Again by Hilbert 90, we have an exact sequence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last map sends @xmath to @xmath .

Therefore, such @xmath exists if and only if @xmath is trivial on @xmath
.

Since @xmath is conjugate self-dual, we know @xmath is trivial on @xmath
. By class field theory, @xmath has index @xmath in @xmath . It remains
to show that @xmath is trivial at any element @xmath in @xmath .

We consider @xmath such that @xmath at all finite places and @xmath at
the infinity place. It is not in @xmath .

Since @xmath is algebraic, we know @xmath has infinity type @xmath with
@xmath . In particular, we have @xmath as expected.

@xmath

The following proposition follows from Proposition 2.3.1 . The idea is
the same with Theorem @xmath in [ HT01 ] .

###### Proposition 2.3.2.

Let @xmath be an algebraic automorphic representation of @xmath which
descends to @xmath . If @xmath is an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath
as in Lemma 2.3.1 then @xmath descends to an automorphic representation
of @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath is cohomological then its descending is
also cohomological.

In particular, let @xmath be a cuspidal conjugate self-dual and
cohomological representation of @xmath . We assume moreover that @xmath
descends locally if @xmath is even. Then there always exists @xmath such
that @xmath descends to an irreducible cohomological automorphic
representation of @xmath .

## Chapter 3 Rational structures and Whittaker periods

In this chapter, we will recall some results on the rationality of
certain algebraic automorphic representations and also the rationality
of the associated Whittaker models and cohomology spaces.

In particular, we will define the Whittaker period and present a way to
calculate the Whittaker period in certain cases.

### 3.1 Rational structures on certain automorphic representations

Let @xmath is an arbitrary number field and @xmath be a positive
integer.

Let @xmath be an automorphic representation of @xmath .

We denote by @xmath the representation space for @xmath . For @xmath ,
we define another @xmath -representation @xmath to be @xmath . Let
@xmath be the subfield of @xmath fixed by @xmath . We call it the
rationality field of @xmath .

For @xmath a number field, @xmath a group and @xmath a @xmath
-representation over @xmath , we say @xmath has an @xmath -rational
structure if there exists an @xmath -vector space @xmath endowed with an
action of @xmath such that @xmath as representation of @xmath . We call
@xmath an @xmath -rational structure of @xmath .

We denote by @xmath the set of algebraic automorphic representations of
@xmath which are isobaric sums of cuspidal representations as in section
@xmath of [ Clo90 ] .

###### Theorem 3.1.1.

(Théorème @xmath in [ Clo90 ] )

Let @xmath be a regular representation in @xmath . We have that:

1.  @xmath is a number field.

2.  @xmath has a @xmath -rational structure unique up to homotheties.

3.   For all @xmath , @xmath is the finite part of a regular
    representation in @xmath . It is unique up to isomorphism by the
    strong multiplicity one theorem. We denote it by @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.1.

Let @xmath be a partitian of positive integers and @xmath be regular
representations in @xmath for @xmath respectively.

The above theorem implies that, for all @xmath , the rational field
@xmath is a number field.

Let @xmath be the normalized isobaric sum of @xmath . It is still
algebraic.

We can see from definition that @xmath is the compositum of @xmath with
@xmath . Moreover, if @xmath is regular, we know from the above theorem
that @xmath has a @xmath -rational structure.

### 3.2 Rational structures on the Whittaker model

Let @xmath be a regular representation in @xmath and then its
rationality field @xmath is a number field.

We fix a nontrivial additive character @xmath of @xmath . Since @xmath
is an isobaric sum of cuspidal representations, it is generic. Let
@xmath be the Whittaker model associated to @xmath (with respect to
@xmath ). It consists of certain functions on @xmath and is isomorphic
to @xmath as @xmath -modules.

Similarly, we denote the Whittaker model of @xmath (with respect to)
@xmath by @xmath .

###### Definition 3.2.1.

Cyclotomic character

There exists a unique homomorphism @xmath such that for any @xmath and
any root of unity @xmath , @xmath , called the cyclotomic character.

For @xmath , we define @xmath to be the image of @xmath by the embedding
@xmath . We define @xmath to be the diagonal matrix @xmath as in section
@xmath of [ RS08 ] .

For @xmath , we define a function @xmath on @xmath by sending @xmath to
@xmath . For classical cusp forms, this action is just the @xmath
-action on Fourier coefficients.

###### Proposition 3.2.1.

(Lemma @xmath of [ RS08 ] or Proposition @xmath of [ GH15 ] )

The map @xmath gives a @xmath -linear @xmath -equivariant isomorphism
from @xmath to @xmath .

For any extension @xmath of @xmath , we can define an @xmath -rational
structure on @xmath by taking the @xmath -invariants.

Moreover, the @xmath -rational structure is unique up to homotheties.

#### Proof

The first part is well-known (see the references in [ RS08 ] ).

For the second part, the original proof in [ RS08 ] works for cuspidal
representations. The key point is to find a nonzero global invariant
vector. It is equivalent to finding a nonzero local invariant vector for
every finite place. Then Theorem @xmath of [ JPSS81 ] is involved as in
[ GH15 ] .

The last part follows from the one-dimensional property of the invariant
vector which is the second part of Theorem @xmath of [ JPSS81 ] .

@xmath

### 3.3 Rational structures on cohomology spaces and comparison of
rational structures

Let @xmath be a regular representation in @xmath . The Lie algebra
cohomology of @xmath has a rational structure. It is described in
section @xmath of [ RS08 ] . We give a brief summary here.

Let @xmath be the center of @xmath . Let @xmath be the Lie algebra of
@xmath . Let @xmath be the set of real places of @xmath , @xmath be the
set of complex places of @xmath and @xmath be the set of infinite places
of @xmath .

For @xmath , we define @xmath . For @xmath , we define @xmath . We
denote by @xmath the product of @xmath with @xmath , and by @xmath the
topological connected component of @xmath .

We fix @xmath the maximal torus of @xmath consisting of diagonal
matrices and @xmath the Borel subgroup of @xmath consisting of upper
triangular matrices. For @xmath a dominant weight of @xmath with respect
to @xmath , we can define @xmath an irreducible representation of @xmath
with highest weight @xmath .

From the proof of Théorème @xmath [ Clo90 ] , we know that there exists
a dominant algebraic weight @xmath , such that @xmath .

Let @xmath be the smallest degree such that @xmath . We have an explicit
formula for @xmath in [ RS08 ] . More precisely, we set @xmath and
@xmath the numbers of real and complex embeddings of @xmath
respectively. We have @xmath .

We can decompose this cohomology group via the action of @xmath . There
exists a character @xmath of @xmath described explicitly in [ RS08 ]
such that:

1.  The isotypic component @xmath is one dimensional.

2.  For fixed @xmath , a generator of @xmath , we have a @xmath
    -equivariant isomorphisms:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.1)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

    where the first map sends @xmath to @xmath and the last map is given
    by the isomorphism @xmath .

3.  The cohomology space @xmath is related to the cuspidal cohomology if
    @xmath is cuspidal and to the Eisenstein cohomology if @xmath is not
    cuspidal. In both cases, it is endowed with a @xmath -rational
    structure (see [ RS08 ] for cuspidal case and [ GH15 ] for non
    cuspidal case).

We denote by @xmath the @xmath -isomorphism given in ( 3.3.1 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Both sides have a @xmath -rational structure. In particular, the
preimage of the rational structure on the right hand side gives a
rational structure on @xmath . But the rational structure on @xmath is
unique up to homotheties. Therefore, there exists a complex number
@xmath such that the new map @xmath preserves the rational structure on
both sides. It is easy to see that this number @xmath is unique up to
multiplication by elements in @xmath .

Finally, we observe that the @xmath -action preserves rational
structures on both the Whittaker models and cohomology spaces. We can
adjust the numbers @xmath for all @xmath by elements in @xmath such that
the following diagram commutes:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The proof is the same as the cuspidal case in [ RS08 ] .

In the following, we fix @xmath , @xmath and we define the Whittaker
period @xmath . For any @xmath , we define @xmath . It is easy to see
that @xmath for @xmath .

Moreover, the elements @xmath are well defined up to @xmath in the
following sense: if @xmath is another family of complex numbers such
that @xmath preserves the rational structure and the above diagram
commutes, then there exists @xmath such that @xmath for any @xmath .
This also follows from the one dimensional property of the invariant
vector. The argument is the same as the last part of the proof of
Definition/Proposition @xmath in [ RS08 ] .

### 3.4 Shahidi’s calculation on Whittaker periods

Let us assume @xmath is a CM field in the following sections of this
chapter. In this case, @xmath itself is connected and hence we may omit
the index @xmath .

let @xmath be a positive integer. Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
be positive integers such that @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath be regular cohomological conjugate
self-dual automorphic representations of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath respectively. We assume that they are Langlands sum of cuspidal
representations.

We write @xmath for the maximal parabolic group of type @xmath and
@xmath be the corresponding Borel subgroup.

Let @xmath be the Langlands sum of @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.4.1.

There exists a non zero complex number @xmath depending on @xmath and
the parabolic type of @xmath which is unique up to elements of @xmath
such that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The constructions and ideas come from [ Mah05 ] and [ GH15 ] . We give a
sketch of the proof here and will include the details in a forthcoming
paper.

#### Sketch of the proof:

For simplicity, we may assume that @xmath .

For @xmath or @xmath , we denote by @xmath the representation space for
@xmath consisting of cusp forms.

We denote by @xmath the Whittaker model for @xmath . We write @xmath for
the cohomological type of @xmath . We fix @xmath , a generator of @xmath
and we write @xmath for @xmath .

We write @xmath for simplicity.

We use similar notation for @xmath .

We claim that there exists a commutative diagram as follows (c.f. (1.3)
of [ Mah05 ] ):

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We now introduce the maps which appear in the diagram:

-   The map @xmath is an explicit map defined locally in [ Mah05 ] .

-   The map @xmath is rational and defined by the theory of Eisenstein
    series which sends @xmath to @xmath . (c.f. Section @xmath in [
    Mah05 ] ).

-   The isomorphism @xmath is rational. The composition of this
    isomorphism and @xmath is just the isomorphism between the cuspidal
    forms and the corresponding Whittaker functions.

-   The theory of Eisenstein cohomology (c.f. [ Har90 ] ) gives a
    rational embedding of @xmath in @xmath .

    More precisely, we write @xmath for @xmath . We denote by @xmath the
    Borel-Serre compactification of @xmath . We write @xmath for its
    boundary and @xmath for the face corresponding to the Borel subgroup
    @xmath .

    We know @xmath embeds rationally in @xmath (c.f. Section @xmath of [
    GH15 ] and Section @xmath of [ Har90 ] ) where @xmath is a sheaf on
    @xmath defined by @xmath . We restrict the latter to the face @xmath
    and get a rational map @xmath which admits a rational section (c.f.
    Proposition @xmath of [ GH15 ] ).

    We may decompose @xmath as in Theorem @xmath of [ Mah05 ] and we see
    that @xmath is a rational direct summand of @xmath as @xmath
    -module. Here we should take @xmath to be the longest element in the
    Weyl group and @xmath to be trivial in the loc.cit .

We take @xmath to be a rational element. We write @xmath for the image
of @xmath under the map @xmath . We denote by @xmath . We write @xmath
to be the corresponding Whittaker function (with respect to a fixed
additive Hecke character).

From the diagram it is easy to see that @xmath is a rational element and
therefore:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Shahidi’s calculation (c.f. Theorem @xmath of [ Sha10 ] and Corollary
@xmath of [ GH15 ] ) implies that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the arguments in Corollary @xmath of [ GH15 ] ) we may choose @xmath
, @xmath such that @xmath is rational for each ramified place. At last,
we conclude the proof by setting @xmath . We can read from the
construction that it depend onlys on @xmath and the parabolic data.

@xmath

For any partition @xmath , we may take @xmath as above such that @xmath
. Hence @xmath is well defined. In particular, @xmath is well-defined.
We denote it by @xmath . We remark that this is the same archimedean
factor appeared in Corollary @xmath of [ GH15 ] .

### 3.5 First discussions on archimedean factors

We will discuss the archimedean factors @xmath defined in the last
section.

One first observation is that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This can be read directly from Equation ( 3.4.1 ).

We observe that if @xmath is also a Langlands sum of automorphic
representations, we can furthermore decompose @xmath . We will get
relations between the archimedean factors. In fact, we have:

###### Lemma 3.5.1.

If @xmath is Langlands sum of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath then we
have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### Proof

We endow @xmath , the set of partitions of @xmath , with the dictionary
order. More precisely, if @xmath and @xmath are two partitions of @xmath
, we say @xmath if there exists an integer @xmath such that @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath . The set @xmath then becomes a totally ordered set.

We shall prove the lemma by induction on @xmath . For each level @xmath
, we shall prove by induction on @xmath .

(1) Basis: When @xmath , we know both sides are equivalent to @xmath by
equation ( 3.5.1 ).

(2) Inductive step: We assume that the lemma is true for @xmath with
@xmath . We shall prove it for @xmath by induction on @xmath .

(2.1) Basis: The smallest element in @xmath is @xmath . In this case, we
have @xmath by definition. Moreover, @xmath by equation ( 3.5.1 ) for
all @xmath . The lemma then follows.

(2.2) Inductive step: Let @xmath . We assume that the lemma holds for
all elements in @xmath smaller than @xmath . We now prove the lemma for
@xmath .

Since @xmath , there exists an integer @xmath such that @xmath . We take
the smallest @xmath with this property and denote it by @xmath .

We take positive integers @xmath such that @xmath . For example, we may
take @xmath and @xmath . We take @xmath and @xmath to be cohomological
conjugate self-dual regular representations of @xmath and @xmath
respectively such that @xmath is the same with the infinity type of the
Langlands sum of @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath be the Langlands sum of @xmath . We apply Proposition 3.4.1
to @xmath and get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Similarly, we apply Proposition 3.4.1 to @xmath and then to @xmath . We
will get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Recall that @xmath , we obtain that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath , we may apply the hypothesis of the induction step @xmath
and get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath then @xmath and both sides of the equation of the lemma are
equivalent to @xmath by equation ( 3.5.1 ). Hence we may assume that
@xmath . Therefore, the hypothesis of the induction step (2) is
satisfied by @xmath . We get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparing the above three equations, we finally deduce that the lemma is
true for @xmath and complete the proof.

@xmath

###### Corollary 3.5.1.

If @xmath is Langlands sum of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath then we
have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 3.6 Special values of tensor products in terms of Whittaker periods,
after Grobner-Harris

Let @xmath be a regular cuspidal cohomological representation of @xmath
. Let @xmath be a regular automorphic cohomological representation of
@xmath which is the Langlands sum of cuspidal representations.
Equivalently, it is a regular element in @xmath .

The arguments in section of [ GH15 ] go over word for word and give the
following result:

###### Proposition 3.6.1.

We assume that @xmath is in good position.

There exists a complex number @xmath which depends on @xmath and @xmath
well defined up to @xmath such that for @xmath with @xmath critical for
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.6.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Whittaker periods of @xmath and @xmath
respectively.

We remark that we don’t need @xmath to be cuspidal here. The above
conditions are sufficient to guarantee that a certain Eisenstein series
is holomorphic.

Moreover, we remark that the good position condition is necessary so
that a certain intertwining operator exists.

We shall give a proof of this proposition in a separate article.

## Chapter 4 CM periods and arithmetic automorphic periods

### 4.1 CM periods

Let @xmath be a Shimura datum where @xmath is a torus defined over
@xmath and @xmath a homomorphism satisfying the axioms defining a
Shimura variety. Such pair is called a special Shimura datum. Let @xmath
be the associated Shimura variety and @xmath be its reflex field.

Let @xmath be a one-dimensional algebraic representation of @xmath (the
representation @xmath is denoted by @xmath in [ HK91 ] ). We denote by
@xmath a definition field for @xmath . We may assume that @xmath
contains @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is motivic (see loc.cit for the
notion). We know that @xmath gives an automorphic line bundle @xmath
over @xmath defined over @xmath . Therefore, the complex vector space
@xmath has an @xmath -rational structure, denoted by @xmath and called
the De Rham rational structure.

On the other hand, the canonical local system @xmath gives another
@xmath -rational structure @xmath on @xmath , called the Betti rational
structure.

We now consider @xmath an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath with
infinity type @xmath (our character @xmath corresponds to the character
@xmath in loc.cit ). Let @xmath be the number field generated by the
values of @xmath on @xmath over @xmath . We know @xmath generates a
one-dimensional complex subspace of @xmath which inherits two @xmath
-rational structures, one from @xmath , the other from @xmath . Put
@xmath the ratio of these two rational structures which is well defined
modulo @xmath .

###### Remark 4.1.1.

If we identify @xmath with the set @xmath , then @xmath itself is in the
rational structure inherits from @xmath . See discussion from @xmath to
@xmath in [ HK91 ] .

Suppose that we have two tori @xmath and @xmath both endowed with a
Shimura datum @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be a map between the
Shimura data. Let @xmath be an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath . We
put @xmath an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath . Since both the Betti
structure and the De Rham structure commute with the pullback map on
cohomology, we have the following proposition:

###### Proposition 4.1.1.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath be as above. We have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 4.1.2.

In Proposition @xmath of [ Har93 ] , the relation is up to @xmath where
@xmath is a number field associated to @xmath . Here we consider the
action of @xmath and can thus obtain a relation up to @xmath (see the
paragraph after Proposition @xmath of loc.cit).

For @xmath a CM field and @xmath a subset of @xmath such that @xmath ,
we can define a Shimura datum @xmath where @xmath is a torus and @xmath
is a homomorphism such that over @xmath , the Hodge structure induced on
@xmath by @xmath is of type @xmath if @xmath , of type @xmath if @xmath
, and of type @xmath otherwise.

Let @xmath be a motivic critical character of a CM field @xmath . By
definition, @xmath and we call it a CM period . Sometimes we write
@xmath instead of @xmath if there is no ambiguity concerning the base
field @xmath .

###### Example 4.1.1.

We have @xmath See @xmath on page @xmath of [ Har97 ] .

Let @xmath . We know @xmath induces an action on @xmath by composition
with @xmath . Moreover, @xmath acts on @xmath and hence acts on the set
of Hecke characters of @xmath .

The CM periods have many good properties. We list below some of them
which will be useful in the future.

###### Proposition 4.1.2.

Let @xmath be a CM field. Let @xmath be a sub CM field.

Let @xmath be a motivic critical Hecke character of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath be motivic critical Hecke characters of @xmath .

Let @xmath be an embedding of @xmath into @xmath and @xmath be a subset
of @xmath such that @xmath . We take @xmath a partition of @xmath .

Let @xmath be an element in @xmath . We then have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
     @xmath      (4.1.2)
     @xmath      (4.1.3)
     @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular, if we take @xmath the complex conjugation, we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Remark 4.1.3.

The first three formulas come from Proposition @xmath , Corollary @xmath
and Lemma @xmath in [ Har93 ] . The last formula is a variation of the
Lemma @xmath in loc.cit. The idea was explained in the proof of
Proposition @xmath in loc.cit. We sketch the proof here.

###### Proof.

All the equations in Proposition 4.1.2 come from Proposition 4.1.1 by
certain maps between Shimura data as follows:

1.  The diagonal map @xmath pulls @xmath back to @xmath .

2.  The multiplication map @xmath sends @xmath , @xmath to @xmath .

3.  The Galois action @xmath sends @xmath to @xmath .

4.  The norm map @xmath pulls @xmath back to @xmath .

∎

The special values of an @xmath -function for a Hecke character over a
CM field can be interpreted in terms of CM periods. The following
theorem is proved by Blasius. We state it as in Proposition @xmath in [
Har93 ] where @xmath should be replaced by @xmath (for this erratum, see
the notation and conventions part on page @xmath in the introduction of
[ Har97 ] ),

###### Theorem 4.1.1.

Let @xmath be a CM field and @xmath be its maximal totally real
subfield. Put @xmath the degree of @xmath over @xmath .

Let @xmath be a motivic critical algebraic Hecke character of @xmath and
@xmath be the unique CM type of @xmath which is compatible with @xmath .

Let @xmath be the absolute discriminant of @xmath . We assume that
@xmath for simplicity.

For @xmath a critical value of @xmath in the sense of Deligne (c.f.
Lemma 6.1.1 ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

equivariant under action of @xmath

###### Remark 4.1.4.

1.   Let @xmath be any CM type of @xmath . Let @xmath denote the
    infinity type of @xmath with @xmath . We may assume @xmath . We
    define @xmath and @xmath and define @xmath . An integer @xmath is
    critical for @xmath if and only if

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (4.1.6)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    (c.f. Lemma 6.1.1 ).

2.  @xmath is well defined up to multiplication by @xmath . More
    generally, if @xmath is any @xmath -base of @xmath , then @xmath .

### 4.2 Construction of cohomology spaces

Let @xmath in the current and the following chapters. Fix an index
@xmath as before. Write @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

Denote @xmath . Recall that @xmath is isomorphic to a subgroup of @xmath
defined by the same similitude . We can define a homomorphism @xmath by
sending @xmath to @xmath .

Let @xmath be the @xmath -conjugation class of @xmath . We know @xmath
is a Shimura datum with reflex field @xmath and dimension @xmath . The
Shimura variety associated to @xmath is denoted by @xmath .

Let @xmath be the centralizer of @xmath in @xmath . Via the inclusion
@xmath , we may identify @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the standard unitary group of degree @xmath over @xmath
. Let @xmath be the subgroup of @xmath consisting of the diagonal
matrices in @xmath . Then it is a maximal torus of @xmath . Denote its
Lie algebra by @xmath .

We observe that @xmath . Its algebraic characters are of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath -tuple of integers with @xmath (mod @xmath ).

Recall that @xmath . We fix @xmath the Borel subgroup of @xmath
consisting of upper triangular matrices. The highest weights of
finite-dimensional irreducible representations of @xmath are tuples
@xmath such that @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath (mod @xmath
).

We denote the set of such tuples by @xmath . Similarly, we write @xmath
for the set of the highest weights of finite-dimensional irreducible
representations of @xmath . It consists of tuples @xmath such that
@xmath for all @xmath and @xmath (mod @xmath ).

We take @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath be the corresponding representations. We define a
local system over @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and an automorphic vector bundle over @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath runs over open compact subgroup of @xmath .

The automorphic vector bundles @xmath are defined over the reflex field
@xmath .

The local systems @xmath are defined over @xmath . The Hodge structure
of the cohomology space @xmath is not pure in general. But the image of
@xmath in @xmath is pure of weight @xmath . We denote this image by
@xmath .

Note that all cohomology spaces have coefficients in @xmath unless we
specify its rational structure over a number field.

### 4.3 The Hodge structures

The results in section @xmath of [ Har94 ] give a description of the
Hodge components of @xmath .

Denote by @xmath the set of positive roots of @xmath in @xmath and by
@xmath the set of positive compact roots. Define @xmath for any @xmath .
We know @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be Lie algebras of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Write @xmath for the Weyl group @xmath and @xmath for the Weyl
group @xmath . We can identify @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath
where @xmath refers to the standard permutation group. For @xmath , we
write the length of @xmath by @xmath .

Let @xmath be a subset of @xmath . By the above identification, @xmath
if and only if @xmath and @xmath One can show that @xmath is a set of
coset representatives of shortest length for @xmath .

Moreover, for @xmath a highest weight of a representation of @xmath ,
one can show easily that @xmath is the highest weight of a
representation of @xmath . More precisely, if @xmath , then @xmath with
@xmath .

###### Remark 4.3.1.

The results of [ Har94 ] tell us that there exists

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

a decomposition as subspaces of pure Hodge type @xmath . We now
determine the Hodge number @xmath .

We know that @xmath is the highest weight of a representation of @xmath
. We denote this representation by @xmath . We know that @xmath is of
the form @xmath with @xmath , @xmath . The first index @xmath is the
Hodge type mentioned above.

Recall that the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the map

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath means the diagonal matrix of coefficients @xmath .

Therefore we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath and then @xmath , we obtain that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The method of toroidal compactification gives us more information on
@xmath . We take @xmath to be a smooth toroidal compactification.
Proposition @xmath of [ Har94 ] tells us that the following results do
not depend on the choice of the toroidal compactification.

The automorphic vector bundle @xmath can be extended to @xmath in two
ways: the canonical extension @xmath and the sub canonical extension
@xmath as explained in [ Har94 ] . Define:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 4.3.1.

There is a canonical isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the dimension of the Shimura variety. We are interested in
the cohomology space of degree @xmath . Proposition @xmath of [ Har97 ]
also works here:

###### Proposition 4.3.2.

The space @xmath is naturally endowed with a @xmath -rational structure,
called the de Rham rational structure and noted by @xmath . This
rational structure is endowed with a @xmath -Hodge filtration @xmath
pure of weight @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, the composition of the above isomorphism and the canonical
isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is rational over @xmath .

#### Holomorphic part:

Let @xmath defined by @xmath for all @xmath . It is the only longest
element in @xmath . Its length is @xmath .

We have a @xmath -rational isomorphism

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can calculate the Hodge type of @xmath as in Remark 4.3.1 .

By definition we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By the discussion in Remark 4.3.1 , the Hodge number

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From equation ( 4.3.3 ), it is easy to deduce that @xmath is the only
largest number among @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, as mentioned in the above proposition, we know that the above
isomorphism is @xmath -rational.

We call @xmath the holomorphic part of the Hodge decomposition of @xmath
. It is isomorphic to the space of holomorphic cusp forms of type @xmath
.

#### Anti-holomorphic part:

The only shortest element in @xmath is the identity with the smallest
Hodge number

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call @xmath the anti-holomorphic part of the Hodge decomposition of
@xmath .

### 4.4 Complex conjugation

We specify some notation first.

Let @xmath as before. We define @xmath and @xmath . They are elements in
@xmath . Moreover, the representation @xmath is the complex conjugation
of @xmath and the representation @xmath is the dual of @xmath as @xmath
-representation.

Similarly, for @xmath , we define @xmath .

We know @xmath is the dual of @xmath as @xmath -representation. We
sometimes write the latter as @xmath .

We define @xmath by @xmath for all @xmath . We know @xmath and @xmath .
The complex conjugation gives an anti-holomorphic isomorphism @xmath .
This induces a @xmath -antilinear isomorphism

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular, it sends holomorphic (resp. anti-holomorphic) elements
with respect to @xmath to those respect to @xmath . If we we denote by
@xmath the longest element related to @xmath then we have @xmath
-antilinear rational isomorphisms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.4.2)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The Shimura datum @xmath induces a Hodge structure of wights
concentrated in @xmath which corresponds to the Harish-Chandra
decomposition induced by @xmath on the Lie algebra: @xmath .

Let @xmath . Let @xmath (resp. @xmath , @xmath ) be the space of
automorphic forms (resp. cusp forms, square-integrable forms) on @xmath
.

We have inclusions for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The complex conjugation on the automorphic forms induces a @xmath
-antilinear isomorphism:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

More precisely, we summarize the construction in [ Har97 ] as follows.

#### Automorphic vector bundles:

We recall some facts on automorphic vector bundles first. We refer to
page @xmath of [ Har97 ] and [ Har85 ] for notation and further details.

Let @xmath be a Shimura datum such that its special points are all CM
points. Let @xmath be the compact dual symmetric space of @xmath . There
is a surjective functor from the category of @xmath -homogeneous vector
bundles on @xmath to the category of automorphic vector bundles on
@xmath . This functor is compatible with inclusions of Shimura data as
explained in the second part of Theorem @xmath of [ Har85 ] . It is also
rational over the reflex field @xmath .

Let @xmath be an automorphic vector bundle on @xmath corresponding to
@xmath , a @xmath -homogeneous vector bundle on @xmath . Let @xmath be a
special pair of @xmath , i.e. @xmath is a sub-Shimura datum of @xmath
with @xmath a maximal torus defined over @xmath . Since the functor
mentioned above is compatible with inclusions of Shimura datum, we know
that the restriction of @xmath to @xmath corresponds to the restriction
of @xmath to @xmath by the previous functor. Moreover, by the
construction, the fiber of @xmath at any point of @xmath is identified
with the fiber of @xmath at @xmath . The @xmath -rational structure on
the fiber of @xmath at @xmath then defines a rational structure of
@xmath and called the canonical trivialization of @xmath associated to
@xmath .

#### Complex conjugation on automorphic vector bundles:

Let @xmath be as in page @xmath of [ Har97 ] and @xmath be its complex
conjugation. The key step of the construction is to identify @xmath with
the dual of @xmath in a rational way.

More precisely, we recall Proposition @xmath of the loc.cit that there
exists a non-degenerate @xmath -equivariant paring of real-analytic
vector bundle @xmath such that its pullback to any CM point is rational
with respect to the canonical trivializations.

We now explain the notion @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
stabilizer of @xmath in @xmath . We know @xmath is associated to an
irreducible complex representation of @xmath , denoted by @xmath in the
loc.cit . The complex conjugation of @xmath can be extended as an
algrebraic representation of @xmath , denoted by @xmath . We know @xmath
is isomorphic to the dual of @xmath and then there exists @xmath , a
one-dimensional representation @xmath , such that a @xmath -equivariant
rational paring @xmath exists. We denote by @xmath the automorphic
vector bundle associated to @xmath .

In our case, we have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath
. As explained in the last second paragraph before Corollary @xmath in
the loc.cit , we may identify the holomorphic sections of @xmath with
holomorphic sections of the dual of @xmath . The complex conjugation
then sends the latter to the anti-holomorphic sections of @xmath . The
latter can be identified with harmonic (0,d)-forms with values in @xmath
where @xmath is the canonical line bundle of @xmath .

By @xmath of [ Har97 ] we have @xmath where the number of @xmath in the
last term is @xmath . Therefore, complex conjugation gives an
isomorphism:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall equation ( 4.3.5 ) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, @xmath . We finally get equation ( 4.4.4 ).

Similarly, if we start from the anti-holomorphic part, we will get a
@xmath -antilinear isomorphism which is still denoted by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which sends anti-holomorphic elements with respect to @xmath to
holomorphic elements for @xmath .

### 4.5 The rational paring

Let @xmath . We write @xmath in this section for simplicity. As in
section @xmath of [ Har97 ] , we denote by @xmath the corresponding
highest weight space. We know @xmath is the tuple associated to @xmath ,
the dual of this @xmath representation. We denote by @xmath the lowest
weight of @xmath .

The restriction from @xmath to @xmath gives an isomorphism

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the @xmath -isotypic subspace of @xmath .

Similarly, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Proposition @xmath of [ Har97 ] says that up to a rational factor the
perfect paring

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

given by integration over the diagonal equals to restriction of the
canonical paring (c.f. @xmath of [ Har97 ] )

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------
           @xmath            (4.5.4)
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ---------

We identify @xmath with @xmath and regard the latter as subspace of
@xmath .

The above construction gives a @xmath -rational perfect paring between
holomorphic sections of @xmath and anti-holomorphic sections of @xmath .

If @xmath , as we have seen in Section 4.4 that the anti-holomorphic
sections of @xmath can be identified with harmonic @xmath -forms with
values in @xmath .

We therefore obtain a @xmath -rational perfect paring

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In other words, there is a rational paring between the holomorphic
elements for @xmath and anti-holomorphic elements for @xmath .

It is easy to see that the isomorphism @xmath commutes with the above
paring and hence:

###### Lemma 4.5.1.

For any @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath .

The next lemma follows from Corollary @xmath and Lemma @xmath of [ Har97
] .

###### Lemma 4.5.2.

Let @xmath . We have @xmath .

More precisely, if we consider @xmath as an element in @xmath then by (
4.5.2 ) and the fixed trivialization of @xmath , we may consider @xmath
as an element in @xmath . We have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that @xmath is the similitude defined in ( 2.1.1 ).

Similarly, if we start from anti-holomorphic elements, we get a paring:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We use the script @xmath to indicate that is anti-holomorphic. It is
still @xmath stable. For @xmath , we also know that @xmath .

### 4.6 Arithmetic automorphic periods

Let @xmath be an irreducible cuspidal representation of @xmath defined
over a number field @xmath . We may assume that @xmath contains the
quadratic imaginary field @xmath .

We assume that @xmath is cohomological with type @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

For @xmath a @xmath -module, define the @xmath -rational @xmath
-isotypic components of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, if @xmath has a @xmath -rational structure then @xmath also
has a @xmath -rational structure.

As in section 4.4 , we have inclusions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Under these inclusions, @xmath sends @xmath to @xmath .

These inclusions are compatible with those @xmath -rational structures
and then induce @xmath -rational parings

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.1)
     @xmath      (4.6.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Definition 4.6.1.

Let @xmath be a non zero @xmath -rational element of @xmath . We define
the holomorphic arithmetic automorphic period associated to @xmath by
@xmath . It is an element in @xmath .

Let @xmath be a non zero @xmath -rational element of @xmath . We define
the anti-holomorphic arithmetic automorphic period associated to @xmath
by @xmath . It is an element in @xmath .

###### Definition-Lemma 4.6.1.

Let us assume now @xmath is tempered and @xmath is discrete series
representation. In this case, @xmath is a rank one @xmath -module (c.f.
[ KMSW14 ] ).

We define the holomorphic arithmetic automorphic period of @xmath by
@xmath by taking @xmath any non zero rational element in @xmath . It is
an element in @xmath well defined up to @xmath -multiplication.

We define @xmath the anti-holomorphic arithmetic automorphic period of
@xmath similarly.

###### Lemma 4.6.1.

We assume that @xmath is tempered and @xmath is discrete series
representation. Let @xmath be a non zero rational element in @xmath and
@xmath be a non zero rational element in @xmath .

We have @xmath .

#### Proof

It is enough to notice that @xmath .

@xmath

###### Lemma 4.6.2.

If @xmath is tempered and @xmath is discrete series representation then
we have:

1.  @xmath .

2.  @xmath .

#### Proof

The first part comes from Lemma 4.5.1 and the fact that @xmath preserves
rational structures.

For the second part, recall that the following two parings are actually
the same:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.3)
     @xmath      (4.6.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We take @xmath a rational element in @xmath and @xmath a rational
element in @xmath . We may assume that @xmath for all @xmath .

By definition @xmath . Since @xmath is a rank one @xmath -module, there
exists @xmath such that @xmath . Therefore @xmath .

On the other hand, since @xmath , we have @xmath . We can deduce that
@xmath as expected.

@xmath

###### Definition 4.6.2.

We say @xmath is compact if @xmath is. In other words, @xmath is compact
if and only if @xmath or @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.6.1.

If @xmath is compact then @xmath . We have @xmath .

#### Proof

If @xmath is compact, then @xmath . The anti-holomorphic part and
holomorphic part are the same. We then have @xmath . The last assertion
comes from Lemma 4.6.2 .

@xmath

## Chapter 5 Special values of automorphic @xmath-functions: the start
point

### 5.1 Special values of automorphic @xmath-functions for similitude
unitary group

The method in [ Har97 ] should work for a general CM field. We state the
predicted formula in this section.

Let @xmath be a tempered representation of @xmath such that @xmath is
discrete series representation. In particular, the holomorphic
arithmetic automorphic periods @xmath is well defined.

We assume that @xmath is cohomological with type @xmath .

We say @xmath or @xmath is @xmath -regular if @xmath for all @xmath and
all @xmath .

Let @xmath be an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath with infinity type
@xmath . Let @xmath be an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath with
infinity type @xmath .

###### Definition 5.1.1.

We set @xmath and @xmath . We say @xmath is critical for @xmath (c.f. [
Har97 ] ) if for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This definition generalize the condition in Lemma @xmath of the loc.cit
. In the loc.cit , it is assumed that @xmath is self-dual. In general,
the index @xmath in that Lemma should be @xmath .

We assume the following conjecture throughout the text.

###### Conjecture 5.1.1.

Let @xmath be a tempered representation of @xmath such that @xmath is
discrete series representation and cohomological with type @xmath . In
particular, the holomorphic arithmetic automorphic periods @xmath is
well defined. If an integer @xmath is critical for @xmath then a certain
rational differential operator exists and we have

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
        @xmath                     (5.1.1)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Recall that @xmath is a Hecke character of @xmath .

###### Remark 5.1.1.

1.   If @xmath is critical for @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath . We
    see that @xmath .

2.   We didn’t state the CM periods in the above conjecture as in
    Theorem @xmath of [ Har97 ] . Instead, the current form appears in
    middle steps of the proof for Theorem @xmath . We refer to equation
    @xmath or the third line in page @xmath of the loc.cit.

Let us examine the condition in the above conjecture. After simple
calculation, we see that such @xmath always exists. Moreover, if @xmath
, we may have @xmath . In this case, we know @xmath does not vanish.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two rational similitude group associated to two
unitary groups over @xmath with respect to @xmath of dimension @xmath .
We know @xmath is an inner form of @xmath and thus they are isomorphic
to each other at almost all primes.

Let @xmath and @xmath be automorphic representations of @xmath and
@xmath respectively. We say @xmath is nearly equivalent to @xmath if
they are isomorphic to each other at almost all primes. In particular,
they have the same value of partial @xmath -functions.

We then deduce that:

###### Corollary 5.1.1.

The arithmetic automorphic periods @xmath and @xmath depends only on the
nearly equivalence class of @xmath if @xmath is @xmath -regular.

### 5.2 Special values of automorphic @xmath-functions for @xmath

Let @xmath be a cuspidal automorphic representation of @xmath which is
regular conjugate self-dual, cohomological. We assume moreover that
@xmath descends locally if @xmath is even. By Lemma 2.3.1 , there exists
an Hecke character of @xmath , denoted by @xmath , such that @xmath is
@xmath -stable. By Proposition 2.3.2 , we know @xmath descends to @xmath
, an automorphic cohomological representation of @xmath with is tempered
and discrete series at the infinity place. In particular, the arithmetic
automorphic period of @xmath can be defined.

###### Definition 5.2.1.

We fix one Hecke character @xmath as above. We denote its infinity type
by @xmath . We define the arithmetic automorphic period for @xmath by
@xmath .

If @xmath is @xmath -regular then @xmath does not depend on the choice
of @xmath up to elements in @xmath . This is a corollary of Theorem
5.2.1 . Therefore we may define @xmath for any fixed @xmath in this
case.

###### Lemma 5.2.1.

Let @xmath be as in the above theorem.

1.   For all @xmath we have @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is compact then @xmath . In particular, since @xmath is
    conjugate self-dual, we have @xmath in this case.

#### Proof

The first part comes from the first part of Lemma 4.6.2 . It is also a
direct corollary from Theorem 5.2.1 below.

The second one follows from Corollary 4.6.1 . Let @xmath be the
auxiliary Hecke character with infinity type @xmath as above and @xmath
be the representation of @xmath with base change @xmath . We know @xmath
is a representation of @xmath with base change @xmath .

By definition @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath .

@xmath

#### Critical points:

Let @xmath , @xmath be two integers. Let @xmath and @xmath be algebraic
automorphic representations of @xmath and @xmath with pure infinity type
@xmath and @xmath respectively.

We assume the existence of motives @xmath and @xmath associated to
@xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath . We say @xmath is critical for @xmath if
@xmath is critical for @xmath in the sense of Deligne (c.f. [ Del79 ] or
Chapter 6 ).

If @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath and @xmath then critical points always
exist. In this case, we have an explicit description for them (c.f.
@xmath of [ Del79 ] ). More precisely, @xmath is critical if and only if
for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , if @xmath then @xmath , if @xmath
then @xmath . Roughly speaking, @xmath should be closer to the central
point than any of the @xmath .

If @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath and @xmath then there is no critical
points (c.f. Lemma @xmath of [ Har97 ] ).

The following theorem follows directly from Conjecture 5.1.1 .

###### Theorem 5.2.1.

Let us assume that Conjecture 5.1.1 is true. Let @xmath be a regular,
conjugate self-dual, cohomological, cuspidal automorphic representation
of @xmath which descends to @xmath for any @xmath (c.f. Proposition
2.3.1 ). We denote the infinity type of @xmath at @xmath by @xmath .

Let @xmath be an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath with infinity type
@xmath at @xmath . We know that @xmath is a constant independent of
@xmath , denoted by @xmath .

We suppose that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . We define @xmath to
be the map on @xmath which sends @xmath to @xmath .

Let @xmath . If @xmath is critical for @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Lemma 5.2.2.

Let @xmath , @xmath be as in Conjecture 5.1.1 . Let @xmath be a
representation of @xmath with base change @xmath for certain auxiliary
@xmath . We set @xmath . Let @xmath . Then @xmath is critical for @xmath
if and only if @xmath is critical for @xmath .

#### Proof

Since @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath .

We write the cohomology type of @xmath by @xmath . We order @xmath in
decreasing order. The cohomology type of @xmath is then @xmath . This
gives @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath . By the above discussion, @xmath is critical for @xmath if
and only if @xmath if @xmath , @xmath if @xmath . Since @xmath , we
deduce that @xmath is critical for @xmath if and only if @xmath and
@xmath . It is easy to see that these two equations are the same with
those in Definition 5.1.1 .

@xmath

#### Proof of Theorem 5.2.1:

We can always choose @xmath and @xmath as in Conjecture 5.1.1 such that
@xmath .

As @xmath we have @xmath . Moreover, the above lemma implies that @xmath
is critical for @xmath and then Conjecture 5.1.1 applies, namely:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath            
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Recall by definition that @xmath . Moreover, @xmath and then @xmath and
@xmath . We deduce that the right hand side of ( 5.2 ) is equivalent to
@xmath .

We end our proof by the fact that @xmath .

@xmath

### 5.3 Arithmetic automorphic periods for conjugate self-dual
representations

If we consider @xmath , it is not conjugate self-dual but @xmath is. We
call such representations conjugate self-dual . We want to generalize
the definition for arithmetic automorphic period to such
representations.

We firstly generalize the definition for @xmath in Theorem 5.2.1 .

###### Definition-Lemma 5.3.1.

Let @xmath be an algebraic regular representation of @xmath with
infinity type @xmath at @xmath . Let @xmath be am algebraic Hecke
character of @xmath with infinity type @xmath at @xmath . We assume that
@xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

We define @xmath to be the map sending @xmath to @xmath .

It is easy to see that @xmath for any @xmath , @xmath .

We can now define the arithmetic automorphic periods.

###### Definition-Lemma 5.3.2.

We say a @xmath -regular cohomological cuspidal automorphic
representation @xmath of @xmath has definable arithmetic automorphic
periods if there exists an algebraic Hecke character @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath descends to unitary groups of any sign. In particular,
@xmath is conjugate self-dual.

In this case, for any sign @xmath , i.e. a map from @xmath to @xmath ,
we define the arithmetic automorphic period for @xmath by @xmath

This definition does not depend on the choice of @xmath and hence is
compatible with Definition 5.2.1 if @xmath itself is conjugate
self-dual.

#### Proof

The last part comes from Theorem 5.2.1 . In fact, for any @xmath , let
@xmath be an algebraic Hecke character such that @xmath . Since @xmath
is @xmath -regular, we may choose @xmath such that there exists @xmath
critical for @xmath .

Let @xmath be an algebraic Hecke character such that @xmath is conjugate
self-dual, we have @xmath .

Since @xmath , Theorem 5.2.1 gives that:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

with both sides non zero.

In particular, @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which does not depend on the choice of @xmath .

@xmath

###### Remark 5.3.1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -regular cohomological cuspidal automorphic
representation of @xmath which is conjugate self-dual after tensoring an
algebraic Hecke character @xmath . Let @xmath be a prime number inert in
@xmath and split in @xmath . If @xmath descends locally then @xmath has
definable arithmetic automorphic periods. In particular, this holds true
if @xmath is in discrete series.

We read from the above proof that Theorem 5.2.1 can be rewritten as
follows:

###### Theorem 5.3.1.

Let @xmath be an algebraic automorphic representation of @xmath which
has definable arithmetic automorphic periods. Let @xmath be an algebraic
Hecke character as in Definition 5.3.1 . We write @xmath .

Let @xmath be critical for @xmath . If @xmath then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, there always exists such @xmath with both sides non zero.

###### Remark 5.3.2.

The last part comes from the fact that @xmath is @xmath -regular. The
@xmath -regular condition is not needed to define the arithmetic
automorphic periods in general. We assume it here to guarantee that
Definition 5.3.2 does not depend on the choice of @xmath . One can
replace this condition by a weaker one on the non vanishing property for
certain @xmath -functions.

## Chapter 6 Motives and Deligne’s conjecture

### 6.1 Motives over @xmath

In this article, a motive simply means a pure motive for absolute Hodge
cycles in the sense of Deligne [ Del79 ] .

More precisely, a motive over @xmath with coefficients in a number field
@xmath is given by its Betti realization @xmath , its de Rham
realization @xmath and its @xmath -adic realization @xmath for all prime
numbers @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are finite dimensional vector
space over @xmath , @xmath is a finite dimensional vector space over
@xmath endowed with:

-   @xmath as @xmath -module;

-   @xmath as @xmath -module.

From the isomorphisms above, we see that @xmath and this is called the
rank of @xmath . We need moreover:

1.  An @xmath -linear involution (infinite Frobenius) @xmath on @xmath
    and a Hodge decomposition @xmath as @xmath -module such that @xmath
    sends @xmath to @xmath .

    For @xmath an integer, we say @xmath is pure of weight @xmath if
    @xmath for @xmath . Throughout this paper, all the motives are
    assumed to be pure. We assume also that @xmath acts on @xmath as a
    scalar for all @xmath .

    We say @xmath is regular if @xmath for all @xmath .

2.  An @xmath -rational Hodge filtration on @xmath : @xmath which is
    compatible with the Hodge structure on @xmath via @xmath , i.e.,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  A Galois action of @xmath on each @xmath such that @xmath forms a
    compatible system of @xmath -adic representations @xmath . More
    precisely, for each prime number @xmath , let @xmath be the inertia
    subgroup of a decomposition group at @xmath and @xmath the geometric
    Frobenius of this decomposition group. We have that for all @xmath ,
    the polynomial @xmath has coefficients in @xmath and is independent
    of the choice of @xmath . We can then define @xmath for whatever
    @xmath .

For any fixed embedding @xmath , we may consider @xmath as a complex
valued function. We define @xmath . It converges for @xmath sufficiently
large. It is conjectured that the @xmath -function has analytic
continuation and functional equation on the whole complex plane.

We can also define @xmath , the infinite part of the @xmath -function,
as in chapter @xmath of [ Del79 ] .

Deligne has defined the critical values for @xmath as follows:

###### Definition 6.1.1.

We say an integer @xmath is critical for @xmath if neither @xmath nor
@xmath has a pole at @xmath where @xmath is the dual of @xmath . We call
@xmath a critical value of @xmath .

###### Remark 6.1.1.

The notion @xmath implicitly indicates that the infinity type of the
@xmath -function does not depend on the choice of @xmath . More
precisely, for every @xmath , put @xmath .

We then have @xmath . Since @xmath is stable by @xmath , each @xmath
inherits a Hodge decomposition @xmath . We may define @xmath with help
of the Hodge decomposition of @xmath . It is a product of @xmath factors
which depend only on @xmath and the action of @xmath on @xmath . The
latter is independent of @xmath since we have assumed that @xmath acts
on @xmath by a scalar.

It remains to show that @xmath is also independent of @xmath . In fact,
since @xmath is pure, @xmath can be reconstructed from the Hodge
filtration @xmath . Hence @xmath is a free @xmath -module. One can show
@xmath and hence @xmath is independent of @xmath .

If @xmath acts as a scalar at @xmath for every @xmath then Deligne’s
period can be defined. We will only treat the case when @xmath has no
@xmath class. Therefore, Deligne’s period can always be defined.

###### Definition 6.1.2.

Let @xmath be a motive over @xmath of weight @xmath which has no @xmath
class. We denote by @xmath the subspace of @xmath fixed by @xmath . We
denote by @xmath a subspace of @xmath . It is easy to see that @xmath
equals to @xmath .

The comparison isomorphism then induces an isomorphism:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Deligne’s period @xmath is defined to be the determinant of the above
isomorphism with respect to fixed @xmath -bases of @xmath and @xmath .
It is well defined up to @xmath ,

Deligne has conjectured in [ Del79 ] that:

###### Conjecture 6.1.1.

If @xmath is critical for @xmath (see the loc.cit for the definition of
critical), then @xmath .

More generally, tensoring @xmath by the Tate motive @xmath (c.f. [ Del79
] chapter @xmath ), we obtained a new motive @xmath . We remark that
@xmath . The following conjecture is a corollary of the previous
conjecture:

###### Conjecture 6.1.2.

If @xmath is critical for @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath .

Deligne has given a criteria to determine whether @xmath is critical for
@xmath (see @xmath of [ Del79 ] ). We observe that @xmath is critical
for @xmath if and only if @xmath is critical for @xmath . Thus we can
rewrite the criteria of Deligne for arbitrary @xmath . In the case where
@xmath for all @xmath , this criteria becomes rather simple.

We first define the Hodge type of @xmath by the set @xmath consisting of
pairs @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath is pure, there exists an
integer @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . We remark that if
@xmath is an element of @xmath , then @xmath is also contained @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.1.1.

Let @xmath be a pure motive of weight @xmath . We assume that for all
@xmath , @xmath which is equivalent to that @xmath .

Let @xmath be some integers such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for all @xmath .

We set @xmath and @xmath . Denote by @xmath . We have that @xmath is
critical for @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, critical value always exists in the case where @xmath for
all @xmath .

#### Proof

The Hodge type of @xmath is @xmath . By Deligne’s criteria, @xmath is
critical for @xmath if and only if for all @xmath , either @xmath and
@xmath , or @xmath and @xmath . Hence the set of critical values for
@xmath are @xmath .

For @xmath , @xmath and then @xmath . Therefore @xmath . Similarly we
have @xmath .

We deduce, at last, that the set of critical values for @xmath is @xmath
. It is easy to verify that the latter set is non empty.

@xmath

### 6.2 Motivic periods over quadratic imaginary fields

Recall that @xmath is a quadratic imaginary field with fixed embedding
@xmath . Let @xmath be a number field.

Let @xmath be a regular motive over @xmath (with respect to the fixed
embedding) with coefficients in @xmath of dimension @xmath pure of
weight @xmath .

Recall that @xmath , the Betti realization of @xmath , is a finite
dimensional @xmath -vector space. The infinite Frobenius gives an
E-linear isomorphism @xmath

Since @xmath is regular of dimension @xmath , we can write its Hodge
type by @xmath with @xmath . The Betti realization @xmath has a Hodge
decomposition @xmath as @xmath -modules.

We write the Hodge type of @xmath by @xmath with @xmath . Note that the
Hodge numbers @xmath are still in decreasing order. We know @xmath and
@xmath induces @xmath -linear isomorphisms: @xmath .

The De Rham realization @xmath is also a finite dimensional @xmath
-linear space endowed with a Hodge filtration @xmath . The comparison
isomorphism:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

induces compatibility isomorphisms on the Hodge decomposition of @xmath
and the Hodge filtration on @xmath .

More precisely, for each @xmath , @xmath induces an isomorphism:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.2.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

###### Definition 6.2.1.

For any fixed @xmath -bases of @xmath and @xmath , we can extend them to
@xmath bases of @xmath and @xmath respectively. We define @xmath to be
the determinant of @xmath with respect to the fixed @xmath -rational
bases, called the determinant period . It is an element in @xmath well
defined up to multiplication by elements in @xmath .

This is an analogue of Deligne’s period @xmath defined in ( @xmath ) of
[ Del79 ] .

Let us now fix some bases. We take @xmath an @xmath -base of @xmath .
Since @xmath is @xmath -linear on @xmath , we know @xmath forms an
@xmath -base of @xmath .

From ( 6.2.2 ) we see that @xmath induces an isomorphism @xmath for any
@xmath . Here we set @xmath . Let @xmath be a non zero element in @xmath
such that the image of @xmath by the above isomorphism is in @xmath . In
other words, @xmath is equivalent to an element in @xmath modulo @xmath
.

Since @xmath forms an @xmath -base of @xmath , we know @xmath forms an
@xmath -base of @xmath . This base is not rational, i.e. is not
contained in @xmath . But by the above construction, it can pass to a
rational base of @xmath with a unipotent matrix for change of basis.
Since the determinant of a unipotent matrix is always one, we can use
this base for calculating @xmath .

We define @xmath similarly. We will use @xmath as an @xmath base of
@xmath to calculate motivic period henceforth.

###### Definition 6.2.2.

Since @xmath is a rank one free @xmath -module, we know there exists
numbers @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . These numbers
in @xmath are called motivic period and well defined up to @xmath .

Since @xmath , we have @xmath . We deduce that:

###### Lemma 6.2.1.

For all @xmath , @xmath .

We write @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath .

We know @xmath and @xmath . This implies that @xmath .

We denote by @xmath the determinant motive of @xmath as in section
@xmath of [ Har13 ] . We know @xmath is an @xmath -base of @xmath and
@xmath is an @xmath -base of @xmath . Moreover, @xmath .

We deduce that:

###### Lemma 6.2.2.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.3)
     @xmath      (6.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Remark 6.2.1.

The determinant period @xmath is inverse of the period @xmath defined in
[ Har13 ] . In fact, the period @xmath is defined by equation @xmath of
[ Har13 ] , namely, @xmath . Therefore @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.2.3.

For all motive @xmath as above, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### Proof

This follows directly from equation ( 6.3.3 ).

One can also prove this with help of Lemma 6.2.2 . In fact, by Lemma
6.2.2 , we may assume that @xmath . We take @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Then @xmath and @xmath where @xmath .

By definition of motivic period, we have @xmath and then @xmath . It
follows that @xmath as expected.

@xmath

###### Example 6.2.1.

Tate motive

Let @xmath be the extension of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath . It is a
motive with coefficients in @xmath . As in section @xmath of [ Del79 ] ,
@xmath and @xmath is the dual of @xmath with generator @xmath .
Therefore the comparison isomorphism @xmath sends @xmath to @xmath . We
have @xmath .

In general, let @xmath be a motive over @xmath with coefficients in
@xmath . We have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Remark 6.2.2.

All the determinants and the coefficients we consider here are elements
in @xmath .

### 6.3 Deligne’s conjecture for tensor product of motives

Let @xmath and @xmath be two number fields.

Let @xmath be a regular motive over @xmath (with respect to the fixed
embedding) with coefficients in @xmath of dimension @xmath pure of
weight @xmath . Let @xmath be a regular motive over @xmath with
coefficients in @xmath of dimension @xmath pure of weight @xmath .

We denote by @xmath the restriction from @xmath to @xmath of the motive
@xmath . It is a motive of weight @xmath with Betti realization @xmath
and De Rham realization @xmath .

We denote the Hodge type of @xmath by @xmath with @xmath and the Hodge
type of @xmath by @xmath with @xmath . As before, we define @xmath and
@xmath . There are indices for Hodge type of @xmath and @xmath
respectively.

We assume that @xmath has no @xmath class. In other words, @xmath and
then @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath .

As in the above section, we take @xmath an @xmath -base of @xmath and
define @xmath which is an @xmath -base of @xmath . Similarly, we take
@xmath an @xmath -base of @xmath and define @xmath for @xmath .

We also take @xmath , @xmath for @xmath as in previous section and
@xmath , @xmath for @xmath similarly.

Recall the motive periods are complex numbers @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (P)
  -- -------- -- -----

The aim of this section is to calculate the Deligne’s period for @xmath
in terms of motivic periods.

###### Remark 6.3.1.

If we define a paring @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath then
@xmath .

Let @xmath . It is a motive over @xmath . We are going to calculate
@xmath .

We define @xmath and @xmath .

###### Remark 6.3.2.

Keeping in mind that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Proposition 6.3.1.

Let @xmath , @xmath be motive over @xmath with coefficients in @xmath
and @xmath respectively. We assume that @xmath has no @xmath -class. We
then have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.3.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

#### Proof

For simplification of notation, we identify @xmath and @xmath and
similarly, we identify @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with their image under
@xmath in the following.

We fixe bases for @xmath and @xmath now. For @xmath , we know @xmath
forms an @xmath -base. For @xmath , as in the above section, we consider
@xmath as an @xmath base of @xmath which is not rational but can change
to a rational base with a unipotent matrix for change of basis.
Therefore we can use this base to calculate Deligne’s period.

If @xmath then @xmath by ( 6.3.1 ). Along with ( P ), we know that
@xmath . Similarly, @xmath for all @xmath .

Note that @xmath is an endomorphism on @xmath and @xmath . For any
@xmath or @xmath , we write @xmath .

Recall that @xmath . Thus @xmath .

We write @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

We then have

  -- -- -- -------- --
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- --

Up to multiplication by elements in @xmath , the Deligne’s period then
equals the determinant of the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

By the relation P , we have @xmath . We get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, for all @xmath , we obtain,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We then deduce that @xmath .

Thus the Deligne’s period:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Recall that @xmath if and only if @xmath . Therefore the index @xmath
above runs over the pairs in @xmath . We see that @xmath with both
@xmath and @xmath runs over all the pair in @xmath . It is noting but
@xmath .

Let us back to the definition of @xmath . It is the coefficients with
respect to the chosen rational bases of the map @xmath . Therefore
@xmath is the coefficient matrix of the comparison isomorphism @xmath .
We then get @xmath which terminates the proof.

@xmath

### 6.4 Motivic periods for automorphic representations over quadratic
imaginary fields

#### Hecke character case:

Let @xmath be an arbitrary algebraic Hecke character of @xmath with
infinity type @xmath . We assume that @xmath .

Let @xmath be the motive associated to @xmath (c.f. [ Del79 ] section
@xmath .) It is of Hodge type @xmath .

For the motivic period for @xmath , we use @xmath to indicate @xmath for
simplification. For example. @xmath .

On one hand, by Blasius’s result, @xmath if @xmath ; @xmath if @xmath .

On the other hand, by Proposition 6.3.1 , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath .

Let us assume @xmath first. We have @xmath . We apply the above to
@xmath and get @xmath .

Notice that there is there is a rational paring: @xmath where @xmath is
a Dirichlet character over @xmath such that @xmath . We obtain that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

by equation ( 6.2.5 ).

We deduce by Lemma 4.1.2 that

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath , we follow the above procedure and can see easily the last
two formulas are still true.

#### Conjugate self-dual case:

Let @xmath be a regular cuspidal cohomological conjugate self-dual
representation of @xmath . We denote the infinity type of @xmath by
@xmath with @xmath .

We assume that there exists a motive @xmath over @xmath associated to
@xmath with coefficients in @xmath .

We know @xmath is a reguler motive of Hodge type @xmath .

We define @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath .

We define @xmath , @xmath as in the previous sections.

If @xmath is conjugate self-dual, then @xmath is polarized. The
polarization on the De Rham realization induces an @xmath -rational
perfect parings @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We may assume that @xmath by adjusting @xmath with multiplication by
elements in @xmath .

Let @xmath . We write @xmath as we did for @xmath . The motivic period
@xmath then equals @xmath up to multiplication by elements in @xmath .

#### conjugate self-dual case:

In the general case, we write @xmath with @xmath conjugate self-dual and
@xmath be an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath .

We take @xmath as before. Let @xmath be a base of @xmath and @xmath be a
base of @xmath . We know @xmath up to multiplication by elements in
@xmath .

Then @xmath which is equivalent to a rational element in @xmath modulo
@xmath . We have similar properties for @xmath .

Moreover,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The motivic period for @xmath then equals @xmath for @xmath up to
multiplication by elements in @xmath .

### 6.5 Deligne’s conjecture for automorphic pairs over quadratic
imaginary fields

Let @xmath (resp. @xmath ) be a regular cuspidal cohomological conjugate
self-dual representation of @xmath (resp. @xmath ). We denote the
infinity type of @xmath (resp. @xmath ) by @xmath (resp. @xmath ) with
@xmath (resp. @xmath ). We suppose @xmath is regular, i.e. @xmath for
all @xmath .

We assume that there exists a motive @xmath (resp. @xmath ) over @xmath
associated to @xmath (resp. @xmath ) with coefficients in @xmath (resp.
@xmath ).

We know @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is reguler motive of Hodge type @xmath
(resp. @xmath ).

We define @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . We define like this to
guarantee that @xmath and @xmath as in the previous sections. Similarly,
we define @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath .

Proposition 6.3.1 implies that:

###### Proposition 6.5.1.

The Deligne’s period of @xmath satisfies:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the set @xmath .

Recall @xmath and @xmath . We obtain that @xmath .

Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this section, we define @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
Recall @xmath are the lengths of different parts of @xmath separated by
@xmath .

Therefore @xmath , we have @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

We define @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . We define @xmath similarly for
@xmath .

We have obtained that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We define @xmath . In fact, let @xmath be the central character of
@xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We define @xmath similarly. We have @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath ,
we know:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At last, we define for all @xmath that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We define @xmath for @xmath similarly. Comparing ( 6.5.1 ) with ( 6.5.3
) and ( 6.5.5 ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now state Deligne’s conjecture for automorphic pairs:

###### Conjecture 6.5.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two positive integers. Let @xmath and @xmath be
regular cohomological cuspidal representation of @xmath and @xmath
respectively which are conjugate self-dual. We suppose that @xmath is
regular.

We assume that there exists motives @xmath and @xmath over @xmath
associated to @xmath and @xmath respectively.

Let @xmath be critical for @xmath . It is equivalent to saying that
@xmath is critical for @xmath . Deligne’s conjecture predicts that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 6.6 The picture for general CM fields

Let @xmath be a CM field containing @xmath and @xmath be the maximal
totally real subfield of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a motive over @xmath with coefficients in @xmath of
dimension @xmath and pure of weight @xmath .

For each @xmath , we may define the motivic period @xmath and @xmath as
in Section 6.2 . We write the Hodge type of @xmath at @xmath by @xmath .

We take @xmath another motive over @xmath with coefficients in @xmath of
dimension @xmath and pure of weight @xmath . Similarly, we write the
Hodge type of @xmath at @xmath by @xmath .

We assume that @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Define @xmath .

For any CM type @xmath of @xmath , we have @xmath .

The proof of Proposition 6.3.1 can be easily generalized to the CM field
case and we get:

###### Proposition 6.6.1.

Let @xmath , @xmath be motive over @xmath with coefficients in @xmath
and @xmath respectively. We assume that @xmath has no @xmath -class. We
have:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath            
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Let us assume that @xmath and @xmath are motives associated to certain
representations @xmath and @xmath respectively. We still write the
motivic period @xmath as @xmath for simplicity.

We define @xmath . We have (c.f. equation ( 6.5.3 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.6.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.6.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We define @xmath and @xmath as before. We have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, if we take @xmath , Deligne’s conjecture predicts that:

###### Conjecture 6.6.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two positive integers. Let @xmath and @xmath be
regular cohomological cuspidal representation of @xmath and @xmath
respectively which are conjugate self-dual. We suppose that @xmath is
regular.

We assume that there exists motives @xmath and @xmath over @xmath
associated to @xmath and @xmath respectively.

If @xmath is critical for @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 6.7 Motivic periods for Hecke characters over CM fields

Let @xmath be two algebraic Hecke character of @xmath . We assume that
@xmath is critical and then is compatible with a CM type @xmath .
Proposition 6.6.1 can be rewritten as

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath            
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Fix any Hecke character @xmath . We may take @xmath such that @xmath .

Equation ( 6.7 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.7.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand, by Blasius’s result, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath vary. We get for any @xmath type @xmath that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.7.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let @xmath vary now. It is easy to deduce that there exists @xmath , an
@xmath -th root of unity, such that @xmath for all @xmath .

For simplicity, we assume that @xmath contains all @xmath -th roots of
unity then we get @xmath for all @xmath .

We can now calculate @xmath . Let @xmath be in @xmath . We take @xmath
such that @xmath . Equation ( 6.7 ) implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Blasius’s result implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.7.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Along with equation ( 6.7.3 ), we obtain that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.7.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

## Chapter 7 Factorization of arithmetic automorphic periods and a
conjecture

We want to show that the arithmetic automorphic periods can be
factorized as products of local periods over infinite places. We may
assume that @xmath is conjugate self-dual in this Chapter. The essential
conjugate self-dual case then follows by Definition 5.3.2 and the fact
that the CM periods is factorable.

### 7.1 Basic lemmas

Let @xmath , @xmath be two sets and @xmath be a multiplicative abelian
group. We will apply the result of this section to @xmath where @xmath
is a proper number field.

###### Lemma 7.1.1.

Let @xmath be a map from @xmath to @xmath . The following two statements
are equivalent:

1.   There exists two maps @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath for all
    @xmath .

2.   For all @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath .

Moreover, if the above equivalent statements are satisfied, the maps
@xmath and @xmath are unique up to scalars.

#### Proof

The direction that @xmath implies @xmath is trivial. Let us prove the
inverse. We fix any @xmath and define @xmath for all @xmath . We then
fix any @xmath and define @xmath .

For any @xmath and @xmath , Statement @xmath tells us that @xmath .
Therefore @xmath as expected.

@xmath

Let @xmath be a positive integer and @xmath be some sets. Let @xmath be
a map from @xmath to @xmath .

The following corollary can be deduced from the above Lemma by induction
on @xmath .

###### Corollary 7.1.1.

The following two statements are equivalent:

1.   There exists some maps @xmath for @xmath such that @xmath for all
    @xmath , @xmath .

2.   Given any @xmath for each @xmath , we have @xmath for any @xmath .

Moreover, if the above equivalent statements are satisfied then for any
@xmath such that @xmath , we have another factorization @xmath . Each
factorization of @xmath is of the above form.

We fix @xmath for each i and @xmath such that @xmath . If the above
equivalent statements are satisfied then there exists a unique
factorization such that @xmath .

###### Remark 7.1.1.

If @xmath for all @xmath , it is enough to verify the condition in
statement @xmath of the above corollary in the case @xmath for all
@xmath .

In fact, when @xmath for all @xmath , for any @xmath and any @xmath , we
may take @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath .

We fix any @xmath . If statement @xmath is verified when @xmath for all
@xmath then for any @xmath , we have

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

We have assumed @xmath to guarantee that each time we apply the formula
in Statement @xmath , the coefficients satisfy @xmath for all @xmath .

Therefore @xmath if @xmath . If @xmath , this formula is trivially true.

We conclude that we can weaken the condition in Statement @xmath of the
above Corollary to @xmath for all @xmath when @xmath for all @xmath . We
will verify this weaker condition in the application to the
factorization of arithmetic automorphic periods.

### 7.2 Formula for the Whittaker period: even dimensional

Let @xmath be a regular cuspidal representation of @xmath as in Theorem
5.2.1 with infinity type @xmath at @xmath . We may assume that @xmath
for all @xmath .

Recall that we say @xmath is @xmath -regular if @xmath for all @xmath
and @xmath .

For @xmath , let @xmath be an algebraic conjugate self-dual Hecke
character of @xmath with infinity type @xmath at @xmath .

Let us first consider the case @xmath even. In this case, @xmath for all
@xmath and all @xmath . We assume the following hypothesis:

###### Hypothesis 7.2.1.

Even dimensional

For all @xmath , the numbers @xmath lie in the @xmath gaps between
@xmath .

We define @xmath to be the Langlands sum of @xmath , @xmath . It is an
algebraic regular automorphic representation of @xmath . It follows by
the above hypothesis that @xmath is in good position. By Proposition
3.6.1 we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a complex number which depends on @xmath and @xmath .

#### Simplification of @xmath:

Since @xmath is the Langlands sum of @xmath , @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then apply Theorem 5.2.1 to the right hand side and get:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Here we write @xmath for @xmath . In particular, @xmath for @xmath .

Note that @xmath is conjugate self-dual, we have @xmath . We deduce
that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### Calculate @xmath:

By Proposition 3.5.1 , there exists a constant @xmath well defined up to
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By Blasius’s result, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath .

Otherwise we have @xmath and @xmath .

Therefore, we have the Whittaker period @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We know @xmath .

Moreover, by Hypothesis 7.2.1 , we have @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We compare equations ( 7.2.1 ), ( 7.2.2 ), ( 7.2.4 ) and ( 7.2.5 ). If
@xmath , we obtain that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we take @xmath then @xmath We see that @xmath depends only on @xmath
.

We may define:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is well defined up to elements in @xmath .

We deduce that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 7.3 Formula for the Whittaker period: odd dimensional

Let @xmath be an odd positive integer. We keep the notation in the above
section We have @xmath for all @xmath and all @xmath . We assume that:

###### Hypothesis 7.3.1.

Odd dimensional For all @xmath , the numbers @xmath lies in the @xmath
gaps between @xmath .

Recall that @xmath is an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath with
infinity type @xmath at each @xmath such that @xmath . We take @xmath to
be the Langlands sum of @xmath , @xmath . It is an algebraic regular
automorphic representation of @xmath . The conditions of 3.6.1 hold.

We repeat the above process for @xmath and @xmath and get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath with @xmath .

It is easy to verify that Hypothesis 7.2.1 or 7.3.1 is equivalent to the
following hypothesis:

###### Hypothesis 7.3.2.

For all @xmath , the @xmath numbers @xmath , @xmath , run over the
numbers @xmath .

We see @xmath and @xmath .

We then have

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

We verify that the equation ( 7.2.4 ) and ( 7.2.5 ) remain unchanged. We
can see that equation ( 7.2.8 ) still holds here.

Let us start from the numbers @xmath . If we are given some numbers
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , such that Hypothesis 7.3.2 is satisfied, we
can always choose @xmath such that @xmath if @xmath is even, @xmath if
@xmath is odd.

We may then take @xmath , @xmath with infinity type @xmath at @xmath .
Equation ( 7.2.8 ) tells us that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

provided a non vanishing condition of the @xmath -function, for example,
if @xmath is 3-regular.

###### Theorem 7.3.1.

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath be some integers such that Hypothesis 7.3.2
is verified. There exists a complex number @xmath such that if a non
vanishing condition of a global @xmath -function is verified, in
particular, if @xmath is 3-regular, then:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 7.4 Factorization of arithmetic automorphic periods: restricted case

We consider the function @xmath which sends @xmath to @xmath .

The motivic calculation predicts that:

###### Conjecture 7.4.1.

There exists some non zero complex numbers @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath .

In this section, we will prove the above conjecture restricted to @xmath
. More precisely, we will prove that

###### Theorem 7.4.1.

If @xmath and @xmath satisfies a global non vanishing condition, in
particular, if @xmath is @xmath -regular, then there exists some non
zero complex numbers @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath for
all @xmath .

#### Proof

For all @xmath , let @xmath be two numbers in @xmath . We consider
@xmath as two elements in @xmath .

Let @xmath be any element in @xmath . We define @xmath by @xmath ,
@xmath if @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

By Remark 7.1.1 , it is enough to prove that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath for all @xmath , we can always find @xmath such that for
all @xmath , the @xmath numbers @xmath , @xmath run over @xmath . In
other words, Hypothesis 7.3.2 is verified.

By Theorem 7.3.1 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, it is easy to see that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath also
satisfy Hypothesis 7.3.2 . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We conclude at last @xmath and then the above theorem follows.

@xmath

### 7.5 Factorization of arithmetic automorphic periods: complete case

In this section, we will prove Conjecture 7.4.1 when @xmath is regular
enough. More precisely, we have

###### Theorem 7.5.1.

Conjecture 7.4.1 is true if @xmath is @xmath -regular and satisfies a
global non vanishing condition, in particular, if @xmath is @xmath
-regular.

###### Corollary 7.5.1.

If @xmath satisfied the conditions in the above theorem then we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath , Conjecture 7.4.1 is known as multiplicity of CM periods. We
may assume that @xmath . The set @xmath has at least @xmath elements and
then Remark 7.1.1 can apply.

For all @xmath , let @xmath be two numbers in @xmath . We have @xmath .

Let @xmath be any element in @xmath . We define @xmath as in the proof
of Theorem 7.4.1 .

It remains to show that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Let us assume that @xmath is odd at first. Since @xmath is @xmath
-regular, we can find @xmath a conjugate self-dual algebraic Hecke
character of @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath . We denote the infinity
type of @xmath at @xmath by @xmath , @xmath . We remark that @xmath for
all @xmath since @xmath .

Let @xmath be the Langlands sum of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We write
the infinity type of @xmath at @xmath by @xmath with @xmath . The set
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a cuspidalconjugate self-dual cohomological representation
of @xmath with infinity type @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . We
may assume that @xmath has definable arithmetic automorphic periods.

Proposition 3.6.1 is true for @xmath . Namely,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We know

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath or @xmath , by Theorem 5.2.1 and the fact that @xmath is
conjugate self-dual, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Proposition 3.5.1 implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a non zero complex numbers depend on @xmath .

By Theorem 5.2.1 again, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.5.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, @xmath where @xmath if @xmath , @xmath if @xmath .

###### Lemma 7.5.1.

For all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### Proof

By definition we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath and @xmath .

Therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

By definition we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, @xmath . Hence we have @xmath .

It is easy to verify that @xmath . The first statement then follows and
the second is similar to the first one.

@xmath

We deduce that if @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.5.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now let @xmath , @xmath be two conjugate self-dual algebraic Hecke
characters of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

We take @xmath as Langlands sum of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Since
the infinity type of @xmath is the same with @xmath , we can repeat the
above process and we see that equation ( 7.5 ) is true for @xmath .
Observe that most terms remain unchanged.

Comparing equation ( 7.5 ) for @xmath and that for @xmath , we get

  -- -- -- ---------
           (7.5.9)
  -- -- -- ---------

By construction, @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Hence to prove ( 7.5.2
), it is enough to show the left hand side of the above equation is a
number in @xmath .

There are at least two ways to see this. We observe that @xmath , @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . Moreover, these numbers are all in
@xmath . Theorem 7.4.1 gives a factorization of the holomorphic
arithmetic automorphic periods through each place. In particular, it
implies that the left hand side of ( 7.5.9 ) is in @xmath as expected.

One can also show this by taking @xmath an automorphic induction of a
Hecke character. We can then calculate @xmath in terms of CM periods.
Since the factorization of CM periods is clear, we will also get the
expected result.

When @xmath is even, we consider @xmath the Langlands sum of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath where @xmath , @xmath are two suitable algebraic Hecke
characters of @xmath . We follow the above steps and will get the
factorization in this case. We leave the details to the reader and just
remark that as in section 7.3 , some CM periods of @xmath appear but
they will be eliminated at the end.

### 7.6 Specify the factorization

Let us assume that Conjecture 7.4.1 is true. We want to specify one
factorization.

We denote by @xmath the map which sends each @xmath to @xmath . By the
last part of Corollary 7.1.1 , it is enough to choose @xmath which is
@xmath -equivariant such that @xmath . Then there exists a unique
factorization of @xmath such that @xmath . We may then define the local
arithmetic automorphic periods @xmath as an element in @xmath .

In this section, we shall prove @xmath . Therefore, we may take @xmath .

More generally, we will see that:

###### Lemma 7.6.1.

If @xmath is compact then @xmath .

This lemma leads to the following theorem:

###### Theorem 7.6.1.

If Conjecture 7.4.1 is true, in particular, if conditions in Theorem
7.5.1 are satisfied, then there exists some complex numbers @xmath
unique up to multiplication by elements in @xmath such that the
following two conditions are satisfied:

1.  @xmath for all @xmath ,

2.   and @xmath

where @xmath is the central character of @xmath .

Moreover, we know @xmath or equivalently @xmath .

#### Proof of Lemma 7.6.1:

Recall that @xmath since @xmath is compact.

Let @xmath be the center of @xmath . We have @xmath . We define a
homomorphism @xmath by sending @xmath to @xmath .

Since @xmath is compact, we see that @xmath is the composition of @xmath
and the embedding @xmath . We get an inclusion of Shimura varieties:
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a Hecke character of @xmath such that @xmath descends to
@xmath , a representation of @xmath , as before. We write @xmath the
cohomology type of @xmath . We define @xmath . Since @xmath is
irreducible, it acts as scalars when restrict to @xmath . This gives
@xmath , a one dimensional representation of @xmath which is cohomology
of type @xmath . We denote by @xmath the character of @xmath with
highest weight @xmath .

The automorphic vector bundle @xmath pulls back to the automorphic
vector bundle @xmath (see [ HK91 ] for notation) on @xmath .

Let @xmath be an element in @xmath . We fix a non zero @xmath -rational
element in @xmath and then we can lift @xmath to @xmath , an automorphic
form on @xmath .

There is an isomorphism @xmath (c.f. [ HK91 ] ). We send @xmath to the
element in @xmath associated to @xmath .

We then obtain rational morphisms

  -- -- -------- -- -- ---------
        @xmath         (7.6.1)
        @xmath         (7.6.2)
  -- -- -------- -- -- ---------

These morphisms are moreover isomorphisms. In fact, since both sides are
one dimensional, it is enough to show the above morphisms are injective.
Indeed, if @xmath , a lifting of an element in @xmath , vanishes at the
center, in particular, it vanishes at the identity. Hence it vanishes at
@xmath since it is an automorphic form. We observe that @xmath is dense
in @xmath . We know @xmath as expected.

We are going to calculate the arithmetic automorphic period. Let @xmath
be rational. We take a rational element @xmath and lift it to an
automorphic form @xmath . We have @xmath by Lemma 4.6.1 .

For the torus, by Remark 4.1.1 , we know

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath . Therefore @xmath . We then get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.6.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now set @xmath . We have @xmath . In particular, @xmath .

We define @xmath to be the composition of @xmath and the natural
embedding @xmath . We know @xmath sends @xmath to @xmath . The embedding
@xmath is a map between Shimura datum.

We observe that @xmath is a Hecke character on @xmath . Its restriction
to @xmath is just @xmath . By Proposition 4.1.1 , we have @xmath .

By the definition of CM period and Proposition 4.1.2 , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.6.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath is conjugate self-dual, we have @xmath .

By equation ( 7.6.3 ), we get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.6.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that by definition @xmath , we get finally

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last formula comes from the fact that @xmath is conjugate self-dual.

@xmath

We recall that the arithmetic automorphic periods can be defined for
essential conjugate self-dual representations. More precisely, let
@xmath be conjugate self-dual as in Theorem 7.6.1 , let @xmath be an
algebraic Hecke character. By Definition 5.3.2 , we have defined @xmath
as @xmath . As we showed above that @xmath , it is natural to define:

###### Definition 7.6.1.

We define local arithmetic automorphic periods for conjugate self-dual
representations by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.6.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Remark 7.6.1.

If @xmath , we see that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore, if @xmath has definable arithmetic automorphic periods and
regular enough, we still have

1.  @xmath for all @xmath ,

2.   and @xmath .

Moreover, these two properties determine the local periods.

###### Remark 7.6.2.

If @xmath and @xmath is a Hecke character, we obtain that: @xmath and
similarly @xmath

## Chapter 8 Functoriality of arithmetic automorphic periods

### 8.1 Period relations for automorphic inductions: settings

Let @xmath be a CM field containing @xmath as before.

Let @xmath be a cyclic extension of CM fields of degree @xmath .

Let @xmath be a cuspidal representation of @xmath .

By Theorem @xmath of [ AC89 ] , there exists @xmath , an automorphic
representation of @xmath which lifts @xmath . We assume moreover that
@xmath for all @xmath non trivial. We can read from the proof of Theorem
@xmath in the loc.cit that @xmath is then cuspidal.

We want to compare the arithmetic automorphic periods of @xmath and
@xmath if they are defined. For this purpose, we assume that @xmath has
definable arithmetic automorphic periods as in Definition 5.3.2 . In
other words, @xmath is @xmath -regular, cohomological and descends to
unitary groups of any sign after tensoring by an algebraic Hecke
character.

We write the infinity type of @xmath as @xmath at @xmath . We remark
that @xmath .

The restriction of embeddings gives a map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , the infinity type of @xmath at @xmath is @xmath . We assume
in this chapter that for any @xmath the @xmath numbers @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , are different. We assume moreover their differences are at
least @xmath . Hence @xmath is also @xmath -regular.

If @xmath is odd or @xmath is even, we know @xmath is algebraic and then
cohomological. We write @xmath in this case.

If @xmath is even and @xmath is odd, @xmath is no longer algebraic. We
define @xmath . It is then a cuspidal cohomological representation of
@xmath . It is conjugate self-dual after tensoring by an algebraic Hecke
character. To see this, we take @xmath an algebraic Hecke character of
@xmath with infinity type @xmath at each infinity place such that @xmath
. We remark that the Hecke character @xmath is conjugate self-dual.

We also assume that @xmath descends to unitary groups of any sign after
tensoring an algebraic Hecke character. Therefore, @xmath has definable
arithmetic automorphic periods.

Let @xmath be a map from @xmath to the set @xmath . We want to relate
@xmath to arithmetic automorphic periods of @xmath in the following
sections.

We take @xmath an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath such that @xmath .
We take @xmath as in the last part Theorem 5.3.1 . We assume that
Conjecture 5.1.1 is true and we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with both sides non zero.

### 8.2 Relations of global periods for automorphic inductions

#### The case @xmath is odd or @xmath is even:

In this case, @xmath is the automorphic induction of @xmath .

We know @xmath . It is easy to see that @xmath is also critical for
@xmath . We can apply Theorem 5.3.1 to @xmath .

We write @xmath and get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We first calculate @xmath . We write the infinity type of @xmath at
@xmath by @xmath .

For @xmath , the infinity type of @xmath at @xmath is then @xmath .

We have by definition that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that the infinity type of @xmath at @xmath is @xmath . We have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We observe that @xmath is uniquely determined by @xmath . More
precisely, it is easy to show that:

###### Lemma 8.2.1.

The integer @xmath is the number of elements in @xmath which is one of
the @xmath -th smallest numbers in the set @xmath where @xmath .

Moreover, it is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By Proposition 4.1.2 , we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
                 (8.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparing the above two equations with equations ( 8.1.1 ) and ( 8.2.1
), we deduce that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### The case @xmath is even and @xmath is odd:

In this case @xmath is no longer algebraic and we consider @xmath .

We know @xmath .

As in the previous case, we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We conclude that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 8.3 Relations of local periods for automorphic inductions

Recall that the arithmetic automorphic periods admit a factorization
(c.f. Theorem 7.6.1 ) @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will discuss the functoriality of local periods in this section.

Let @xmath be an element of @xmath .

It is easy to see from Lemma 8.2.1 or equation ( 8.2.4 ) that if @xmath
then @xmath for all @xmath over @xmath .

Fix any @xmath and an integer @xmath . We define @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath for @xmath .

#### The case @xmath is odd or @xmath is even:

Recall @xmath in this case. We get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath , we have @xmath . Similarly, we have @xmath .

Let @xmath be a generator of @xmath . From the construction in [ Clo90 ]
we know @xmath has base change @xmath . In particular, we know @xmath .

We fix any @xmath over @xmath . We know

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Equation ( 8.3.2 ) then gives:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can read from Lemma 8.2.1 that @xmath depends only on @xmath .

It is natural to define:

###### Definition 8.3.1.

Let @xmath be any integer. Let @xmath . For any @xmath over @xmath , we
define @xmath to be the number of elements in @xmath which is one of the
@xmath -th smallest numbers in the set @xmath .

Equation ( 8.3.3 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### The case @xmath is even and @xmath is odd:

In this case, we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We repeat the above procedure and get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We conclude the functoriality of arithmetic automorphic periods for
automorphic induction:

###### Theorem 8.3.1.

Let @xmath be a CM field of degree @xmath over @xmath .

Let @xmath be a cyclic extension of CM fields of degree @xmath and
@xmath be a cuspidal representation of @xmath which has definable
arithmetic automorphic periods.

We assume that @xmath for all @xmath non trivial. We define @xmath to be
the automorphic induction of @xmath . It is a cuspidal representation of
@xmath .

We assume that @xmath (resp. @xmath ) also has definable arithmetic
automorphic periods if @xmath is odd or @xmath is even (resp. if @xmath
is even and @xmath is odd) (c.f. Section 8.1 ).

Let @xmath be any map from @xmath to @xmath . Let @xmath be the map from
@xmath to @xmath determined by @xmath and @xmath as in Lemma 8.2.1 . Or
locally let @xmath be an integer and @xmath be as in Definition 8.3.1 .

If @xmath is odd or @xmath is even, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Otherwise we have:

  -- -- -- -------- --
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- --

### 8.4 Period relations under Galois action

We are going to prove period relations for base change. Before that, we
first prove that arithmetic periods are equivariant under Galois
actions.

More precisely, let @xmath be a CM field and @xmath be a cuspidal
representation of @xmath which has definable arithmetic automorphic
periods.

We fix any @xmath and take @xmath , an algebraic Hecke character of
@xmath such that @xmath . Assuming Conjecture 5.1.1 and Theorem 5.2.1
gives:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for a critical point @xmath with both sides non zero.

Let @xmath . We observe that @xmath .

We then get:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

It is easy to see that @xmath .

Moreover, by Proposition 4.1.2 we have @xmath .

We obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.4.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Similarly, @xmath .

We write @xmath . Then @xmath . Compare with equation ( 8.4.1 ) and
equation ( 8.4 ), we deduce that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can moreover get relations of local periods. Let us fix @xmath and
@xmath an integer.

We set @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
.

By the results in Section 7.6 , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and similarly:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again by Proposition 4.1.2 , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.4.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

We conclude that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Theorem 8.4.1.

Let @xmath be a CM field and @xmath be a cuspidal representation of
@xmath which has definable arithmetic automorphic periods. We assume
that Conjecture 5.1.1 is true. Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be an
integer. We have:

  -- -- -- -------- -- ----------
           @xmath      (8.4.9)
           @xmath      (8.4.10)
  -- -- -- -------- -- ----------

### 8.5 Relations of global periods for base change

Let @xmath a cyclic extension of CM fields of degree @xmath as before.
Let @xmath be a cuspidal representation of @xmath . The strong base
change of @xmath exists. We denote it by @xmath or @xmath .

By the class field theory, we have @xmath . Since @xmath is cyclic, its
dual is also cyclic. We fix any generator of @xmath which gives @xmath a
Hecke character of @xmath .

We remark that @xmath is an order @xmath Hecke character. In particular
it has trivial infinity type. It is also unitary and thus conjugate
self-dual.

We assume that @xmath for all @xmath . Then @xmath is cuspidal (Théorèm
@xmath of [ AC89 ] ). We want to compare the arithmetic automorphic
periods of @xmath to those of @xmath if they are defined.

We assume that @xmath has definable arithmetic automorphic periods. In
other words, it is @xmath -regular, cohomological and descends to
unitary groups of any sign after tensoring an algebraic Hecke character.
We know @xmath is also @xmath -regular and cohomological. We assume that
@xmath also descends to unitary groups of any sign after tensoring an
algebraic Hecke character.

Let @xmath be any map from @xmath to the set @xmath .

We take @xmath an algebraic Hecke character of @xmath with @xmath such
that @xmath satisfies conditions in Theorem 5.3.1 . Let @xmath be the
base change of @xmath to @xmath .

There is a relation between the @xmath -function of @xmath and that of
@xmath , namely:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We write @xmath . For any @xmath and any @xmath with @xmath , it is easy
to see that @xmath . In other words, @xmath is the composition of @xmath
and @xmath .

We assume that Conjecture 5.1.1 is true. We can interpret both sides in
terms of arithmetic automorphic periods and CM periods and then deduce
period relations.

More precisely, for a certain critical point @xmath we have:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (8.5.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

with both sides non zero.

Since @xmath , we have @xmath . Moreover, @xmath if @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand, we apply Theorem 5.3.1 to @xmath and get:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Comparing equation ( 8.5.1 ), ( 8.5.3 ) and ( 8.5 ), we get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath is odd, we have @xmath . Otherwise we assume that @xmath for
simplicity.

We conclude that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.5.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 8.6 Relations of local periods for base change

There are relations between local periods of @xmath and those of @xmath
.

Let @xmath be an integer. We fix @xmath . We take @xmath to be the map
which sends @xmath to @xmath and @xmath to @xmath . Equation ( 8.5.7 )
then becomes:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.6.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that for @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.6.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

We deduce that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.6.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We observe that @xmath is @xmath -invariant. The local periods are then
@xmath -invariant.

Indeed, for any @xmath , we have @xmath . Theorem 8.4.10 implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.6.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that @xmath acts faithfully and transitively on the set @xmath .
We fix any @xmath and then:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.6.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparing equation ( 8.6.3 ) and equation ( 8.6.5 ), we conclude that
for any @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.6.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consequently, there exists an algebraic number @xmath with @xmath such
that @xmath

It is expected that @xmath is equivariant under Galois action. But we
don’t know how to prove it at this moment.

We summarize the above results on period relations for base change as
follows.

###### Theorem 8.6.1.

Let @xmath be a cyclic extension of CM fields of degree @xmath . Let
@xmath be a cuspidal representation of @xmath . We denote by @xmath its
strong base change to @xmath .

We assume that @xmath for all @xmath and then @xmath is cuspidal
(Théorèm @xmath of [ AC89 ] ). We assume that both @xmath and @xmath
have definable arithmetic automorphic periods.

Let @xmath be any map from @xmath to @xmath . We write @xmath the
composition of @xmath and @xmath .

We then have:

  -- -- -- -------- -- ---------
           @xmath      (8.6.7)
           @xmath      (8.6.8)
  -- -- -- -------- -- ---------

Consequently, we know

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.6.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an algebraic number whose @xmath -th power is in @xmath
.

## Chapter 9 An automorphic version of Deligne’s conjecture

### 9.1 A conjecture

###### Conjecture 9.1.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two positive integers. Let @xmath and @xmath be
cuspidal representations of @xmath and @xmath respectively which have
definable arithmetic automorphic periods.

Let @xmath be critical for @xmath . We predict that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 9.1.1.

(Known cases for the above conjecture:)

Let @xmath be the quadratic imaginary field. Then the above conjecture
is already known in the following cases:

1.  @xmath and @xmath is strictly bigger than the central value. This is
    the main theorem in [ Har97 ] . We keep the notation as in Therem
    5.3.1 . Let @xmath . It is easy to verify that @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath unless @xmath and @xmath .

    Recall that @xmath and @xmath . The formula in the above conjecture
    is the same with the formula in Theorem 5.3.1 .

2.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath conjugate self-dual in good position and
    @xmath or @xmath along with a non vanishing condition.

    In this case, we have @xmath . Equivalently we have @xmath for all
    @xmath ; @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath or @xmath . Recall
    that @xmath . Above conjecture is equivalent to that:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    This is Theorem @xmath of [ GH15 ] and Theorem @xmath of [ LIN15 ] .

The shall prove the following special cases of the above conjecture in
the next chapters:

###### Theorem 9.1.1.

We assume that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -regular if @xmath to
guarantee the factorization of the arithmetic automorphic periods. We
know Conjecture 9.1.1 is true for the following cases:

1.  @xmath , the pair @xmath is in good position (see Definition 1.2.2
    ), @xmath is strictly bigger than the central value, or @xmath
    equals to the central value along with a non vanishing condition and
    moreover

    1.   [label=(i)]

    2.  @xmath , @xmath conjugate self-dual if @xmath ,

    3.  @xmath conjugate self-dual, @xmath conjugate self-dual if @xmath
        .

2.   Any @xmath , @xmath and any position for @xmath , @xmath , the pair
    @xmath is very regular ( 11.1.1 ) and moreover:

    1.   [label=(i)]

    2.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath conjugate self-dual if @xmath ;

    3.  @xmath , @xmath , @xmath conjugate self-dual if @xmath .

### 9.2 Compatibility with Deligne’s conjecture over quadratic imaginary
fields

One see easily that Conjecture 9.1.1 is formally compatible with
Conjecture 6.5.1 , Deligne’s conjecture for automorphic pairs. For this,
it is enough to compare the arithmetic automorphic period @xmath with
the motivic period @xmath where @xmath is an conjugate self-dual
representation.

When @xmath is not @xmath , this is difficult since we don’t have
geometric meanings for our local periods @xmath . But for the case when
@xmath , this is already discussed in Section @xmath of [ GH15 ] . We
now give a detailed explanation here.

First, let @xmath be conjugate self-dual. In the construction of the
arithmetic automorphic period, we have chosen @xmath , an algebraic
Hecke character of @xmath , such that @xmath descends to a similitude
unitary group. It is easy to verify that @xmath (c.f. Theorem @xmath or
@xmath of [ HT01 ] ). The arithmetic automorphic period is defined to be
the Petterson inner product of a rational class in the bottom stage of
the Hodge filtration of a cohomology space related to @xmath . In other
words, @xmath is related to @xmath .

By Lemma 6.2.1 we have @xmath for all @xmath .

By equation ( 6.4.3 ), we see @xmath . We deduce that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall equation ( 6.5.6 ), the right hand side of the above formula is
just @xmath as expected.

###### Remark 9.2.1.

We can also deduce the above result without passing to the motivic
period of @xmath . In fact, we can also consider @xmath as Petterson
inner product of a rational class in the bottom degree of a cohomology
space related to @xmath . It should be related to @xmath .

Lemma 6.2.3 implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can deduce the comparison by the fact that @xmath .

For the general cases, we write @xmath with @xmath conjugate self-dual.
For the automorphic part, we see from Definition-Lemma ( 5.3.2 ) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the motivic part, we have @xmath and @xmath . Therefore @xmath .

By ( 6.4.3 ) again, we see at first that @xmath and @xmath . We obtain
finally:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have already related @xmath to @xmath . The relation for the general
cases then comes.

###### Remark 9.2.2.

We believe that the above comparison also works over general CM fields.
However, the local periods @xmath are not defined geometrically. It is
expected that their geometric meaning can be obtained by comparing
special values of @xmath -functions.

### 9.3 Simplify archimedean factors

We observe that in Conjecture 9.1.1 the right hand side only concerns
arithmetic automorphic periods and a power of @xmath . Sometimes we will
get a formula of @xmath which also involves archimedean factors as in
Theorem @xmath of [ GH15 ] . We need to show that the contribution of
these archimedean factors is equivalent to a power of @xmath :

###### Proposition 9.3.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Conjecture 9.1.1 . We assume that either
the critical value @xmath is strictly bigger then the central value,
either it is equal to the central value along with a nonvanishing
condition on a certain @xmath -function that we shall see in the proof.

If there exists an archimedean factor @xmath depending only on @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath            
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

then we have @xmath . In particular, Conjecture 9.1.1 then follows.

Sometimes it is possible to calculate the archimedean factors directly.

A simpler way is to take @xmath and @xmath as representations induced
from Hecke characters. Then we may write the left hand side of equation
( 9.3.1 ) in terms of a power of @xmath and products of CM periods. For
the right hand side, note that we have already related the arithmetic
automorphic periods of a representation induced from Hecke characters
and the CM periods by Theorem 8.3.1 .

We shall deduce that the archimedean factor @xmath is equivalent to a
power of @xmath if @xmath and @xmath are induced from Hecke characters.
But such representations can have any infinity type. The only non
trivial point is that if @xmath is conjugate self-dual then we may take
a conjugate self-dual Hecke character such that its automorphic
induction has the same infinity type as @xmath . We prove this in the
lemma below. Hence the above proposition is true for any @xmath and
@xmath . This is the idea of the proof of Theorem @xmath in [ LIN15 ] .

###### Lemma 9.3.1.

Let @xmath be a cyclic extension of CM fields of degree @xmath . We
assume that @xmath is odd. If @xmath is a conjugate self-dual
representation of @xmath then there exists @xmath a conjugate self-dual
algebraic Hecke character of @xmath such that @xmath .

#### Proof

We denote by @xmath the maximal totally real subfield of @xmath .

We may take an algebraic Hecke character @xmath of @xmath such that
@xmath (c.f. Lemma @xmath and paragraphs before Lemma @xmath in [ CHT08
] ).

Since @xmath is conjugate self-dual, we see that @xmath is conjugate
self-dual. In particular, @xmath is trivial at infinity places. By Lemma
@xmath of [ CHT08 ] , we may find @xmath an algebraic Hecke character of
@xmath with trivial infinity type such that @xmath . Put @xmath . It is
then a conjugate self-dual Hecke character with @xmath .

@xmath

We now give the details of the proof for Proposition 9.3.1 .

#### Proof

For simplicity, we assume that both @xmath and @xmath are odd. For
general case, we have to twist @xmath or @xmath by @xmath as before. The
following proof goes through as well.

We take @xmath (resp. @xmath ) a CM field which is a cyclic extension of
@xmath of degree @xmath (resp. @xmath ). We assume that @xmath and
@xmath are linearly independent over @xmath . Let @xmath . It is then a
CM field of degree @xmath over @xmath .

We may take @xmath (resp. @xmath ) an algebraic Hecke character of
@xmath such that @xmath (resp. @xmath ) where @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is
the automorphic induction of @xmath (resp. @xmath ) from @xmath (resp.
@xmath ) to @xmath . Moreover, we may assume that @xmath and @xmath are
cuspidal and have definable arithmetic automorphic periods.

For @xmath , we write @xmath for the elements in @xmath above @xmath and
@xmath for the elements in @xmath above @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath .
We write @xmath for the only element in @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath .

We write @xmath for the infinity type of @xmath at @xmath and @xmath for
the infinity type of @xmath at @xmath .

Then @xmath has infinity type @xmath and @xmath has infinity type @xmath
at @xmath .

By equation ( 9.3.1 ), we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.3.2)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

On one hand, we have @xmath .

We observe that the infinity type of @xmath at @xmath is @xmath .

We denote @xmath .

We write @xmath . By Blasius’s result,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We need to assume that we may choose @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath
. When @xmath is strictly bigger then the central value, this is always
true. When @xmath is equal to the central value, we assume this as a
hypothesis.

Recall that the CM periods are multiplicative and functorial for base
change. Hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (9.3.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

We have deduced that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.3.5)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath .

On the other hand, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath if @xmath is in the @xmath -th smallest numbers in the set
@xmath and @xmath otherwise by Definition 8.3.1 .

We order @xmath and @xmath in decreasing order. We have @xmath if and
only if @xmath . We get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recall that @xmath and @xmath by Remark 7.6.2 . We obtain that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparing equations ( 9.3.2 ), ( 9.3.5 ) and ( 9.3.8 ), we observe that
it remains to show:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (9.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since @xmath by Lemma 1.2.1 . We see the above two equations are
equivalent. We now prove the first one.

Recall by definition that @xmath is the length of the @xmath -th part of
the sequence @xmath split by the numbers @xmath .

Therefore, @xmath . This is exactly @xmath as expected.

@xmath

###### Remark 9.3.1.

Roughly speaking, the above proposition tells us that if we have a
formula like equation ( 9.3.1 ) then the archimedean factor must be
equivalent to a power of @xmath . If one can show that the CM periods
@xmath , @xmath is algebraically independent, we can moreover prove that
the power of arithmetic automorphic periods must be the split indices.

More precisely, the following statement is true:

If there exists an archimedean factor @xmath depending only on @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath and integers @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath depending on @xmath , @xmath such that

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath            
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

then we have @xmath and @xmath provided that the local CM periods are
algebraically independent. In particular, Conjecture 9.1.1 then follows.

The proof of the above statement is the same as proof for Proposition
9.3.1 . We remark that the indices for the arithmetic automorphic
periods are determined by equation ( 9.3.9 ).

This statement is very powerful. Sometimes it is easy to show that there
exists a formula in the form of equation ( 9.3.1 ) but difficult to
calculate the exact indices. In fact, one can explain in several lines
that there exists such formulas for the cases in Theorem 9.1.1 . But we
have devoted the next two whole chapters to calculate the precise
indices.

Unfortunately we don’t know how to prove the algebraically independency
of the CM periods. So the calculation in the next two chapters are
inevitable at the moment.

### 9.4 More discussions on the archimedean factors

As discussed in the previous section, one can leave the archimedean
factors to the end of the proof and show that they contribute as a power
of @xmath .

In our situation, we happen to be able to calculate the product of the
archimedean factors directly. Let us first recall some archimedean
factors.

Let @xmath (resp. @xmath ) be an algebraic regular generic
representation of @xmath (resp. @xmath )). We have defined:

1.  @xmath which appears in the calculation of Whittaker period (c.f.
    Section @xmath ).

2.  @xmath which appears in the calculation of critical values for
    automorphic representations of @xmath (c.f. Proposition 3.6.1 ).

3.  @xmath defined in equation ( 7.2.7 ) by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Lemma 9.4.1.

The archimedean factors satisfy:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

We now take @xmath and @xmath to be cuspidal conjugate self-dual
representations of @xmath and @xmath respectively such that @xmath is in
good position. We assume that they all have definable arithmetic
automorphic periods.

By Proposition 3.6.1 , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for some critical @xmath .

Recall from equation ( 7.5.1 ) that:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have a similar formula for @xmath since @xmath is also cuspidal. We
then deduce that:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Here we have used the fact that @xmath by Theorem 7.6.1 .

Proposition 9.3.1 then gives the following result on the archimedean
factors:

###### Proposition 9.4.1.

The archimedean factors satisfy:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

provided @xmath or @xmath along with a non vanishing condition for the
central value of a certain @xmath -function.

This is Theorem @xmath of [ LIN15 ] when @xmath is a quadratic imaginary
field.

Comparing Lemma 9.4.1 and Proposition 9.4.1 , we change the notation
@xmath to @xmath and deduce that:

###### Corollary 9.4.1.

We write @xmath . For @xmath an algebraic and generic representation of
@xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

provided @xmath or @xmath along with a non vanishing condition for the
central value of a certain @xmath -function.

In the following, we assume that @xmath , or @xmath along with a non
vanishing condition for @xmath .

### 9.5 From quadratic imaginary fields to general CM fields

We shall prove Theorem 9.1.1 in the following two chapters over
quadratic imaginary field. The proof only requires little change for
general CM fields. This is because the automorphic arithmetic periods
and the CM periods are all factorable. We now explain the details for
the first case of Theorem 9.1.1 in the current section.

Let @xmath and @xmath be cuspidal conjugate self-dual representations of
@xmath and @xmath which has definable arithmetic automorphic periods. We
assume that @xmath is in good position and both @xmath and @xmath are
regular enough. For simplicity, we also assume that @xmath is even and
@xmath is odd.

Let @xmath . We take some conjugate self-dual Hecke characters @xmath
such that if we write @xmath for the Langlands sum of @xmath and @xmath
then @xmath is in good position. By the assumption on the parity of
@xmath and @xmath we know that @xmath is algebraic.

We may assume that for each @xmath , the first index of the infinity
type of @xmath is in decreasing order. Therefore, @xmath is determined
by the infinity type of @xmath and @xmath at @xmath .

As explained in the introduction, the proof requires three main
ingredients.

Ingredient A: Theorem 5.3.1 says that for certain Hecke characters
@xmath and critical points @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath depends only the infinity type of @xmath and @xmath at
@xmath .

By Theorem 7.6.1 , we may rewrite the above equation as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Ingredient B: Proposition 3.6.1 says that if @xmath and @xmath is
critical for @xmath then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Whittaker periods.

Ingredient C : Corollary 3.5.1 implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, by Corollary 7.5.1 , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.5.5)
     @xmath      (9.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On one hand, note that @xmath . We replace @xmath by @xmath in equation
( 9.5.2 ) and will get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (9.5.7)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand, apply equations ( 9.5.4 ), ( 9.5.5 ) and ( 9.5.6 ) to
the right hand side of equation ( 9.5.3 ), we get:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath            
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a non zero complex number depending only on @xmath and
the infinity type.

We apply equation ( 9.5.2 ) to @xmath and Blasius’s result to @xmath ,
we get:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath            
  -- -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is an archimedean factor as before, @xmath and @xmath are
two integers which depend only on the infinity type of @xmath and @xmath
at @xmath .

The first thing we need to show is that @xmath and @xmath . Since we
have ordered the first index of the infinity type of @xmath at @xmath in
decreasing order, we know that both sides only concern the infinity type
of @xmath and @xmath at the fixed place @xmath . So the proof is the
same with the quadratic imaginary case.

We then deduce a formula in the following form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (9.5.10)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are integers which depend only on @xmath ,
@xmath and the infinity type of @xmath and @xmath at @xmath .

If we know the CM periods are algebraically independent then we can
finish the proof by Remark 9.3.1 . Unfortunately this is hard to prove
and hence we need to calculate @xmath and @xmath explicitly. Again,
since they only concern infinity type of @xmath and @xmath at @xmath ,
we may repeat our calculation for the quadratic imaginary field case for
the fixed place @xmath . We shall see that the indices are just the
split indices.

Finally we may show that the archimedean factor @xmath by Proposition
9.3.1 and complete the proof.

## Chapter 10 Special values of @xmath-functions for automorphic pairs
over quadratic imaginary fields

### 10.1 Settings, the simplest case

In the current and the following chapters, let @xmath and @xmath be
conjugate self-dual cuspidal representations of @xmath and @xmath
respectively which have definable arithmetic automorphic periods. We
will interpret the critical values for @xmath in terms of arithmetic
automorphic periods when @xmath is in good position (see Definition
1.2.2 ).

We write @xmath for the infinity type of @xmath and @xmath for the
infinity type of @xmath . We may order @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath .

We assume @xmath is even and @xmath is odd at first. Then the numbers
@xmath are half integers and the numbers @xmath are integers.

We assume the pair @xmath is in good position , namely, each @xmath are
included in one of the intervals @xmath , @xmath and each such interval
contains at most one @xmath .

Let @xmath be the integers such that @xmath for all @xmath . More
precisely, we have:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath                  (10.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------

It is easy to see:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (10.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (10.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We put @xmath . Let @xmath be conjugate self-dual algebraic Hecke
characters of @xmath of infinity type @xmath respectively. We assume
that @xmath lie in different intervals @xmath which do not contain any
of @xmath .

More precisely, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        (10.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and the above @xmath numbers lie in different gaps between the @xmath
numbers @xmath . Note that in this case, the @xmath numbers above are
integers and the @xmath are half integers.

Let @xmath be the Langlands sum of @xmath and @xmath . It is a generic
cohomological conjugate self-dual automorphic representation of @xmath .

Let @xmath be an integer. By Proposition 3.6.1 , we know that if @xmath
is critical for @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (10.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We shall simplify both sides of the above formula. We first calculate
the left hand side.

We know @xmath .

For each @xmath with @xmath , we apply Theorem 5.2.1 to @xmath and get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (10.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By equation ( 10.1 ), we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Shortly, @xmath are the numbers in @xmath .

We then deduce that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the compositum of @xmath , @xmath .

### 10.2 Calculate the Whittaker period, the simplest case

By Corollary 3.5.1 , we know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath since @xmath is conjugate self-dual.

#### Calculate @xmath:

For @xmath , applying Theorem 5.2.1 to @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . The last step is due to the fact that @xmath .

It is easy to verify that @xmath is critical for @xmath by considering
the Hodge type and the original definition by Deligne. Recall that
@xmath is of infinity type @xmath and @xmath is of infinity type @xmath
.

Compare with ( 10.1.6 ), we see that @xmath . Then @xmath

Therefore, we have deduced that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### Calculate @xmath:

For @xmath , since @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Blasius’s result.

Therefore, we know that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (10.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since @xmath , we get finally

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 10.3 Calculate the arithmetic automorphic periods and conclude, the
simplest case

Since @xmath and @xmath are cuspidal, we may apply Corollary 7.5.1 and
get:

  -- -- -- -------- -- ----------
           @xmath      (10.3.1)
           @xmath      (10.3.2)
  -- -- -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the right hand side of equation ( 10.1.5 )

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

#### Archimedean factors:

Recall that by lemma 9.4.1 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By corollary 9.4.1 , we know

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath and hence @xmath , we obtain that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### Arithmetic automorphic periods:

At last, we have to determine the value of @xmath for @xmath .

For fixed @xmath , from the equation ( 10.1 ), we see that the number of
@xmath such that @xmath is @xmath , the number of @xmath such that
@xmath is @xmath , and the number of @xmath such that @xmath is @xmath .

For example, we see @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath .

We then deduce that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

by the fact that @xmath and equation ( 10.1 ).

Finally, we get @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### Final conclusion, simplest case:

When @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can read from ( 10.1 ) that for @xmath , @xmath unless @xmath .
Moreover, if @xmath then @xmath . We can then write the above formula in
a symmetric way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 10.3.1.

If @xmath , then the above formula is automatically true. Otherwise the
condition @xmath is equivalent to that @xmath for all @xmath . For
@xmath , we can always choose @xmath and @xmath such that the above is
true, see Section @xmath of [ Har07 ] . For @xmath , we don’t know how
to prove it at the moment. We will assume this is true henceforth.

### 10.4 Settings, the general cases

Let @xmath be arbitrary integers. We still want to apply the previous
strategy to get special values of @xmath -function for @xmath . But if
we take @xmath to be Langlands sum of @xmath and some algebraic Hecke
characters, it may be no longer algebraic. For example, if @xmath , we
know the Langlands parameters of @xmath are in @xmath . But the
Langlands parameters of an algebraic representation of @xmath should be
in @xmath . In order to fix this, we will tensor the character @xmath ,
a Hecke character of infinity type @xmath , when necessary.

When @xmath , we write @xmath and we will expand @xmath to an algebraic
representation of @xmath as previously. When @xmath , we write @xmath
and we will expand @xmath to an algebraic representation of @xmath . In
both cases, we assume the pair @xmath is in good position , namely,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (10.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let @xmath be the integers such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (10.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for all @xmath .

Let @xmath be conjugate self-dual algebraic Hecke characters of @xmath
of infinity type @xmath respectively. These characters will help us
expand @xmath or @xmath to an algebraic representation of @xmath .
Similarly, we will tensor them by @xmath if @xmath to settle the parity
issue. We write @xmath in this case and @xmath otherwise.

We assume that @xmath and lie in different intervals @xmath which
doesn’t contain any of @xmath .

More precisely, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath                        (10.4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and the above @xmath numbers lie in the gaps between the @xmath numbers
@xmath . Note the above @xmath numbers are in @xmath when @xmath for all
@xmath .

There are four cases:

1.  [label=()]

2.  @xmath is even and @xmath is odd, then @xmath and @xmath . We set
    @xmath as in previous sections.

3.  @xmath is even and @xmath is even, then @xmath and @xmath . We set
    @xmath .

4.  @xmath is odd and @xmath is even, then @xmath and @xmath . We set
    @xmath .

5.  @xmath is odd and @xmath is odd, then @xmath and @xmath . We set
    @xmath .

In all cases, @xmath is a generic cohomological conjugate self-dual
automorphic representation of @xmath and Proposition 3.6.1 gives us that
if @xmath is critical for @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (10.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Again, we shall simplify both sides of this equation.

### 10.5 Simplify the left hand side, general cases

For the left hand side of equation ( 10.4.4 ), we know by construction
that:

1.  [label=()]

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath

We set @xmath and @xmath as before. Recall that @xmath for all @xmath .

If @xmath is even (case (A) and (B)), we have for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is odd (case (C) and (D)), we have for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore for cases (A) and (B), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For cases (C) and (D), we put @xmath and then we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 10.6 Simplify the right hand side, general cases

#### Calculate @xmath:

Apply Corollary 3.5.1 , we get

1.  [label=()]

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath

Here we have used that:

###### Lemma 10.6.1.

If @xmath is a conjugate self-dual Hecke character then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### Proof

By Corollary 7.5.1 , we have:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (10.6.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By the definition of arithmetic automorphic period (c.f.
Definition-Lemma 5.3.2 ), we know @xmath . The latter is equivalent to
@xmath since @xmath is conjugate self-dual.

We see that:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (10.6.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By Corollary 7.5.1 , This will imply that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But we know by Corollary 9.4.1 that @xmath and a similar formula for
@xmath . The lemma then follows.

@xmath

By Theorem 5.2.1 , for all @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, we have

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Along with equation ( 10.2.1 ), we get

1.  [label=()]

2.  and (D): @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  : @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  : @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

where @xmath .

We then apply equations ( 10.3.1 ), ( 10.3.2 ) and Lemma 9.4.1 ,
Corollary 9.4.1 to get:

1.  [label=()]

2.  @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

5.  @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

### 10.7 Compare both sides, general cases

At first, observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can then conclude:

1.  [label=()]

2.  @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  Since @xmath , we have

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (10.7.1)
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- ----------

    Since @xmath , and

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    We get @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.  Since @xmath , we have

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (10.7.2)
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- ----------

    Moreover, we know @xmath , we have @xmath . Thus @xmath . We then
    get @xmath

    Therefore:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

5.  Similarly, since @xmath , we have

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (10.7.3)
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- ----------

    It is easy to verify that @xmath .

### 10.8 Final conclusion: general cases

Before concluding, we notice that in case (B) or (D),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath by ( 10.1.3 ). Therefore:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (10.8.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

by Lemma 1.2.1 which says that @xmath .

Therefore, we get

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Recall that @xmath by definition, we obtain that:

###### Theorem 10.8.1.

Let @xmath be two positive integers. Let @xmath be a quadratic imaginary
field. Let @xmath and @xmath be cuspidal representations of @xmath and
@xmath respectively which are very regular, cohomological, conjugate
self-dual and supercuspidal at at least two finite split places. We
assume that @xmath is in good position in the sense of Definition 1.2.2
.

1.   [label=()]

2.   If @xmath , then for any critical value @xmath for @xmath such that
    @xmath , or @xmath along with a non-vanishing condition, we have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   If @xmath , then for any critical value @xmath for @xmath such that
    @xmath , or @xmath along with a non-vanishing condition, we have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

## Chapter 11 Special values at @xmath of @xmath-functions for
automorphic pairs over quadratic imaginary fields

### 11.1 Settings

Let @xmath and @xmath be two positive integers.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two cuspidal representations of @xmath and
@xmath respectively which has definable arithmetic automorphic periods.
We assume they are also conjugate self-dual.

We write the infinity type of @xmath (resp. @xmath ) by @xmath (resp.
@xmath ). We see that @xmath for all @xmath (resp. @xmath for all @xmath
).

1.  [label=()]

2.  If @xmath , we write @xmath . We define @xmath .

3.  If @xmath , we write @xmath . We define @xmath .

4.  If @xmath , we may assume that @xmath is even and @xmath is odd. We
    write @xmath . We define @xmath and @xmath .

It is easy to see that @xmath is an algebraic generic representation of
@xmath with infinity type @xmath .

We assume that @xmath is regular, i.e. for any @xmath and any @xmath ,
we have @xmath .

Set @xmath . We see that @xmath are @xmath different numbers in @xmath .
We take @xmath such that the @xmath numbers above are in different gaps
between @xmath . Let @xmath be a cuspidal conjugate self-dual
representation of @xmath which has arithmetic automorphic periods and
infinity type @xmath .

Our method also requires @xmath to be @xmath -regular. To guarantee
this, we assume that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (11.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this case, we say the pair @xmath is very regular . We can then take
@xmath as above such that @xmath is critical for @xmath . Moreover,
results in [ Har07 ] show the existence of @xmath as above, such that
@xmath .

We fix such @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is critical for @xmath and
moreover

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (11.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with both sides non zero.

In the end of this section, let us show some simple facts on the split
index. We can read from the construction of @xmath that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Here we have used Lemma 1.2.1 .

Moreover, for each @xmath , one of @xmath and @xmath is @xmath and
another is @xmath . We also know that @xmath and @xmath .

### 11.2 Simplify the left hand side

We are going to simply the left hand side of equation ( 11.1.2 ) now.

1.  [label=()]

2.  In this case we have @xmath .

    By Theorem 10.8.1 , we know that

      -- -- -------- -------- --
            @xmath            
            @xmath            
            @xmath            
            @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -- -------- -------- --

    Therefore, since @xmath for all @xmath , we obtain that

      -- -- -------- -------- --
                     @xmath   
            @xmath   @xmath   
                     @xmath   
            @xmath   @xmath   
                     @xmath   
      -- -- -------- -------- --

3.  In this case, we have @xmath .

    Applying the second part of Theorem 10.8.1 , we have

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (11.2.3)
         @xmath      
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- ----------

    ###### Lemma 11.2.1.
    We have:

      -- -- -------- -------- --
                     @xmath   
            @xmath   @xmath   
            @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -- -------- -------- --

    #### Proof
    We set @xmath , @xmath (resp. @xmath , @xmath ) to be the index
    @xmath for the pair @xmath (resp. @xmath )) as in ( 10.1 ). We see
    from ( 10.8.1 ) that @xmath and @xmath .

    Recall that @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is the position of the infinity
    type of @xmath (resp. @xmath ) in the gaps of the infinity type of
    @xmath . It is easy to see that the @xmath numbers @xmath , @xmath
    for @xmath and @xmath runs over @xmath . We then deduce the first
    formula of the lemma.

    The second follows easily from the first one.

    @xmath

    From the lemma we see that

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (11.2.4)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    We thus obtain that

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (11.2.5)
      -- -------- -- ----------

4.  In this case, we have @xmath .

    Similarly, we get:

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (11.2.6)
      -- -------- -- ----------

### 11.3 Simplify the right hand side

By Corollary 3.5.1 and Corollary 9.4.1 , for cases (A) and (B), we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore, for cases (A) and (B), we obtain that:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- ----------
           @xmath            (11.3.1)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- ----------

We have used Lemma 9.4.1 , the fact that @xmath and also the fact that
@xmath , @xmath .

For case (C), we only need to change @xmath to @xmath in the above
formula.

### 11.4 Final conclusion

Comparing ( 1 ) and ( 11.3.1 ), we get for case (A):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Comparing ( 2 ) and ( 11.3.1 ), we get for case (B):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here we have used that @xmath by Lemma 1.2.1 .

Similarly, for case @xmath , comparing ( 3 ) and ( 11.3.1 ), we obtain
that:

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

The last step is deduced by definition of @xmath (c.f. Definition-Lemma
5.3.2 ).

###### Theorem 11.4.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two positive integers. Let @xmath and @xmath be
two cuspidal representations of @xmath and @xmath respectively which are
very regular, cohomological, conjugate self-dual and supercuspidal at at
least two finite split places. Assume that the pair @xmath is very
regular in the sense of ( 11.1.1 ).

1.   [label=()]

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   If @xmath , then @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --