This thesis is concerned with the question of when the double branched
cover of an alternating knot can arise by Dehn surgery on a knot in
@xmath . We approach this problem using a surgery obstruction, first
developed by Greene, which combines Donaldson’s Diagonalization Theorem
with the @xmath -invariants of Ozsváth and Szabó’s Heegaard Floer
homology. This obstruction shows that if the double branched cover of an
alternating knot or link @xmath arises by surgery on @xmath , then for
any alternating diagram the lattice associated to the Goeritz matrix
takes the form of a changemaker lattice. By analyzing the structure of
changemaker lattices, we show that the double branched cover of @xmath
arises by non-integer surgery on @xmath if and only if @xmath has an
alternating diagram which can be obtained by rational tangle replacement
on an almost-alternating diagram of the unknot. When one considers
half-integer surgery the resulting tangle replacement is simply a
crossing change. This allows us to show that an alternating knot has
unknotting number one if and only if it has an unknotting crossing in
every alternating diagram.

These techniques also produce several other interesting results: they
have applications to characterizing slopes of torus knots; they produce
a new proof for a theorem of Tsukamoto on the structure of
almost-alternating diagrams of the unknot; and they provide several
bounds on surgeries producing the double branched covers of alternating
knots which are direct generalizations of results previously known for
lens space surgeries. Here, a rational number @xmath is said to be
characterizing slope for @xmath if the oriented homeomorphism type of
the manifold obtained by @xmath -surgery on @xmath determines @xmath
uniquely.

The thesis begins with an exposition of the changemaker surgery
obstruction, giving an amalgamation of results due to Gibbons, Greene
and the author. It then gives background material on alternating knots
and changemaker lattices. The latter part of the thesis is then taken up
with the applications of this theory.
