##### Table of Contents

-    Introductory Outline
    -    Main Objectives
    -    Thesis Summary
-    1 Protocells: In the Twilight Zone Between Non-Living and Living
    Matter
    -    1.1 A Synthetic Approach Makes Origins of Life Scientifically
        Accessible
    -    1.2 Non-Protocell Approaches to Origins of Life
    -    1.3 Relevance of Self-Assembled Compartments in the Origins of
        Cellular Life
    -    1.4 Basic and Hybrid Protocells
    -    1.5 A Core Conception of Life Underlies All Protocell (and
        Origins) Research
-    2 Conceptualising Life: The Evolution–Autonomy Dichotomy
    -    2.1 Diachronic Lens: Living Systems are Self-Reproducing
        Systems with Potential for Open-Ended Evolution
        -    2.1.1 Experimental Mainstream in Protocell Research: The
            Ribocell
        -    2.1.2 Von Neumann’s Logical Organisation for
            Self-Replicating Machine Automata
    -    2.2 Synchronic Lens: Living Systems are Autonomous Agents
        -    2.2.1 The Behavioural and Constitutive Dimensions of
            Autonomous Agents
        -    2.2.2 Maturana and Varela’s Logical Organisation for the
            Living Cell: Autopoiesis
        -    2.2.3 Other Relational Biology Perspectives Similar to
            Autopoiesis
    -    2.3 Autonomy is a Missing Conceptual Backdrop for Origins of
        Life Protocell Research
-    3 Autonomy in Protocells: A Semi-Empirical Approach
    -    3.1 Perspective: The Development of Biological Autonomy Theory
        -    3.1.1 Why Biological Autonomy Needs Theoretical Models
        -    3.1.2 Systems Biology and Modelling Biological Autonomy
    -    3.2 Dynamic Models Capturing Minimal Autopoiesis
        -    3.2.1 Computational Models of Autopoiesis in Artificial
            Chemistry
        -    3.2.2 Experimental Models of Autopoietic Lipid Aggregates
    -    3.3 A Scientific Research Program Toward Basic Autonomous
        Protocells
        -    3.3.1 Framework: Co-Evolution of Protocell Metabolism and
            Membrane
        -    3.3.2 Methodology: Semi-Empirical Modelling
        -    3.3.3 Semi-Empirical Models Toward Basic Autonomous
            Protocells
    -    3.4 Before Basic Autonomous Protocells: Modelling the Early
        Interplay of Chemical Reactions and Dynamic Compartments
-    4 Overview of Scientific Contributions
    -    4.1 Prelude: The Equilibrium Self-Assembly of Amphiphiles
        -    4.1.1 Basic Principles of Micelle and Vesicle Self-Assembly
        -    4.1.2 A Lattice Monte Carlo Model of Amphiphilic
            Self-Assembly
    -    4.2 Grounding the Semi-Empirical Approach: An Experimentally
        Validated Kinetics Model for Protocell Membranes
        -    4.2.1 The Phenomena of Protocell Competition
        -    4.2.2 An Improved Lipid Kinetics Model for Fatty Acid
            Vesicle Membranes
    -    4.3 A New Paradigm for Metabolism in Early Protocells
        -    4.3.1 Cells Regulate Their Cytosol Volume, Early Protocells
            Could Not
        -    4.3.2 Variable Solvent Volume And Emergent Chemical
            Dynamics in Early Protocells
    -    4.4 Indirect Coupling of Protocell Metabolism and Membrane
-    5 Discussion
    -    5.1 The Autonomy Perspective: Recapitulation and Implications
        -    5.1.1 Reformulation of Major Prebiotic Transitions
        -    5.1.2 Basic Autonomy as a Multidimensional, Heuristic
            Concept
        -    5.1.3 Matter Matters: The Value of Semi-Empirical Modelling
    -    5.2 Toward Modelling Autonomous Protocells: Contributions and
        Challenges
        -    5.2.1 Relevance of Scientific Results
        -    5.2.2 Limitations
        -    5.2.3 Challenges in Advancing Semi-Empirical Protocell
            Research
    -    5.3 Future Directions
        -    5.3.1 Immediate Research Pathways
        -    5.3.2 Longer Term Research Pathways
-    Conclusions
-    A Petri Net Framework for Modelling Constructive Dynamical Systems
    -    A Whistle-Stop Tour of Petri Nets
    -    Petri Nets as Structured Descriptions of Model Equations
    -    Extending Petri Nets to Handle Structural Change in Dynamical
        Systems
    -    Worked Example: Petri Net Model for Growing and Dividing
        Protocells
-    B Lattice Model of Self-Assembly in Surfactant-Water-Oil Mixtures
    -    Spin Models to Capture Universal Properties of Complex
        Phenomena
    -    General Description of Larson Model Evolution
    -    Lattice Energies
    -    Algorithm for Larson Model Evolution
        -    A Note on Moving Amphiphile Chains
-    C Two Validity Tests for Abstract Elementary Reaction Sets
    -    Validity Test 1: Possibility for Atom Number Conservation
    -    Validity Test 2: Possibility for All Free Energy Changes as
        Negative
    -    Validity Tests are Not Additive
    -    Reaction Sets with Non-Elementary Steps
    -    Reservoir Analysis of Reaction Networks Limits Stoichiometric
        Possibilities
-    D Published Manuscripts
-    Copyright Permissions for Reproduced Figures

## Introductory Outline

The transition from non-living to living matter remains a major
blindspot in science. Current research lines into the origins of life,
whether based on single replicator molecules or on the newly emerging
field of protocells, are typically oriented towards an evolutionary
conception of what life entails. Under this conception, of prime
interest is how inorganic molecules and chemical assemblies started to
replicate, engage in selection, and increase in complexity, ultimately
toward the biochemical complexity of living cells. This doctoral thesis
tackles the problem of the origins of cellular life from an alternate
conceptual starting point, from the autonomous systems perspective ,
based on the conceptual theory of Biological Autonomy. From this
systems-theoretic perspective of cellular organisation, the fundamental
transitions in the origins of cellular life problem become radically
reformulated as how chemical compartment systems, i.e. protocells,
started to develop integrated chemical infrastructures in order to stay
far-from-equilibrium, and then how these integrated infrastructures
further developed into the autopoietic organisation displayed by
full-fledged biological cells. Autonomy defines a qualitatively
different – and it is argued wider and more appropriate – global
framework in which to place scientific research on protocells.

This thesis is a work located in the feedback loop between philosophical
reflection on the origins of life problem, and scientific modelling of
protocells. It demonstrates how the interaction of philosophy and
science can bring about fruitful results and novel insights on a complex
problem like the transition from physics and chemistry towards biology.
On a conceptual level, this work explains the autonomy conception of
life in detail, and follows through the (radical) implications that this
organisational, systems view has for reformulating the major transitions
in protocell evolution. On the scientific level, this thesis constructs
realistic “semi-empirical” protocell models to contribute toward an
initial stage in modelling autonomous protocells. Throughout the work,
the conceptual and scientific levels are interwoven and reinforce each
other: the conceptual analysis is essential for highlighting which type
of scientific questions are relevant to focus on, and the scientific
work carried out makes possible the further specification of overlooked
open questions in the field of prebiotic protocell research.

### Main Objectives

The main objectives of this thesis are:

1.  To explain how the biological autonomy perspective has strong
    implications for the origins of cellular life, detailing the
    different set of scientific questions and major transitions that
    this perspective illuminates, as compared to standard evolutionary
    views.

2.  To start investigating the physicochemical basis of biological
    autonomy in protocells by identifying a current gap of knowledge in
    protocell research programs: namely, the rigorous modelling of basic
    chemistry interacting with dynamic lipid compartments. To
    investigate this area as a first, necessary transition toward basic
    autonomous protocells.

3.  To develop semi-empirical protocell models which contribute new
    insights to the general question of how chemical reactions started
    to couple with dynamic lipid compartments, before self-producing,
    metabolic cells came to stage.

4.  To carefully examine and explain the main implications of the above
    modelling work for the general conceptual framework of autonomy, as
    applied to this prebiotic context.

5.  To locate and explain future challenges faced by the semi-empirical
    modelling approach, proposing strategies for further advancing this
    research line toward modelling autonomous protocells.

Below follows a chapter summary of this thesis, highlighting how the
main ideas and conceptual strand run throughout the work. Chapters 1 - 3
serve as an extended introduction and literature review. These initial
chapters lay essential groundwork and take the time to properly develop
the implications of the autonomy perspective for protocell research
before narrowing down and identifying the sub-problem that is addressed
by the scientific protocell modelling contributions of this thesis.

### Thesis Summary

This thesis begins in Chapter 1 by providing a primer on protocells. In
the origins of cellular life problem, protocells (very rudimentary
physicochemical systems based on self-assembled compartments) are
increasingly being perceived as providing a vital bridge between
chemistry/physics and biological cellular systems. Many general reasons
in favour of self-assembled compartments from an early stage in the
origins of life can be cited. These reasons range from compartments
being effective ‘localisers’ of molecular populations (enabling chemical
evolution), to compartments being necessary scaffolds to set up the
correct conditions to host complex sequences of linked chemical
reactions.

However, whilst a useful vehicle for explaining abiogenesis, protocells
are concept-neutral, and do not by themselves define a general research
program toward the origins of cellular life. In practice, protocells are
used in scientific research programs that adhere to wider general
conceptions of what the phenomenon of ‘life’ itself entails. Different
researchers hold (explicitly or implicitly) different conceptual
orientations on life, and these orientations percolate into which
protocell experiments they perform, and how they interpret their results
as relevant.

Therefore, a more conceptual, philosophical reflection on the phenomena
of what constitutes ‘life’ is extremely relevant for protocell research,
and origins of life research in general. While a universally accepted
“bright line” definition separating living from non-living systems
continues to be elusive, researchers in origins of life, artificial life
and biology have meanwhile partitioned into two broad conceptual camps.
The main purpose of Chapter 2 is to explain, in detail, the central
tenets held by each of these camps. The dominant camp at present, the
evolutionary view of life, is based on a diachronic or ‘across
generations’ perspective of living systems, whereby life is seen to be
manifest in chemical systems which can reproduce, proliferate and
proceed through chemical evolution to higher levels of complexity. This
perspective stems from the extension of evolution by natural selection
to units which are much more simple than whole living systems, and
underlies the RNA World and Ribocell protocell research projects. The
other, marginalised camp is the autonomy view of life, which instead
sees living systems from a synchronic or ‘in time’ perspective,
focussing on the fundamental autopoietic organisation of components and
processes that allow cells to function as far-from-equilibrium systems
in the here-and-now.

Even if prebiotic research is currently heavily embedded in an
evolutionary conception of life, this thesis argues that the
marginalised autonomy perspective is actually the most general and most
appropriate conceptual framework for protocell research into the origins
of cellular life problem. A critical blindspot of the evolutionary
perspective is that, by perceiving life as primarily manifest ‘across
time’, it lacks (or finds no use for) a rigorous account of the
physicochemical organisation of individual cellular systems. The
evolutionary approach implicitly assumes that biological cells are
simply template-directed chemical networks in ‘lipid bags’, and this
weak notion of cellularity correspondingly translates into an origins of
life research program focussed on the increase in complexity of chemical
networks, where protocells play a side part as useful ‘chemical
containers’ facilitating this process.

The autonomy perspective, on the other hand, instills a deep systemic
appreciation of the way molecules have to organise in space and time in
order to form a functional far-from-equilibrium biological cell. This
rigorous organisational view of cellularity translates into a
protocell-centric research program into the origins of cellular life
that aims to unravel how the chemical organisation of protocells became
more integrated and complex over time, ultimately transforming into the
self-fabricating, autopoietic organisation that biological cells
possess. A key point is that the autonomy view makes explicit a critical
integration problem in origins of life, typically overlooked by
evolutionary approaches, and an autonomy-led protocell research program
confronts this problem. Biological cells are only functional systems by
virtue of the fact that they closely couple and coordinate compartment,
metabolism and template-information subsystems. The same logic would
apply equally to the earlier, more rudimentary protocell stages
preceding full-fledged cells: in order to be viable, functional
far-from-equilibrium systems, able to further increase in complexity,
these protocells would also require some type of integrated chemical
organisation able to overcome the key problems associated with
cellularity – such as the problems of selective permeability, osmotic
water flow, and the harnessing and distribution of free energy
resources. Autonomy implies that protocell research programs into the
origins of cellular life should deal with cellular organisation and
integration issues from an early stage , for a late-stage amalgamation
of independently developed template, membrane and metabolic systems
would be unlikely to result in functional cells.

Chapter 3 details how a research program into autonomous protocells can
be realised, bridging the scientific and conceptual levels of the first
two chapters. The chapter begins by discussing reasons why, although
important, the theory of Biological Autonomy is difficult to convert
into quantitative models. Computational and experimental approaches to
implement minimal autopoietic systems in-silico and in-vitro are then
reviewed as rudimentary attempts to model autonomous systems, along with
their associated limitations. A hybrid “semi-empirical” approach is put
forward as a theoretical yet physically-grounded route to properly
address the problem of how autonomy originated and developed in
protocells. A research program toward basic autonomous protocells is
explained that involves semi-empirical modelling, and the aim of the
program is to investigate how the metabolic and membrane systems of
protocells co-evolved to result in integrated, functional protocell
units. Recent semi-empirical protocell schemes based on a kinetic model
of a lipid vesicle are reviewed.

The concluding part of Chapter 3 identifies the more specific sub-area
where this thesis makes its scientific contributions: the realistic
modelling of far-from-equilibrium chemistry in dynamic lipid
compartments. This sub-area involves modelling early protocell
‘reactors’ that hypothetically preceded self-producing protocells. These
‘reactors’ would not have possessed the capacity to fabricate complex
molecular components like lipids or peptides, but they could
nevertheless already have started to demonstrate emergent and
biologically relevant non-linear behaviours.

Chapter 4 provides a non-technical overview of the scientific
contributions made by this thesis toward the realistic modelling of
chemistry in dynamic lipid compartments. Four pieces of scientific work
are reviewed. The scientific work includes an improved theoretical model
of membrane lipid exchange kinetics, validated against experiments, for
the semi-empirical vesicle model introduced in Chapter 3 . On the
alternate subject of protocell metabolism, a different model is used to
demonstrate how osmotic water flow across the permeable membranes of
early protocells could have been an important factor in creating complex
reaction dynamics and complex protocell dynamics. A new general systems
principle called ‘osmotic coupling’ is proposed, which is applicable to
all types of metabolism in early protocells.

The discussion in Chapter 5 re-assumes more of a global perspective,
recapitulating how the autonomous systems view creates a valid
conceptual backdrop for protocell research, and how the prevalent
evolutionary view, which by seeing life ‘across time’ rather than ‘in
time’, misses the important integration problem that all cellular
systems must accomplish. A tentative set of major transitions in
protocell development from an autonomy perspective are outlined, and the
scientific results of Chapter 4 are summarised and related to an early
protocell stage on this set of transitions. Limitations of research,
future challenges to the semi-empirical modelling approach, and future
directions are considered.

## Chapter 1 Protocells: In the Twilight Zone Between Non-Living and
Living Matter

The biological cell is the minimal physicochemical structure which is
unanimously agreed to be alive by human observers, and forms the
fundamental building block of all living systems on earth Brenner (
\APACyear 2010 ) . Cells can exist in colonies or cohorts of
individuals, as tightly coupled heterogeneous assemblies composing
multicellular organisms, and as free-living individuals. In fact, most
cells can exist in the free-living state, given suitable environmental
conditions. On this logic, asking how life originated is equivalent to
asking how the first cells originated.

During abiogenesis, the 500 million year process dating from the
stabilisation of the early earth ( @xmath 4.0 billion years ago) up
until the appearance of the first fossil evidence for cyanobacteria (
@xmath 3.5 billion years ago), the spontaneous emergence of a single
biological cell, in a single instant in time, is a possibility that can
be ruled out with certainty. Current cells, even in their simplest
prokaryote forms, are bewilderingly complex biochemical nano-machines,
both in terms of their component parts list, and in terms of the spatial
and temporal organisation of these components. The spontaneous assembly
of a cell would not only demand the right mix of complex macromolecules
to be present in the prebiotic environment, but these components would
also have to localise and assemble in a precise order to create a
far-from equilibrium organism as opposed to a complicated non-functional
conglomerate. Therefore, it is legitimate to reason that a series of
more basic ‘infra-biological’ structures pre-dated the first
full-fledged cells, and via a series of fundamental transitions, evolved
into them.

The exact identity of these infra-biological structures continues to be
matter of dividing opinion, the debate revolving largely around which
criteria are considered essential for life. However, one pertinent
generalisation that can be made about contemporary cells is that they
all depend critically on the existence of a surrounding lipid membrane
Morowitz ( \APACyear 1992 ) . ¹ ¹ 1 Although some authors dispute the
primary role of a membrane for effective cell function. \shortciteA
pollackCellsGels for example argues that the functioning of a cell is
better explained by the fact that the cytoplasm is a gel . At some point
during abiogenesis, life became membrane bound: the question is when and
how this happened.

The field of protocells works on the assumption that
compartmentalisation of chemical constituents (which may be by a lipid
membrane or by other means) was a fundamental step realised very early
in the origins of life. As such, the field of protocells investigates
rudimentary cell-like structures as candidates leading up to the
emergence of the first cell S. Rasmussen, Bedau, Chen \BCBL \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2009 \APACexlab \BCnt 2 ) .

One recent definition ² ² 2 Other definitions biased more toward
evolutionary capabilities have also been proposed. A protocell is: “a
simple cell-like entity (with a compartment and genetic material)
capable of self-replication, metabolism, and Darwinian evolution” Blain
\BBA Szostak ( \APACyear 2014 ) ; “an entity thermodynamically separated
from the environment and able to replicate using available nutrient
molecules and energy sources.” (Morowitz, \APACyear 1992 , p103) . of a
protocell in the Encyclopedia of Astrobiology is:

  any experimental or theoretical model that involves a self-assembled
  compartment (typically a supramolecular structure, like a lipid
  vesicle) linked to chemical processes taking place around or within
  it, aimed at explaining how more complex biological cells or
  alternative forms of cellular organization may come about.
  Ruiz-Mirazo ( \APACyear 2011 )

Protocells are therefore the hypothesised prototypes of the first cells
on earth. They are soft, mutable supramolecular structures held together
by the weak forces of self-assembly (see Section 4.1.1 ), just as the
membranes of contemporary cells are, and they partially implement some
of the essential functionalities observed in cells. ³ ³ 3 A chemical
system occupying a micro-metre sized rock pore is also
‘compartmentalised’, but it is not strictly a protocell. These
functionalities can include the maintenance of a spatial identity over
time, adaptive response to environmental changes, the metabolic use of
environmental resources to sustain, grow and reproduce, the excretion of
waste, and the use of a genetic apparatus to coordinate operations,
grant heredity and enable evolution. Figure 1.1 depicts a variety of
self-assembled compartment structures currently being explored as
protocell candidates.

Apart from a membrane being crucial, extant cellular life also relies on
a metabolic system and a template-based genetic system for operation.
This triad of subsystems Ganti ( \APACyear 2003 ); Szathmáry \BOthers .
( \APACyear 2005 ) is useful for categorising experimental and
theoretical approaches to protocells too S. Rasmussen, Bedau, McCaskill
\BCBL \BBA Packard ( \APACyear 2009 ); Solé \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2007
); Ruiz-Mirazo \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2014 ) . By definition, all
protocells have some type of self-assembled compartment @xmath , which
may or may not be a semi-permeable membrane, in addition to a metabolism
@xmath and/or molecular template copying system @xmath . The valid
permutations of this trio are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , with the
latter signifying an advanced protocell design. By itself, an empty
self-assembled compartment @xmath is not strictly a protocell, but is
rather an equilibrium supramolecular structure. Protocells have the
extra requirement that self-assembly needs to be coupled to an energy
and matter flow in some way, i.e. protocells operate
far-from-equilibrium .

In summary, the field of protocells represents an attempt at an extreme
form of reverse engineering of the cell. Not only do we want to know the
fundamental principles underlying the operation of modern living cells,
but we also want to know the history of prototypes, re-designs and
failures which incrementally lead up to such a complicated final product
becoming possible and arising on the early earth. Protocell research
approaches the full-fledged living cell from the ‘bottom up’, with the
ultimate goal of creating synthetic cellular systems in the lab by
starting from inert molecules and molecular assemblies which are
combined in some careful predefined sequence. ⁴ ⁴ 4 perhaps relying on
in-vitro evolution for some of the stages of preparation. On the way to
achieving this grand objective, protocells have immediate technological
applications such as drug delivery capsules or as nano-sized chemical
reactors. Protocells are also starting to be used in synthetic biology
as agents to interact with living cell populations, steering their
collective behaviour without the need for genetic modification of the
individual living cells Lentini \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2014 ); Gardner
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2009 ) .

The alternative to the ‘bottom up’ approach of protocells is the ‘top
down’ approach whereby existing cells are artificially simplified to
successively lower levels of complexity e.g. by reducing the size of
their genome. Whilst this reverse process does give useful information
about the minimum complexity threshold required by extant cellular life
and it does provide a potential reference for the final steps of
biogenesis, it does not represent a paradigm to understand the emergence
of cellular life in general. Typically, modern cells cannot tolerate
much simplification without becoming completely non-functional, and so
ancient cellular prototypes must be made by synthesis, not by
decomposition.

The remainder of this factual introduction to protocells is organised as
follows. First, a brief diversion is taken to explain in more detail how
a remote historical event like the origins of life can be investigated
using the scientific method. Following that, other more traditional (and
still ongoing) non-protocell approaches to the origin of life are
outlined, to give a wider perspective. Then, Section 1.3 considers why
protocells have risen to prominence and lists general reasons why
self-assembled compartments feature in modern theories of abiogenesis.
Section 1.4 outlines general routes to constructing protocells in the
laboratory, and Section 1.5 concludes by noting that a conception of
life is critical in determining the emphasis and direction of all
protocell research programs. This leads onto more conceptual discussions
of life in Chapter 2 .

### 1.1 A Synthetic Approach Makes Origins of Life Scientifically
Accessible

Making a full historical reconstruction of the exact sequence of
physico-chemical transitions which lead to the emergence of
cellular-based life on earth is impossible. This information is forever
lost. The origin of life process not only happened at an extremely
remote period in the past, making prebiotic conditions difficult to be
rigorously established, but also the appearance of life erased any
direct evidence of the initial developmental trajectory of pre-life. As
Morowitz points out, origin events generally prohibit historical
investigation because “Each origin radically transforms the system and
changes the rules of operation.” (Morowitz, \APACyear 1992 , p14) . The
origin of the universe and the origin of human culture are two other
examples. Once life appeared, it radically changed the boundary
conditions away from those in early prebiotic times: it oxygenated the
atmosphere, and it established a biosphere pervaded by hierarchical
ecosystems. Now, all life invariably comes from pre-existing life, and
well-adapted living organisms preclude the re-emergence of simpler, more
fragile forms of ‘protolife’, even if such protolife were able to appear
under the changed environmental conditions.

As a result, a huge chasm in complexity separates biological life and
the closest ‘near-life’ systems, which are arguably self-organising
systems termed dissipative structures Nicolis \BBA Prigogine ( \APACyear
1989 ) . Dissipative structures, like living organisms, are physical
systems that degrade their environment to dynamically maintain their own
ordered existence, but in nature they only constitute relatively simple
examples such as hurricanes, candle flames, oscillating chemical
reactions and convection patterns in liquids (e.g. Rayleigh-Bernard
cells). ⁵ ⁵ 5 See \shortciteA Mossio2010 for a discussion of the
difference between inert systems with only physical self-organisation,
and organisms with biological self-organisation.

Fortunately, a remaining (and scientifically accessible) option exists
for the exploration of origins: a synthetic approach to abiogenesis
(e.g. see \shortciteNP Attwater2014). This approach involves the
bottom-up synthesis of life and “life as it could be” in the laboratory.
Using educated guesses about approximate prebiotic conditions (e.g. the
energy sources, molecules and prevailing conditions present: see
\shortciteNP deamer2011,Deamer1997), often combined with generalisations
about current living cells (e.g. all rely heavily on protein catalysts
synthesised by nucleic acids), diverse experiments are performed to
uncover what could be the most relevant physical effects and transitions
leading from prebiotic chemistry to the first cellular-based life. A
synthetic approach to the origins of life therefore simplifies
abiogenesis to only those physical effects and transitions most
essential, and gives us a way to provide an account of origins by
constructing a story based on educated guesses involving the sequence of
these transitions. Lab experiments will continue to shed more light on
what phenomena were possible, and which are difficult to achieve to
narrow space of possibilities for origins.

A synthetic approach has the advantage of being able to disregard the
complicated contingent aspects of abiogenesis. Indeed, much of what
happened during the history of abiogenesis – the exact details of all
the chemical and physico-chemical structures existing, their spatial
distributions and their myriad interactions – is probably not necessary
to know in detail in order to have a comprehensive picture of origins.
Most chemical phenomena taking place would have been fleeting and
completely irrelevant to the emergence of life, but a select few
phenomena would have been fundamental . These latter phenomena are those
searched for by a synthetic experimental approach to origins of life.

Before general arguments are presented for protocells, the next section
briefly reviews different approaches to origins of life and the
traditional theories.

### 1.2 Non-Protocell Approaches to Origins of Life

The origins of life field is indeed a broad sphere of enquiry, with many
avenues currently open and active. Lines of investigation can be
approximately divided into (at least) three broad categories, but these
categories all remain interrelated to some extent. In order to set
protocells into a wider context, these categories are very briefly
reviewed below, with more emphasis on the third category, to which
protocells belong.

Ever since the landmark Miller-Urey experiment Miller ( \APACyear 1953
); Lazcano \BBA Bada ( \APACyear 2003 ) , a traditional category in
origins research has been to conduct experiments to find out how the
individual building blocks of life could have been synthesised on the
prebiotic earth in conditions where efficient and specific protein
catalysts did not yet exist. Under ‘plausible’ prebiotic assumptions,
these experiments aim to uncover potential chemical synthesis pathways
to monomers like amino acids, nucleotides and lipids, and then to their
functional polymerised forms (e.g. proteins and nucleic acids). The
field of abiotic synthesis has been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere
(Ruiz-Mirazo \BOthers ., \APACyear 2014 , Section 2 therein) , but for
some brief examples, it includes the work of \shortciteA cairnsSmith1985
who cited that clay crystals could have been pivotal helpers in the
organised assembly of complex organic molecules, and it also includes
more recent work by the Sutherland group who have uncovered possible
abiotic synthesis pathways for C and U nucleotides Powner \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2009 ) and for the precursors of amino acids and lipids Patel
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2015 ) . Finally, the possibility that essential
material was delivered to the early earth by meteorites in an already
synthesised form also falls into this first category of research.

A second category of origins research tries to narrow down the
geographical locations suitable for the genesis of life on the early
earth. Alternative ‘cradles of life’ are sought that could have provided
suitable bioenergetic and nutrient conditions to kick-start life.
Scenarios recently argued for have included deep sea hydrothermal vents
Martin \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2008 ); Lane \BBA Martin ( \APACyear 2012
) , inland geothermal fields Mulkidjanian \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2012 )
and scenarios allowing the construction of natural ‘fuel cells’ Barge
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2014 ) .

The third category in origins research aims to tackle the overarching
question of how a general infrastructure became established in prebiotic
chemistry, and what the identity of that infrastructure was, such that
the emergence of full-fledged living systems became eventually possible.
Recognising that genetic and metabolic systems are both essential parts
of all current living organisms, this category traditionally divided
into two fiercely defended schools of thought: “genes preceded
metabolism” (exemplified by \shortciteNP Anet2004) and “metabolism
preceded genes” (exemplified by \shortciteNP Shapiro2000). These
approaches existed before compartments or membranes were conceded as
relevant in the overall scheme of origins, and research down these lines
is still ongoing today, with neither of the two schools having yet a
clear advantage over the other Fry ( \APACyear 2011 ); Lazcano (
\APACyear 2010 ) .

The genes-first school is based on an evolutionary view of life (see
Section 2.1 ) and holds that the prebiotic environment was populated by
self-replicating template molecules, most likely RNA, which somehow
arose spontaneously in fairly high concentrations. This approach
criticises the metabolism-first school (discussed below) along these
lines: Metabolic cycles in living cells are very complicated sequences
of reactions only possible because of the presence of very specific
protein catalysts. Such advanced catalysts were not available on the
early earth, and in their absence, it is extremely unlikely that long
sequences of reactions could have become organised spontaneously Orgel (
\APACyear 2008 ) . Also, generally only hypothetical models and not
experimental evidence support the metabolism-first approach.

The genes-first view holds that replicators competed in different
scenarios and evolved longer lengths over time, acquiring novel
functions such as the ability to catalyse their own formation, the
ability to catalyse complex sequences of simpler chemical reactions, or
the ability to produce proteins, some of which could act as the first
enzymes. The RNA World hypothesis sits at the centre of the genes-first
approach and remains under active development as the mainstream theory
in origins of life (see Section 2.1 ).

Conversely, the metabolism-first school is based more on a thermodynamic
view of life. It postulates that multi-step chemical networks and cycles
existed on the prebiotic earth, where reactions either proceeded
spontaneously or were catalysed by e.g. various surfaces. This approach
criticises the genes-first school along these lines: RNA is a very
specific and complicated macromolecule, and even though it could be
conceivably synthesised in the prebiotic environment, nature is
indiscriminate, and does not have a special bias for creating RNA
molecules. In composing RNA by non-enzymatic means, interfering factors
would mean that the majority of molecules produced would be
non-functional Shapiro ( \APACyear 2007 ) . Also, heredity can be
implemented without information-storing molecules, for example,
information exists in the concentrations of individual compounds in a
chemically reproducing network.

The metabolism-first approach holds that chemical networks, when driven
by an energy flow, created localised regions of increased order that
consisted of small abundant molecules at first, but later developing so
that complex macromolecules began to be synthesised. Nucleotides, the
monomers of nucleic acids, eventually appeared on the scene to fulfil
roles like catalysis and energy storage, before ultimately being used to
synthesise RNA. Stuart Kauffman’s autocatalytic set model Kauffman (
\APACyear 1986 ); Farmer \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1986 ) is often cited as
holding a central position within the metabolism first approach. It
suggests a way in which complex polymers can be built from a collective
network of cleavage and condensation reactions, rather than by template
base-pairing. It is a model which continues to attract attention (e.g.
\shortciteNP Hordijk2013,Hordijk2010). Freeman Dyson’s model for how
disordered molecular populations jumped into an ordered ‘metabolic’
state also falls into the metabolism-first camp Dyson ( \APACyear 1999 )
, as does the hypothesis of \shortciteA Wachtershauser1988 who proposed
that the surface of pyrites could ignite basic metabolic cycles, acting
as a basic catalyst and forming a “pioneer organism”.

Whereas both the gene-first and metabolism-first schools seek to explain
the emergence of a complex metabolic system directed by enzymes
synthesised by nucleotides, most modern theories on the origins of life
now also see compartmentalisation as a key phenomenon. The next section
reviews general arguments for protocells: why compartmentalisation of
chemical systems is now broadly thought of as an essential step in
abiogenesis.

{tcolorbox}

[colback=mybrown!50!white,colframe=mybrown!75!black,title=Box 1: Focus
on Lipid Vesicles as Protocell Compartments]

[]

Above: (a) Vesicles formed from lipids extracted from the Murchison
meteorite ( \shortciteNP Pohorille2009: see View Image Copyright
Permissions. ). The largest spherical vesicles pictured are around 20
@xmath m in diameter. (b) Vesicle cross section cartoon, showing the
bilayer arrangement of lipids. (c) Myristoleic acid, a simple type of
lipid amphiphile able to form vesicles. (d) Multilamellar and nested
vesicles.

-   A lipid vesicle is a soft topologically closed supramolecular
    structure which self-assembles as a two-layer lipid membrane (or as
    a set of two-layer lipid membranes) in aqueous solution, keeping an
    aqueous volume within it. Given the correct conditions, these
    bilayer membranes form with the lipid heads contacting the inner out
    outer water phases, and with the lipid tails clustering together
    inside the hydrophobic centre of the bilayer (see Section 4.1.1 for
    more details).

-   A variety of different lipid types can constitute vesicles, and
    vesicles can be made from one single type of lipid or from diverse
    mixtures of lipids (as the membranes of all living cells are). In
    origins of life studies, the lipids used for protocell models tend
    to be very simple lipids called ‘fatty acids’ because it is not
    unreasonable that these lipids would have been environmentally
    available on the early earth Rushdi \BBA Simoneit ( \APACyear 2001
    ); Dworkin \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2001 ); Ruiz-Mirazo \BOthers . (
    \APACyear 2014 ) .

-   Lipid vesicles can contain nested, smaller vesicles, and/or multiple
    bilayer membranes stacked next to each other. This latter case is
    called a ‘multilamellar’ vesicle. Vesicles forming naturally tend to
    be very heterogeneous in size and multilamellarity, but some
    measurements and calculations are much easier to carry out with more
    homogeneous populations. Therefore, experimentalists tend to prefer
    working with ‘unilamellar’ vesicles, which consist of a single
    bilayer and have a more standard size. Unilamellar vesicles can be
    prepared by extruding a solution of fatty acids through a filter of
    small holes.

### 1.3 Relevance of Self-Assembled Compartments in the Origins of
Cellular Life

The construction of rudimentary cell-like chemical systems is a
scientific tradition stretching back, at least, to the latter half of
the 19 @xmath century Hanczyc ( \APACyear 2009 ) . Russian biochemist
Aleksandr Oparin, investigating chemistry in coacervates in the 1950’s
and 1960’s, was one of the first people to implement a systematic
research program into protocells. Within the last 15 years, the field of
protocells has attracted more sustained interest, and the current pace
of research is accelerating exponentially.

So why is the subject of protocells now a hot topic? what reasons exist
for considering self-assembled compartments as essential from an early
stage in origins of life? Table 1.1 below lists a range of diverse
factors that have come to light, broadly supporting the relevance of
compartmentalised protocells during abiogenesis. Some researchers hold
self-assembled compartments as necessary for concentrating important
populations of molecules, keeping them safe from environmental
parasites, and allowing their reliable transmission to offspring.
Alternatively, others see compartments as playing more of an active role
in the ‘proto-metabolism’ of an emerging cellular system, for example,
helping to provide energy resources, catalyse reactions, and encourage
otherwise unfavourable chemical synthesis. Both of these viewpoints are
represented in Table 1.1 .

In current research, the most popular experimental approach to
protocells is to use membranous lipid vesicles as candidate compartments
Chen \BBA Walde ( \APACyear 2010 ) . For this reason, a short primer on
lipid vesicles is given in Box 1. Other compartment media are also
explored under the banner of ‘protocells’, such as lipid micelles,
“membrane-free” compartments like microemulsions (consisting of minute
water droplets in oil, and the reverse), coacervates,
droplets/coacervates covered in surfactants, gels and various inorganic
membranes, to name but a few (see Fig. 1.1 and also \shortciteNP Li2014
for a round up of some interesting non-lipid approaches to protocells).
Table 1.1 is biased toward phenomena enabled by lipid vesicles, but most
of the points raised can generalise to different types of self-assembled
compartment. Therefore, points in the table are labelled as ‘V’ if they
apply specifically to vesicles, ‘C’ if they apply specifically to
non-vesicle compartments and ‘V,C’ if they should be applicable to all
types of self-assembled micro-compartment.

Although Table 1.1 focusses on advantages of encapsulating chemical
systems inside (or as part of) self-assembled enclosures, it should be
noted that compartmentalisation is not without its corresponding
difficulties. Vesicles in particular are only stable in a limited range
of environmental conditions. Excessive temperature, extreme pH, high
pressures, and the presence of salts (e.g. in oceans), are all factors
negatively affecting the stability of vesicle bilayers Thomas \BBA Rana
( \APACyear 2007 ); Maurer \BBA Monnard ( \APACyear 2011 ) . Also,
limited permeability of compartment membranes presents potential
bottlenecks for an internal metabolism, as nutrient accessibility and
dissipation of internal waste products are hindered. Vesicles,
additionally, are susceptible to osmotic lysis or sudden burst, if the
internal turgor pressure becomes too great (see later).

Nevertheless, in spite of these potential problems, extant life
organises all of its molecular components and processes around lipid
compartments, controlling the spatial distribution of critical
functional species, and avoiding their loss by diffusion. Proposing a
prebiotic scenario in which compartmentalisation takes place relatively
early provides room and time for chemical systems to develop these
control mechanisms from the bottom-up.

### 1.4 Basic and Hybrid Protocells

Current approaches to protocells can be roughly divided into two
categories: basic protocells and hybrid protocells. Both approaches work
fundamentally from the ‘bottom up’, i.e. the idea is to put together
isolated components in a lego-like way to form integrated systems with
cell-like attributes.

Basic protocells are focussed around simple molecular (often
prebiotically plausible) components and simple chemical processes.
Typically, these models are used to demonstrate important
first-principles effects, like for example how protocell membrane
morphology is related to factors such as osmotic pressure or the
presence of internal macromolecules. Basic protocells are also used to
demonstrate primitive pathways to well-established cellular functions,
such as sustainable division or adaptive movement.

Hybrid protocells, on the other hand, also incorporate biological
machinery transplanted from existing cells. For example, in some cases,
the whole DNA-RNA-protein transcription/translation system can be
borrowed from organisms like E. coli and then encapsulated inside more
primitive compartments. The use of hybrid protocells, although it may be
‘cheating’ in a strict prebiotic sense, gives an opportunity to ‘jump
ahead’ to more advanced stages in the emergence of life, creating
chimera systems that shed light on more developed properties of a cell,
like the effect of micro-volume on protein synthesis, or the interaction
of nucleic acids with lipid membranes. Figure 1.2 displays a diverse
selection of basic and hybrid protocell approaches implemented to date
in the lab.

It is useful to note that the field of protocells is closely related to
two underlying fields, also in their infancy, and which are also
extremely relevant to origins research. The larger framework of which
protocells are part is that of systems chemistry Ruiz-Mirazo \BOthers .
( \APACyear 2014 ); von Kiedrowski \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2010 ) .
Systems chemistry explores the dynamic properties of complex chemical
mixtures made of many different types of components engaging in myriad
interactions. It can be seen as the ‘difficult cousin’ of traditional
chemistry, which instead focusses on deducing the structure of
individual types of molecules and on the study of isolated reactions in
well-controlled conditions. Systems chemistry is the new discipline
aiming to properly address the chemical infrastructures existing on the
early prebiotic earth, and it is replacing the traditional
metabolism-first vs. genes-first dichotomy with a more unified
systems-oriented view de la Escosura \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2015 ) . A
sub-field of systems chemistry is that of structured media Epstein
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2012 ); Showalter \BBA Epstein ( \APACyear 2015 )
. This sub-field investigates chemical reactions occurring in the
presence of self-assembled structural entities, like microemulsions,
droplet arrays and gels, paying attention to the new dynamical regimes
which can result. For example, \shortciteA Vanag2001 found that a
standard reaction-diffusion chemical system has its pattern generation
capabilities extended when it takes place in an oil populated by tiny
water droplet compartments.

Protocells are in turn a sub-field of structured media: the boundary
between the two fields is blurry, but structured media tend to
investigate reactions in solution pervaded with a multitude of simple
self-assembled elements, whereas protocells focus more on individual
instances of chemically active compartment systems, where the
self-assembled compartment is more elaborate (e.g. a lipid bilayer, not
just a micelle or phase difference). The emphasis in the protocells
field is more on the behaviour of individual structures rather than on
the patterning behaviour of an entire solution. Examples right on the
boundary, which could either be classified as structured media or
protocells, include work done on the BZ oscillating reaction inside
arrays of vesicles which signal to each other Tomasi \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2014 ) , and the investigation of floating gel particles made
from clay minerals as structures which can house and catalyse
biochemical reactions Yang \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2013 ) .

### 1.5 A Core Conception of Life Underlies All Protocell (and Origins)
Research

In this short scientific introduction, we have been concerned with what
protocells essentially are, how they are currently being investigated
and several preliminary arguments for how they constitute a suitable
vehicle for crossing the non-living and living worlds.

However, because the fundamental aim of protocells is to enlighten how
biological cells came about, it follows that all protocell research
programs are inevitably immersed in some general conception of what the
phenomenon of life entails. By themselves, protocells are only like a
blank piece of paper: they give a plausible object with which to
construct a story about abiogenesis, but they do not dictate what that
story should be. Rather, it is the core conception of life held
knowingly or unconsciously by an investigator that determines the exact
experiments she will involve the protocells in, and how she will
interpret the results as being relevant to a larger picture. Without a
conception of life, the ultimate goal of a protocell research program
would be undefined.

Jack Szostak, a prominent figure in origins of life and protocell
research, recently appeared to express a conflicting sentiment, stating
“Attempts to define life are irrelevant to scientific efforts to
understand the origin of life.” Szostak ( \APACyear 2012 \APACexlab
\BCnt 1 ) . Szostak argued that a definition of life amounts to
specifying a precise dividing line between chemistry and biology,
whereas the emergence of life probably manifested as a temporally
extended process, unfolding via a series of important transitions. Such
transitions are cited as “the true unknowns and subject of
origin-of-life studies”, and it is argued that effort would be better
spent in characterising the physical and chemical forces driving these
transitions, rather than in defining life. This may well be a valid
viewpoint, but what the article misses, however, is that even if an
exact definition of life is irrelevant, a weaker general conception of
the phenomenology of life is still required. It is this general
conception which colours and biases what type of transitions will be
searched for on the way toward a ‘living’ cell. For example, by holding
an evolutionary perspective, Szostak is inevitably biased toward
searching for phenomena relevant to the evolutionary potential of
protocells.

Science is not performed in a conceptual vacuum, especially not origins
of life studies. Instead of an ability to uncover an ‘objective truth’,
we are instead often constrained to find what we are looking for, as
physiologist Claude Bernard once paraphrased “The hypothesis … had
prepared my mind [and my predecessors’] for seeing things in a certain
direction … We had the fact under our eyes and did not see it because it
conveyed nothing to our mind.” (cited in \shortciteNP gross1998, p382).
Chapter 2 examines two different conceptual ways to characterise life,
and argues that conceptualising life as autonomy, the way that has
received by far the least attention, brings forward a relevant alternate
research program in which protocells are the key players in the origin
of life.

## Chapter 2 Conceptualising Life: The Evolution–Autonomy Dichotomy

If we observed a pink gooey blob on the surface of Mars, under what
criteria would we classify it as alive or not? ¹ ¹ 1 A phrasing of ‘What
is life?’ by Inman Harvey.

As human observers, we recognise earthly life without having to
reference an explicit definition. In the here-and-now, we identify other
living organisms heuristically. Given a split-second glimpse, or a
freeze-frame photograph, we may suspect that a system is living if its
physical embodiment has special superficial features such as intricate
‘organic-like’ shapes, patterning, fluids, and soft interfaces (which
all hint at a complex underlying biochemistry). Given a short
observation time window, our confidence to attribute ‘life’ is further
increased if we can discern a state change in either the whole system
and/or some of its internal/external parts, particularly if this state
change seems asserted on behalf of the organism, rather than a direct
result of prevailing environmental conditions. The most obvious form of
state change perceptible by our human senses is movement, and thus the
display of goal-directed movements (such as feeding, recoil, avoidance,
hunting, etc.) from organic-like structures is typically how we identify
life in brief encounters. Over longer time scales, we would also be
inclined to identify a system as living if we witnessed it reproduce
itself, or witnessed it carry out a gradual morphogenetic or metamorphic
development process.

Our mental ‘checklist’ approach may be sufficient to recognise living
individuals in daily life, but it does not constitute a formal
definition of the essential qualitative difference between living and
non-living systems. ² ² 2 Our heuristic approach is sometimes faulty in
fact, and we attribute life when there only exists a superficial
resemblance e.g. with life-like robots, or with a piece of dust
twitching in the breeze. A formal definition distilling the core logic
of living systems, if possible, would be much preferred to a list of
heuristics, for it would not only allow earthly life to be recognised,
but should also go some way to explaining how living systems universally
generate their attributes from a deeper organisational scheme. Such a
definition of life could help identify life in other parts of the
universe, could establish a strict criterion on what could be considered
alive in ethical debates, and, in the ideal circumstances, could act as
a unifying principle to transform biology from an observational,
descriptive science into an exact theoretical one.

Life, however, has traditionally resisted a ‘water tight’ consensus
definition, despite a multitude of attempts throughout history (see
\shortciteNP Popa2004). Whereas some systems easily yield to a
characterisation of their core logic, for example a “triangle” is
precisely “a plane figure with three straight sides and three angles”,
the logical scheme common to living systems has been much harder to pin
down. Definitions often end up being too broad and abstract, admitting
trivial cases of non-life, or too specific and narrow, excluding obvious
cases of life. So, what type of problems stand in the way of and
complicate a universal definition of life? A few key examples will be
discussed below.

A first problem is what status cells should take in a definition of
life. The cell is the lowest complexity physical unit unanimously agreed
to be alive, but does this necessarily mean that ‘defining life’ should
be equivalent to ‘defining cellular life’? In other words, are
non-cellular forms of life possible? For example, are viruses alive?
\shortciteA Forterre2010 explains that, rather than being branded as a
pure parasite, viruses can be seen through another lens as a strange
type of organism that only only exists in cellular form intermittently .
Viruses can be seen to propagate in intracellular space the form of
non-metabolising virions, and then manifest their ‘organism’ form once
inside the cytoplasm of cells where they set up complex virion
factories. ³ ³ 3 These virion factories replicate the genome of the
virus and produce more virions to propagate the virus further.
Furthermore, some viruses can completely replace the genome of a host
cell with their own (effectively giving a virus with the appearance of a
cell), and other viruses can become ‘ill’ when their viral factory is
hijacked by yet further viruses.

Cells and organisms themselves can also move into the grey area between
the inert and living. For example, \shortciteA Ganti2003a highlights
that dried seeds and frozen organisms are dormant configurations of
matter not currently ‘alive’, but with the potential for life, given the
right conditions. Indeed, some microbial organisms perform the
living-inert transition routinely, transiting into a non-metabolising
state as a survival strategy whenever environmental conditions become
too harsh ( cryptobiosis , see \shortciteNP Tsujimoto2016). At the other
end of the spectrum, simple chemical systems resulting from reactions
and diffusions of molecules can display life-like properties, such as
division Virgo \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2011 ) . These borderline cases
mean that the set of life is at least a fuzzy set with different
possible levels of membership.

Even disregarding borderline cases, ‘normal’ metabolising life is also
diverse and rife with counterexamples ready to challenge any
comprehensive definition. For example, some cell types cannot reproduce
(red blood cells have no nucleus at their final stage of development),
some eukaryotes (called coenocytes ) have division of their internal
nuclei that is not accompanied by division of the cytoplasm, and some
cells can even survive as just cytoplasm without a surrounding lipid
membrane for transient periods Kim \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2001 ) .

Another issue, discussed further in this Chapter, is that living cells
have both an individual and collective dimension to them. A cell exists
as an individual in its own right, but at the same time it performs
activities which transcend itself, such as dividing and passing on
information in a heritable way such that an evolutionary lineage can be
established (see the discussion of Gánti’s life criteria below). In a
definition, should life be defined at the individual or collective
dimension, or both?

Finally, not helping matters is that the only example of life known
about so far is terrestrial cellular-based life. This ‘sample size of
one’ problem means that it is generally not know to what extent the
biochemistry of earthly living systems is necessary, and to what extent
historical accidents have played a role in shaping their structure and
organisation, for no other independent examples exist. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Some defend
the possibility that there could exist undiscovered groups (or even
whole ecosystems) of micro-organisms right here on earth that could
employ a weird chemistry and hence constitute a qualitatively different
‘alien’ example of life. This ‘shadow biosphere’ hypothesis is discussed
by \shortciteNP Davies2009. Could life exist in different solvents, or
use different molecules for catalysis or for information storage?

Precisely due to reasons like these, Harold Morowitz has referred to the
definition of life as an ‘intellectual maze’ (Morowitz, \APACyear 1992 ,
p4) . Some people have seen little point in entering this maze because
they believe life emerged along a continuum and thus a ‘bright line’
cut-off between living and inert is meaningless (as in Section 1.5 ).
Others think that biological theory is not yet advanced enough to
propose such a definition Cleland \BBA Chyba ( \APACyear 2002 ) . And,
even if an impregnable definition of life did appear one day, some could
argue that it may serve little practical purpose, for being able to
define a phenomenon does not necessarily imply that a full or even
partial explanation of that phenomena has been reached, only that some
particular idiosyncrasy of it has been identified. ⁵ ⁵ 5 In order to be
possible, a life definition would likely have to target one specific
subgroup of life i.e. actively metabolising and singular cellular
systems. Further, in order to be concise, a definition of life would
undoubtedly have to be hierarchical, i.e. it would need to make use of
specific terms loaded with meaning that require whole definition trees
themselves (e.g. like the definition of detailed concepts in mathematics
do). In light of the these problems, it has been suggested that
synthetic cellular life, if eventually created in the lab, may be best
identified via a practical Turing-style imitation game scenario where
living cells, not humans, are the judges Cronin \BOthers . ( \APACyear
2006 ) .

Nevertheless, and as raised in Section 1.5 , the general constellation
of ideas we perceive as meaningful and fruitful for investigating living
systems is undoubtedly important when trying to synthesise life. Such a
constellation sets a makeshift direction for enquiry, whose path can be
subsequently modified as new discoveries are made. In the absence of a
unanimously agreed definition of life, two distinct general conceptions
of life have emerged in the literature (Fig, 2.1 ). The first view is
diachronic, or ‘across time’. It identifies life with the historical
evolutionary process that gave rise to it, and views self-reproduction
and evolution as being the primary properties of living systems enabling
them to engage in population-level competition and selection. The second
general conception of life is synchronic, or ‘in time’. It sees life as
more connected with the organisational logic underpinning the operation
of individual living systems over their short lifetimes, and holds that
self-production, self-maintenance and adaptive behaviour are the primary
properties of living systems.

These ‘evolution’ and ‘autonomy’ conceptions of life, as they will be
called here, are two poignant aspects of biological cells, and cells
typically embody both dimensions simultaneously. ⁶ ⁶ 6 \shortciteA
Ruiz-Mirazo2004 in fact combine both dimensions to attempt a universal
definition of life: living beings, they say, are ‘autonomous systems
with open-ended evolution capacities’. However, most researchers in the
fields of origins of life or artificial life end up gravitating toward
one or the other of these conceptual poles, leaving a vacuous chasm in
the middle. Therefore, the duo exist as almost opposing schools of
investigation. ⁷ ⁷ 7 It is noticeable, for example, that past
International and European conferences on Artificial Life have always
had two seemingly orthogonal tracks: one focussed on population
evolution, and the other on individual behaviour (see \shortciteNP
Aguilar2014). This artificial separation between the life conceptions is
largely due to a difference in timescales, the role of the individual in
each and hence the different theoretical tools and concepts employed in
each. Researchers more biased toward an evolutionary perspective are
concerned with the appearance of traits in populations of individuals
over long trans-generational timescales, and the existence of these
individuals is taken for granted. On the other hand, researchers biased
toward the autonomy conception investigate the particular type of
far-from-equilibrium physicochemical organisation that allows individual
living systems to robustly distinguish themselves from their environment
(and at the same time, respond adaptively to changes in it), over
comparatively short time windows.

The ‘evolution’ and ‘autonomy’ schools of thought in fact actually
closely mirror the potential life criteria and absolute life criteria
classes, respectively, introduced by Tibor Gánti in the 1970’s. As part
of his Chemoton theory (see Section 2.2.3 ), Gánti aimed to clarify how
the units of evolution were related to the units of life, and made the
pertinent point that living cells have attributes existing in two
distinct classes. Cells have to perform essential activities in the
here-and-now, in order to stay viable, and these he called these the
absolute criteria . Cells need to (i) remain as distinct individuals,
(ii) build their own structures by metabolising nutrients, (iii)
demonstrate stability despite internal and environmental fluctuations,
and (iv) must have their metabolism, development and evolution regulated
by an information carrying subsystem. In addition to these essential
prerequisites, Gánti noted, cells must perform activities which are not
necessary for their instantaneous existence, but that are instead
necessary for the long term continuance of the living world of which
they are a part. These potential criteria require living systems to (i)
be capable of growth and multiplication, (ii) have hereditary change
with a capacity for a long term increase in complexity (‘open-ended
evolution’, see later), and (iii) to be capable of dying so that their
composing materials can be recycled and reused within the wider life
system. Gánti argued that systems that only evolve tend to satisfy some
of the potential criteria, whereas systems that live typically span and
satisfy both sets of criteria, but minimally are required to satisfy the
absolute criteria.

Hence, Gánti’s view was that bare evolving systems, like mixtures of
replicator molecules, were strictly not alive. Nevertheless, the
mainstream trend is currently to identify life more with the ‘evolution’
point of view and to marginalise or forget completely about the
‘autonomy’ aspect. Although the autonomy conception has deeper
historical roots, in the scientific era immediately proceeding Darwin,
most people seem more comfortable thinking in a diachronic way, seeing
self-reproduction and evolution as the primary defining features of
life. This view transfers into the protocell world. Protocells are
generally conceived as passive membranous containers whose function is
to segregate and aid replicating genetic molecules.

The remainder of this Chapter reviews the ‘evolutionary’ (Section 2.1 )
and ‘autonomy’ (Section 2.2 ) perspectives in detail, hence looking a
life through diachronic and synchronic lenses respectively. Even though
current mainstream protocell research adopts the evolutionary view as
its conceptual basis, the aim of this Chapter is to bring the autonomy
perspective to the fore and explain how this marginalised conception of
life defines a vital, but until now largely missing, research agenda for
protocells (Section 2.3 ).

### 2.1 Diachronic Lens: Living Systems are Self-Reproducing Systems
with Potential for Open-Ended Evolution

Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection stands as one of the
great unifying principles in all of biology. The theory outlines one
important mechanism helping to build a picture of how cellular life,
starting from a common ancestor (the so called ‘LUCA’, around 3.5-3.8
billion years ago) subsequently diversified, resulting in the grand tree
of life whose branches host the incredible biodiversity that we observe
today (around 1.4-1.9 million species). ⁸ ⁸ 8 Evolution by natural
selection ‘helps’ to build the picture, because as \shortciteA Gould1994
points out in his critical review, natural selection is only a principle
to help explain local adaptations. Natural selection is not an engine
inevitably driving towards a general increase in the complexity of
species over time, although it is often depicted that way. Natural
selection does not explain increases in complexity. \shortciteA
Szathmary1995 have suggested that increases in complexity are achieved
through major evolutionary transitions.

Evolution by natural selection comes about in a population of
interacting individuals or ‘units’, whenever those units (i) have
phenotypic variations (varying morphological or behavioural
characteristics) which in turn (ii) lead to differential fitness
(different probabilities of survival and hence reproduction) and where
(iii) the fitness of parents is somehow partially inherited by their
offspring Lewontin ( \APACyear 1970 ) . Over time, individuals better
adapted to coping with their environments survive longer and reproduce
more (their successful characteristics perpetuated in their offspring),
whereas less well adapted individuals are forced out of the population
for indirect reasons (e.g. they ineffectively compete for limited food
and/or space) or for direct reasons (e.g. they are actively preyed upon
by higher fitness individuals).

From a historical viewpoint, a valid argument could be advanced that the
ability for self-reproduction and a capacity for long term evolvability
(or ‘open-ended evolution’, see Section 2.1.2 below) are necessary
characteristics of living systems. After all, organisms form part of a
long-running evolutionary process, and it is this overarching process
which connects them to both the past and the future. ⁹ ⁹ 9 Even though
they are not capable of having offspring, sterile mules, grandmothers,
red blood cells and neurones are isolated dead ends in an overall
evolutionary process. These examples of non-reproducing living systems
do not constitute complete counterexamples to evolution being important
for life.

However, the contemporary mainstream view leans toward the more extreme
(and simplistic) position that the capacities for self-reproduction and
evolvability are sufficient to define life. “Life is that which evolves”
is the bold opening statement of \shortciteA Chen2012, for example, and
a similar sentiment is echoed in many current papers. \shortciteA
Trifonov2011 recently reported that the ‘average’ definition of life,
drawn from 123 definitions, would be (trivially) ‘Life is
self-reproduction with variations’. Similarly a working definition of
life referenced by many, and originally proposed by an internal NASA
panel, is that ‘Life is a self-sustaining chemical system capable of
undergoing Darwinian evolution’ Joyce ( \APACyear 1994 ) , recently
clarified by Gerald Joyce to mean ‘A chemical system capable of
undergoing Darwinian evolution in a self-sustained manner.’ Mullen (
\APACyear 2013 ) . ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 This clarification shows that the NASA
definition is purely evolutionary. ‘Self-sustained’ refers to evolution
being self-sustained, and not a chemical organisation being
self-sustained or self-maintained. This mainstream position, as
\shortciteA szathmary2005 remark (and actually object against), is the
same as saying that the units of life are the same as the units of
evolution. This equality is convenient, since the units of evolution are
relatively easy to define.

In fact, the mainstream evolutionary view of life often goes one step
further, demoting or discarding completely the capacity for long term
evolvability and promoting the more mechanistic and tangible aspect of
self-reproduction. The reasoning is that self-reproduction at the
individual level ultimately drives evolution at the population level, as
the late Nobel Prize Cristian de Duve wrote in a Nature essay ‘The key
notion in this theory [evolution] is reproduction. The rest follows
obligatorily.’ (de Duve, \APACyear 2005 , p581) . Therefore, we arrive
at the point where living systems are equated to be those which have
growth, self-reproduction and proliferation as their basic
characteristic. In this light, the single cell is effectively seen as
(i.e. effectively reduced to) a self-reproducing system based on the
replication of nucleic acids and the catalytic and functional abilities
of proteins.

A brief clarification is necessary at this point with regards to the
terminology being introduced. ‘Self-replication’ is often used
indiscriminately to refer to systems which bring about more of
themselves, but in a strict sense, self-replication should only refer to
systems which make exact copies of themselves (or an exact copy, within
a small margin of error). When offspring resemble, but are far from
being identical to their parents, ‘self-reproduction’ should be used
instead Dyson ( \APACyear 1999 ); Luisi ( \APACyear 2006 ); Szathmáry
\BBA Maynard Smith ( \APACyear 1997 ) . Individual molecules can
self-replicate, but cells always self-reproduce because the division
process never creates perfectly faithful replicas: considerable
stochastic differences always exist between parent and offspring.

Darwin himself did not write explicitly about the origin of life, but
nor did he discount that a scientific exploration of origins was
impossible Peretó \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2009 ) . Nevertheless, since
the units of evolution are not necessarily restricted to the class of
biological organisms ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The triad of prerequisites is general, not
restricted to organisms: ‘the principles can be applied equally to
genes, organisms, populations, species, and at opposite ends of the
scale, prebiotic molecules and ecosystems.’ (Lewontin, \APACyear 1970 ,
p2) . , a prevailing idea of the last century has been to extrapolate
Darwinian evolution back towards the origin of life, proposing a
precursor ‘chemical evolution’ as the general mechanism to explain
abiogenesis also. With life effectively conceptualised as a
self-reproducing system, the emergence of life has been logically
hypothesised as a continuum from self-replication to self- reproduction
. At the beginning, individual replicator molecules (i.e. naked
templates not requiring enzymes for self-replication) are considered to
have evolved into more complicated chemical systems of replicators
(templates catalysing each other, perhaps involving intermediate
metabolic reactions too), which ultimately culminated in cellular-based
reproducers, that contained replicating macromolecules (e.g. see
\shortciteNP Pross2011,Joyce2002).

From this evolutionary perspective, the origin of life commenced when
chemical evolution got started with the most basic kinds of molecular
replicators. ¹² ¹² 12 It should be noted that evolution is often
inextricably linked with template replicating molecules. But others have
noted that (limited) heredity can also be ensured by systems without a
template, such as in a ‘lipid world’ of mixed composition vesicles Segre
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2000 ) or in compartmented autocatalytic sets
with multiple ‘autocatalytic cores’ Vasas \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2012 )
. The popular RNA World hypothesis, championed by early origin of life
theorist Leslie Orgel Orgel ( \APACyear 1973 , \APACyear 2004 ) ,
proposes that the first self-replicating systems were based on RNA.
Orgel stated “It may be claimed, without too much exaggeration, that the
problem of the origin of life is the problem of the origin of the RNA
World, and that everything that followed is in the domain of natural
selection.” (Orgel, \APACyear 2004 , p100) .

The logic for favouring a pre-living world of RNA replicators is the
following. The metabolism of self-reproducing cells is an extremely
complicated affair whereby polynucleotides specify the synthesis of
amino acids into proteins, and at the same time proteins catalyse the
formation of polynucleotides from nucleotides. The precise organisation
of such a system would prohibit its sudden spontaneous emergence in
prebiotic conditions, and so there should be some more minimal precursor
system leading up to it. Of all the components involved, RNA is singled
out as the most likely candidate to constitute a simple one-molecule
precursor system because of its versatility:

1.  [label= 0 )]

2.  RNA plays a central role in current cell metabolism, acting as an
    information messenger sandwiched between the fixed and stable
    information archive of DNA, and the world of proteins, which put the
    informational content of the DNA into action.

3.  RNA can weakly imitate the functional roles of both DNA and
    proteins: it is a nucleic acid like DNA and thus able to store
    information and potentially replicate by complementary base pairing.
    Also, at the same time, RNA can use its folded structure to catalyse
    a small but relatively diverse set of reactions.

4.  RNA forms the catalytic site for peptide bond formation in cellular
    ribosomes, suggesting an ancient link between RNA and protein
    synthesis.

Even though the origin of the first RNA molecules remains largely
unclear ( \shortciteNP Shapiro2007,Shapiro2000 but see \shortciteNP
Powner2009), the RNA World hypothesis is still actively developed Higgs
\BBA Lehman ( \APACyear 2015 ); Pressman \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2015 )
and has historically spurred a number of developments. These include the
theoretical concept of hypercycles, as a solution to the error-prone
copying of long replicators Eigen \BBA Schuster ( \APACyear 1979 ) . ¹³
¹³ 13 A hypercycle is a group of shorter templates that each
self-replicate with high fidelity and help each other replicate (they
catalyse each other in a closed cycle). The idea is that, rather than a
long template holding all of the ‘information’ and self-replicating
unreliably, the same amount of ‘information’ can be distributed amongst
a mutually dependent group of short replicators that can each perform
accurate self-replication. Other theoreticians have also considered
populations of replicators on two-dimensional surfaces Scheuring
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2003 ); Kamimura \BBA Kaneko ( \APACyear 2014 ) ,
populations of replicators confined in small ‘honeycomb’ enclosures in
porous rock Branciamore \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2009 ) and populations of
replicators inside compartments which divide Szathmáry \BBA Demeter (
\APACyear 1987 ); Bianconi \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2013 ) . In general,
however, the RNA World hypothesis has traditionally disregarded
compartments, and has been silent on how replicators in free solution,
or on surfaces, could have made the transition to organisationally
complex cellular-based lifeforms.

#### 2.1.1 Experimental Mainstream in Protocell Research: The Ribocell

The current experimental mainstream in origins of life research inherits
heavily from the conceptual landscape fashioned by evolutionary thinking
and the RNA World, but in line with the current protocell line of
research reviewed in Chapter 1 , focusses more on the emergence of
cellular, i.e. compartmentalised life. In addition to nucleic acid
replicators, lipid compartmentalisation is considered as an important
factor from the beginning, not just as a late innovation. Enclosing
lipid vesicles are seen as key to helping the Darwinian evolution of an
entrapped replicase because they spatially segregate replicator
populations, forming units of selection, and allow successful mutant
replicases to keep their selective advantage. The main protagonist Jack
Szostak has written ‘Although a protocellular structure poses more
problems initially, it is actually simpler to solve these problems up
front rather than leave them till later when they could become
completely intractable’ (Szostak, \APACyear 2012 \APACexlab \BCnt 2 ,
pp1-2) .

The mainstream project, seeded by the article ‘Synthesizing Life’ in
Nature over a decade ago Szostak \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2001 ) and
followed up periodically since then Mansy \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2008 );
Ricardo \BBA Szostak ( \APACyear 2009 ); Blain \BBA Szostak ( \APACyear
2014 ) , has the long term aim to create a self-replicating nucleic acid
protocell or ‘ribocell’ (see Fig. 1.2 a). ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Another notable
attempt to synthesise a minimal type of evolving life was the Los Alamos
Bug ( \shortciteNP Rasmussen2004, popularised in New Scientist ,
February 2005), a proliferating lipid aggregate system that used a
membrane embedded template molecule to synthesise membrane lipids using
precursors and energy from light. More specifically, the challenge is to
establish the conditions under which a protocell compartment (a lipid
vesicle) can grow and divide in synchronisation with the base pairing
and strand separation of an entrapped RNA. The ribocell is thought to
constitute an extremely minimal cellular-like reproducing system within
reach of complete laboratory synthesis . Such a protocell would ideally
divide into daughters, which then go on to do the same, hence
establishing a primitive cell cycle. The argument is that once this cell
cycle becomes established (and sustainable), then the chemical system
has the golden ticket to start Darwinian evolution. From there,
presumably, ‘‘evolution is cleverer than you are’’ (Orgel’s second
rule). ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 The long term evolutionary potential of the ribocell
system is a problem presumably postponed until the first reproduction
stage has been realised.

Whilst the grand aim of the ribocell is to achieve the coordination of
molecular genome replication and supramolecular compartment
reproduction, current efforts are invested in tackling two pre-problems
which need to be solved before the main problem can be properly
attempted. The first problem is how non-enzymatic replication of the RNA
genome comes about Szostak ( \APACyear 2012 \APACexlab \BCnt 2 ) . The
second problem, which is a fundamental problem in the origins of
cellular life, is to establish how protocells started to divide in a
semi-reliable way, given that they could not possibly possess the
complex biochemical machinery (septal or ‘Z ring’, see \shortciteNP
Weiss2004) that modern cells use to accomplish this task. In this
regard, the roles of simple physical forces and external stimuli are
being investigated as primitive protocell division mechanisms Errington
( \APACyear 2013 ); Murtas ( \APACyear 2013 ); Svetina ( \APACyear 2009
); Solé \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2009 ); Hanczyc \BBA Szostak ( \APACyear
2004 ) . Another relevant aspect in this puzzle is that of protocell
competition . Even if the ribocell could be made to do a lifecycle,
there would be multiplication with heredity, but no selection as such.
Therefore, how protocells might locally compete with each other is an
area under active investigation Budin \BBA Szostak ( \APACyear 2011 );
Chen \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2004 ); Shirt-Ediss \BOthers . ( \APACyear
2014 ) , particularly when the genome inside the protocell could cause
the compartmentalised system as a whole to become a better competitor
Adamala \BBA Szostak ( \APACyear 2013 ) .

The most recent empirical advances on an integrated, self-replicating
nucleic acid protocell have come in the form of partial solutions
covering different parts of the grand scheme outlined above. \shortciteA
Ichihashi2013 report on a “cell-like” system based on micrometer water
droplets in oil, whereby each droplet contains RNA templates which can
replicate thanks to an added translation system. Over generations of
manually fusing and dividing the droplets, they find that RNA
replication (which has been introducing mutations in the RNAs) generally
increases in efficiency and parasitic side reactions tend to decrease in
efficiency. Therefore this system, whilst requiring significant human
intervention, constitutes an empirical example of chemical evolution in
cell-like environments. Working with lipid-based protocells, \shortciteA
Terasawa2012 have reported that deflated GUV vesicles containing an
inert polymer in their aqueous pool (mimicking a macromolecule, like a
nucleic acid) can readily assume a budded shape and divide. They
postulate that a simple physical link could exist between the presence
of genetic material and protocell compartment division, mediated by the
effect of excluded volume. \shortciteA Kurihara2011 have reported on
another relationship apparently holding between macromolecules and
compartment division: DNA macromolecules can speed up the spontaneous
growth and division of lipid vesicles when lipid precursor is added
because they embed in the lipid membrane and cause local deformations.
Finally, \shortciteA Hardy2015 have recently reported a vesicle system
that can keep reproducing indefinitely (but lacking encapsulated
templates).

Being well-defined, the ‘synchronisation problem’ of simultaneous genome
replication and compartment reproduction has also attracted theoretical
modelling and analysis. By constructing minimal linear models of growing
protocell systems composed of two variables, genetic material @xmath and
compartment material @xmath , \shortciteA Carletti2008 have been able to
prove analytically that such models will converge to constant division
times. Furthermore, they demonstrate constant division times result
regardless of whether the genetic material is anchored in the membrane,
or is floating inside the enclosed aqueous volume of the protocell.
Using a more sophisticated model with physically realistic parameters,
\shortciteA Mavelli2012 has performed stochastic simulations of the
ribocell, mimicking the original \shortciteA Szostak2001 idea in-silico
in order to investigate parameter regions leading to synchronisation and
factors introduced by fluctuations. Finally, \shortciteA Mavelli2013
have recently focussed in detail on the compartment reproduction half of
the problem. Adopting a more general perspective, they have derived a
formula specifying what relationships must hold between different
parameters in a realistic protocell model - regardless of whether the
metabolism is template controlled or not - such that a sustainable
division cycle becomes established, creating the conditions for
population evolution.

#### 2.1.2 Von Neumann’s Logical Organisation for Self-Replicating
Machine Automata

Hungarian mathematician John von Neumann started an intriguing body of
work generally related to the topic of systems that
self-replicate/self-reproduce, well worth including as part of this
section. Von Neumann worked quite independently from the fields of
origin of life and definition of life ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 von Neumann did not
comment on how his logical definition of a self-replicating machine was
appropriate for a definition of life. Maturana and Varela, on the other
hand (see Section 2.2.2 ), made explicit that their logical definition
of a self-producing ‘autopoietic’ machine was a necessary and sufficient
condition for life. and he was enthralled by one abstract problem
concerning the limiting capabilities of automata which can construct
other automata. Von Neumann was interested in the answer to the general
question “Can the construction of automata by automata progress from
simpler types to increasingly complicated types?” (von Neumann,
\APACyear 1966 , p92, Question E) . According to \shortciteA
McMullin2000, by posing such a question, von Neumann was actually
pursuing the important problem of open-ended evolution and the minimum
complexity machine that could achieve it.

A unit of selection with the capacity for open-ended evolution is able
to evolve, but crucially is also able to sustain evolutionary change in
the long term , without reaching a pre-determined upper limit of
organisational complexity Ruiz-Mirazo \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2008 ) . ¹⁷
¹⁷ 17 For an example, \shortciteA Dawkins1986 touched on the idea of
open-ended evolution when discussing the ‘evolution of evolvability’.
Here, he postulated that some types of organisms may not only be good at
surviving , but also good at actually evolving . He noted that certain
genotype encodings of his computational ‘biomorph’ creatures are more
pregnant with possibility when it comes to evolution e.g. the ability to
specify body segments in a genotype leads to a multitude of forms not
possible without segmentation. Biological systems are systems capable of
evolving in an open-ended way, and it is this non-asymptotic feature of
their construction which has permitted the emergence of the ‘endless
forms’ of life, including complex multi-cellular beings. If biological
systems had possessed no open-ended capacity, evolution may have
produced just well-adapted microbial communities on Earth (or, simpler,
chemical assemblies) and then reached an impassable ceiling of
complexity, a plateau. However, for its subtlety, the capacity for
open-endedness is an often forgotten ingredient in evolutionary
definitions of life.

Von Neumann’s ‘Question E’ cited above is interesting because, in some
evolutionary lineages, there has been an increase in the complexity of
biological molecular machines over time, whereas the type of
electromechanical machines that we currently build through engineering
generally involve a large degeneration of complexity at each stage of
production. To construct a machine of a given complexity with our
current technology, an even more complicated machine is required, and
ultimately humans are required to construct the most complicated
machines. ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 In fact, humans are often required as an essential
part of many complex production processes, such as in microelectronics,
or car production. Machines rarely independently create others. The
machine currently coming closest is probably the Rep-Rap 3d printer:
version 1 can print 50% of its plastic parts (but not metal parts, nor
electronics). Virtual physics worlds, such as cellular automata (CA),
are more forgiving than the real world, and self-replicating ‘machines’
of grid cells can be realised. Von Neumann himself demonstrated a CA
design requiring 29 states for each cell. Since then, simpler designs
like the self-replicating loop by Christopher Langton have been
proposed. In manufacturing, at the intersection between a degeneration
and a growth of complexity lies self-replication, whereby a machine
creates another in the precise image of itself. Therefore, leading up to
Question E above, von Neumann posed a pre-problem: “Can any automata
construct other automata that are exactly like it? Can it be made, in
addition, to perform further tasks, e.g. also construct certain other,
prescribed automata?” (von Neumann, \APACyear 1966 , p92, Question D) .
It was in answer to this question that von Neumann devised the essential
logic of self-replication (Fig. 2.2 a).

According to von Neumann, a self-replicating system must consist of four
logical parts: a constructor A, a duplicator B, a controller C and
blueprint instructions @xmath (A+B+C) that specify how to construct the
machine of parts A, B and C from available resources. In the original
machine, the constructor A interprets stored blueprint instructions
@xmath to construct a physical replica of itself by utilising material
from the surroundings. The duplicator B in the original machine also
copies the blueprint instructions into the replica without interpreting
them. The controller C ensures that the constructor and duplicator are
well-coordinated as the replica is formed, so that it eventually ends up
with identical hardware and blueprints to the original machine. Without
a constructor A, a machine cannot synthesise anything physically new,
rendering self-replication impossible; missing blueprint duplicator B, a
machine can synthesise a replica, but the replica will not have
operating instructions, and thus will be forever static; lacking a
controller C implies no coordination to the overall self-replication of
material and information. It should be noted that the instructions
@xmath can make the machine carry out other useful behaviours unrelated
to self-replication. Self-replication may be a crucial but infrequent
aspect of the machine.

The self-replication logic proposed by von Neumann maps directly into
the scenario of a chain of self-replicating robots which construct
themselves from a parts store (Fig. 2.2 c). A pre-existing initial robot
fetches parts from a specially arranged parts store and uses them to
construct the body of a second robot. On completing the construction
task, the controller of the original robot then copies the software
program into the second robot. On completion, the second robot is
switched on, and both work together to construct the third robot, and so
on. ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 Alternatively, the second robot could go and locate another
parts store to construct the third robot from there.

It is an interesting exercise to see how far von Neumann’s
self-replicating logic applies to mitotic cell division. In mitotic
division, the cell does not build a copy of itself in the environment de
novo . Rather, the cell takes in nutrients, grows, and then radically
re-organises its internal structure, duplicating its essential
components at each pole before dividing in the middle. Figure 2.3 shows
how von Neumann’s replication logic could approximately apply to this
process. Approximate signs on the arrows acknowledge that cell division
is actually a case of self-reproduction and not exact self-replication
(i.e. the daughter cells are not identical to the parent, nor to each
other). In the cell, the information @xmath corresponds to the DNA, the
constructor A corresponds to the general system of cell metabolism, the
duplicator B corresponds to the spindle apparatus and the controller C
consists of the complex interactions in which the cell segregates its
components, and then constricts the membrane. Mitotic cell division
always results in the loss of the parent cell, leading to a different
type of lineage than does machine replication (compare Fig. 2.3 b with
Fig. 2.2 b).

For self-replicators of lower complexity (e.g. template molecules, or
protocells), the essential elements of von Neumann’s replicator logic
often meld together. For example, for template molecules, construction,
duplication and control all seem to be entailed by the process of
complementary base pairing. Likewise, in early protocells, the
information instructing the system how to divide is somehow embedded in
the physical components themselves and their interaction with outside
influences, rather than being explicitly encoded in a molecular medium.
The same applies to Gánti’s chemoton (see Section 2.2.3 later); it
proliferates and is program controlled, but the program does not contain
an independent description of how to build a new microsphere from
scratch.

### 2.2 Synchronic Lens: Living Systems are Autonomous Agents

Even though living systems can be legitimately described as
self-reproducing systems which evolve, this does not fully meet our
daily experience of them. Indeed, when confronted with the pink gooey
blob on Mars, applying the criteria of self-reproduction and evolution
would actually seem like very indirect and distant ways to establish
whether it was alive or not. Rather, in the here-and-now, what
immediately strikes us about individual organisms is their apparent
purposefulness , a property typically absent from other types of
physicochemical system. During their ontogenetic lifetimes, in between
bouts of self-reproduction, organisms act conspicuously as autonomous
agents , forever reaching out to manipulate their world in the apparent
pursuit of their own agenda and goals.

Bacteria are the often cited example of biological autonomous agents,
performing actions which tend to benefit their own survival and eventual
reproduction. As Pross writes, “bacteria when placed in a glucose
solution gradient ‘swim’ upstream to take advantage of the higher
concentration of nutrient available there. Or, if glucose, the cell’s
primary energy source, is replaced by lactose, then the cell synthesises
the enzyme necessary to break down the complex sugar into its
constituent simple sugars, glucose and galactose.” (Pross, \APACyear
2008 , p725) . ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 This is the lac-operon mechanism. Indeed,
prokaryotes are impressive metabolisers, able to switch their metabolic
configuration to extract resources from almost anywhere. Apart from a
flexible metabolic capacity, other remarkable cases of adaptive
behaviour are also routinely demonstrated in individual cells and
single-celled organisms. For example, individual cells of the red alga
Antithamnion can show meticulously coordinated self-repair when its cell
wall is torn into two pieces by a fine needle, and the gel-like
single-celled amoeba can adjust its rate of reproduction to match food
supply, use different engulfing tactics to suit different types of
microscopic prey, and in some species, can even construct an intricate
protective shell from inert materials found in the environment Ford (
\APACyear 2009 ) . In another example amongst many, E. coli have been
shown to have abilities of environmental anticipation embedded into
their metabolic networks A. Mitchell \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2009 ) .

In the intellectual landscape before Darwin, the purposeful or so called
‘teleological’ character of organisms was the original hallmark used to
differentiate living systems from the non-living. The question was, how
could such teleology exist in a universe governed by objective natural
law? How could there be doings , and not merely happenings ? Early
philosophers such as Aristotle, Descartes and then later Kant invested
much thought on how teleology was manifest in the living, and to what
extent organisms could be viewed as mere machines (see \shortciteNP
[Section 1 therein]Bedau2010). In particular, Kant termed organisms
natural purposes and hinted that their teleology may be brought about
through self-organisation of matter, seeding the embryo ideas of
self-organisation and emergence at the same time Weber \BBA Varela (
\APACyear 2002 ) .

An autonomous agent can be roughly defined as a system (i) with some
capacity for self-generating the rules that determine its behaviour, and
that (ii) directs this behaviour toward ongoing activity beneficial for
the survival of the system over the short or long term (like eating,
hunting, hibernating etc.). Put more bluntly, autonomous agents are some
special arrangement of matter that appears to be ‘selfish’ Kauffman (
\APACyear 2000 ) . In a different phrasing, \shortciteA Boden2008 writes
that “autonomy is self-determination: the ability to do what one does
independently, without being forced so to do by some outside power…an
individual’s autonomy is the greater, the more its behaviour is directed
by self-generated (and idiosyncratic) inner mechanisms” (pp1-2). So
autonomous agents are not mere slaves to their environment. Another key
characteristic of autonomous agents, highlighted by \shortciteA
Collier2008, is that they are often masters of anticipation , able to
project probable (favourable or unfavourable) future states from present
conditions and past history and then use this information to determine
present dynamics accordingly. In such a way, the behaviour of autonomous
agents is not directly tied to perception, but also guided by history
and past associations made. Table 2.1 summarises some of the striking
differences existing between autonomous agents and other physicochemical
systems.

Efforts to precisely define autonomy, and give a quantitative measure
allowing different systems to be directly compared, have been harder to
develop. Existing attempts have tended to equate autonomy with
self-determination (as echoed by Boden above), granting higher autonomy
values to systems that are more determined by their own processes rather
than by external influences, i.e. autonomy is equivalent to the
statistical independence of an agent from its environment Seth (
\APACyear 2010 ); Bertschinger \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2008 ) . However,
as \shortciteA Barandiaran2009 articulate, although this method has some
merit, autonomous agents occupy a conceptually more tricky position than
this.

For example, sometimes an agent will let its behaviour be largely
determined by the environment and will take advantage of or ‘surf’
prevailing conditions (e.g. a bird gliding on air currents), only to
minimally intervene at key moments, changing its relationship to the
environment in very subtle ways (e.g. a wing movement), such that a goal
is achieved in the long run (e.g. intercontinental migration). In this
context, statistical analysis has a difficult time in distinguishing the
agent as the overall source of its own activity when the interventions
it makes are so small, and the role played by the environmental forces
is so large.

Evidently ‘autonomy’, like ‘life’, is a slippery concept of which we
have some intuition, but which becomes difficult to formalise. ²¹ ²¹ 21
‘Intelligence’ or ‘complex system’ are other major concepts we talk of
routinely without possessing agreed and comprehensive definitions for.
However, some progress can be made into the type of physicochemical
organisation which lies at the root of - and ultimately gives rise to -
autonomous behaviour in living systems. This is discussed below for the
remainder of Section 2.2 .

#### 2.2.1 The Behavioural and Constitutive Dimensions of Autonomous
Agents

The class of autonomous agents is evidently wider than all biological
organisms, for on the rough definition given above, it would also
encompass (at least) the artificial agents created by man, such as
learning Khepera robots, Google self-driving cars and the Mars curiosity
lander module, to name a few. Within this wide class, two qualitatively
different types of autonomy can be usefully distinguished (see
\shortciteNP Froese2007,Moreno2008).

All autonomous agents, regardless of whether embodied as exquisitely
organised collections of biomolecules (living systems) or as coarse
assemblies of metal, plastics and semiconductors (robots), implement a
sense of behavioural autonomy . To some extent, all regulate their
coupling with the environment in an adaptive way in order to carry out
their own agenda. Behavioural autonomy is generally termed ‘agency’.

In addition, the subset of biological systems also implement a much
stronger form of autonomy, called constitutive autonomy or ‘biological
autonomy’, as used by \shortciteA Moreno2015 and originally by
\shortciteA varela1979. Living organisms not only regulate their
interactions with the environment, but they also actively distinguish
themselves from the environment at the same time: that is, they build
and maintain their own bodies. This is an absolute necessity, since most
of the complex molecules composing cells have extremely short half lives
as compared to the lifetime of the organism, and therefore demand
constant re-synthesis. Cells thus exist at the molecular level as
remarkable ‘fluid machines’, organised such that part of the operation
of the machine is to continually replace the decaying or diffusing
components of which the machine itself is made (self-maintenance). Thus,
whilst a cell appears to persist as a unity on the macro-level, this
persistence is only of form and not of matter : the microscopic
structure is actually a constant turnover or flow of different
molecules. This operative scenario stands in stark contrast to (current)
man-made machines. Man-made, or so called ‘heteronomous’ machines - all
robots included - come pre-embodied as a linkage of coarse-grain
components that simply persist over time. The fuel input to such
machines is not used to construct or repair part of the structure, but
is rather just used to move the pre-existing structure, with only the
fuel itself undergoing chemical transformation.

The idea of constitutive autonomy is an important one, for it means that
the activity of a cell, is coincident with, and not detached from, its
very being . As \shortciteA Kampis1995 phrases, ‘‘In cells, the action
results in its own blueprint’’ (p96). In other words, what a cell is
materially, and what it does behaviourally, are deeply and intimately
connected. ²² ²² 22 For higher, multicellular organisms, the behaviour
of the organism may be more decoupled from its material realisation,
e.g. determined more by the action of a neural system. The way cells
continually build their structure, and synthesise new components in
response to environmental changes is, naturally, deeply intertwined with
the way they interact with their environments. For cells, the
constitutive and behavioural aspects of autonomy are two inseparable
sides of the same coin. ²³ ²³ 23 However, theoretical cell models nearly
always presume the existence of the cellular body, and just focus on the
dynamics of behaviour, or of internal chemical reactions. Few models
explicitly tackle the issue of body construction, although this was the
vision for modelling efforts when the European Conferences for
Artificial Life were founded Bourgine \BBA Varela ( \APACyear 1992 ) .

Of crucial importance here is to realise that the specific type of
autonomy possessed by biological systems goes all the way down to the
root of the existence of the system itself. This ‘radical embodiment’ of
biological systems creates a unique state of affairs, a new paradigm. On
the one hand, all man-made machines, including even robots that
demonstrate some degree of behavioural autonomy, all bear the indelible
mark of an external human designer. A robot may be able to learn new
associations, but this capacity is somehow primed and requested by the
external designer, rather than being of intrinsic value to the robot
itself. ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 But, it is an open question, if beyond a threshold
complexity of ‘wiring’, intelligence could emerge in a robot based on a
non-biological substrate (however, such a robot built at the macro-scale
level would not be able to synthesise its own components, and so would
be unable to grow or self-repair). , The designer is the one who points
out what a machine should find relevant about the world it inhabits.
Thus, the function attained by the machine holds relevance for the
designer but is alien to the machine itself: the machine materially
persists regardless of whether performing its intended function or not.
²⁵ ²⁵ 25 Ray Bradbury’s collection of short stories The Martian
Chronicles Bradbury ( \APACyear 1950 ) has several poignant sci-fi
examples of intelligent robotic devices carrying out an essentially
meaningless existence after humans have departed. In one case, after the
wipe out of earthly civilisation following nuclear war, intelligent
houses continue to tidy away dust, wash dishes and make breakfast as
usual, but for no purpose. In another case, a captain’s android family
go on mindlessly in the same routine after his death. On the other hand,
by continually synthesising their own embodiment, biological systems
cannot be reduced to mere artefacts that simply extend the autonomy of a
human designer, like machines can. Instead, there becomes a case to talk
about the presence of ‘genuine’ autonomy in biological systems, a
concern about the world that is not externally imposed. In a biological
system, say a cell, what is ‘good’ and ‘bad’ for the system, the so
called norms of operation, are not decided a priori by an external
authority, but instead spontaneously arise from the very organisation
and ongoing dynamics of the system itself (see \shortciteNP
Barandiaran2014). A cell determines what is relevant for itself and
behaves in a way that generally ensures its continued material
existence. Likewise, the distinguishable components of a self-generated
biological system acquire specific roles or functions , not because
these were stipulated by an outside agent, but because the components
each assist, in some specific capacity, the maintenance of the whole
system. As \shortciteA Rosen1991 explains, the function of a component
in a self-maintaining system can be ascertained by removing that
component, and observing the behaviour of the whole system in its
absence. From this perspective, the function of mechano-sensitive
channels in bacteria is to help the organism survive large and sudden
osmotic shocks.

The idea of constitutive autonomy (self-maintenance) stems from and is
articulated in more detail by the theory of autopoiesis , reviewed in
the following subsection.

#### 2.2.2 Maturana and Varela’s Logical Organisation for the Living
Cell: Autopoiesis

The theory of autopoiesis was introduced in the 1970’s by Chilean
biologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela as an attempt to
describe the abstract logical organisation of the cell and to provide an
essentialist definition of life Maturana \BBA Varela ( \APACyear 1980 );
Luisi ( \APACyear 2003 ); Fleischaker ( \APACyear 1988 ) . Although the
main ideas behind autopoiesis can be traced back (at least) to Immanuel
Kant and then identified in the writings of numerous scientists and
philosophers since (including Claude Bernard, Hans Jonas and Aleksandr
Oparin, for example ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 The reader should refer to \shortciteNP
Moreno2015 for a general account of the historical development of
autopoietic ideas. ), Maturana and Varela were the first to take these
ideas, shape them into a concise definition of life, and then rigorously
pursue what such a definition implied for the autonomy of living
systems. Indeed, it was this extra step, this connection with autonomy,
that set it apart from other theories.

Autopoiesis is a theory situated within the field of relational biology
(see \shortciteNP [Ch5]Rosen1991). Relational biology considers
biological systems from the point of view of the abstract relations or
logical organisation that connect the components together into a
functioning whole , and forgets about the exact biochemical nature of
these components. This top-down description thus captures the ‘forest’
at the expense of blurring the ‘trees’, and represents the exact
opposite of the traditional analytical approach to biology. In the
analytical or reductive approach, the workings of individual components
or sub-systems are characterised in detail (the trees), but yet this
information cannot be pieced together to form a fully integrated account
of the organism (the forest). ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 Mathematical physicist Nicholas
Rashevsky moved into relational biology in the 1950’s, later in his
career (and invented the discipline), after working for many years on
detailed (and pioneering) analytical models of isolated aspects of
organisms. The two approaches are complementary, but require different
branches of mathematics to express. Unconventional for some, relational
biology is not concerned with time nor with material structure, nor even
states, but is instead concerned with invariant organisation of
processes, usually expressed as graphs, hypersets or category theory.

Autopoietic theory itself can be seen to arise from a number of basic
and quite undeniable observations that can be made about a living
prokaryote cell. A prokaryote is:

1.  [label= 0 )]

2.  a system localised in space, distinguishable from the environment by
    the person observing it

3.  an open system far-from-equilibrium, absorbing nutrients and
    excreting waste

4.  internally manufacturing the majority of components it requires and
    of which it is made, including highly complex macromolecules (DNA,
    RNA, proteins etc.) - from simpler and less diverse materials in the
    nutrient medium (e.g. glucose and various salts). ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 The fact
    that a cell is able to synthesise all of its components is evidenced
    by cell division. Cell division can only result in two daughters
    resembling the parent cell only if a copy can be made of everything
    not immediately available from the environment. DNA could be argued
    to copy itself, but the fact is, it still requires enzymes from the
    cell to unwind its double helix, and help pairing of nucleotides to
    the separated strands making two new identical DNA molecules.

    3a ) including its own boundary i.e. a surrounding semi-permeable
    phospholipid membrane which selectively absorbs nutrients and expels
    waste.

5.  effective only as an organised whole. A prokaryote put through a
    blender results in a system of molecules with the same chemical
    composition as the original intact cell, but it is simply an inert
    paste, not a living organism.

To formulate autopoiesis, Maturana and Varela asked the following
pertinent question: what does a cellular machine essentially have to be
in order to generate the basic observations above?

By ‘to be’, they were not searching for a detailed biochemical and
physical description of a particular species of bacteria. Rather, they
were interested in trying to define life in general and so they were
seeking to identify the abstract relational logic a bacterium was
implementing. As such, they focussed on how the cell must be globally
organised as a series of processes ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 a “process transforms
something into something else (a chemical reaction transforms its
reactants into its products; a transport process transforms the spatial
distribution of a substance; friction transforms kinetic energy into
heat)” Virgo \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2011 ) . , such that the system was
overall a self-producing and self-bounding machine in physical space.
They called this type of machine an ‘autopoietic’ machine (greek: auto
=self, poiesis =creating/producing), defined as follows:

  An autopoietic machine is a machine organized (defined as a unity) as
  a network of processes of production (transformation and destruction)
  of components that produces the components which:
  (i) through their interactions and transformations continuously
  regenerate and realize the network of processes (relations) that
  produced them; and
  (ii) constitute it (the machine) as a concrete unity in the space in
  which they (the components) exist by specifying the topological domain
  of its realization as such a network.
  Maturana and Varela, De Maquinas y Seres Vivos (1972)
  Reprinted in (Maturana \BBA Varela, \APACyear 1980 , pp78-79)

Phrased in more colloquial language, an autopoietic machine is a
peculiar type of “biochemical factory that autonomously fabricates
itself” Hofmeyr ( \APACyear 2007 ) .

Maturana and Varela hold that all cells are autopoietic machines. ³⁰ ³⁰
30 Autopoiesis was developed in the context of the single cell.
Multicellular living systems are also self-producing systems, but how
the ‘first order’ autopoiesis of the cell extends to such ‘second order’
structures is less clear and not a well developed part of the theory.
@xmath ³¹ ³¹ 31 Stating that all cells are autopoietic machines is, on
its own, equivalent to saying that autopoiesis is necessary for life and
leaves room for life entailing something more besides (such as the
capacity for open-ended evolution for example). However, Maturana and
Varela also adopted the stronger position, that autopoiesis was
sufficient to decisively demarcate living systems from non-living
systems. At the level of the whole cell system, there exists web of
interrelated processes (e.g. catalysed reactions, molecular diffusions,
energy transduction mechanisms, active transport mechanisms, etc.) whose
operation (i.e. cell component dynamics) ensures the re-creation of the
very same process network, and at the same time builds an enclosing
supra-molecular membrane structure in physical space to give the process
network an identity distinct from the surrounding milieu.

On a first reading, autopoietic machines and Von Neumann’s
self-replicating machines (Fig. 2.2 ) seem to be almost equivalent
ideas. After all, both are machines able to fabricate themselves.
However, the ideas are quite distinct. Von Neumann’s replicators
fabricate an independent replica copy of themselves in the environment,
and once assembled, a machine has a static enduring embodiment.
Autopoietic machines, on the other hand, are organised to keep
re-fabricating their own embodiment at each moment in time; they have a
dynamic structure constantly in molecular turnover where most components
and assemblies quickly decay and need continual re-synthesis.

An alternative way to see autopoietic machines, is as an extreme type of
homeostatic device:

  an autopoietic machine is a homeostatic (or rather relations-static)
  system which has its own organization (defining network of relations)
  as the fundamental variable which it maintains constant.
  ( Maturana \BBA Varela , \APACyear 1980 , p79)

Whilst man-made homeostatic devices (Watt’s governors, thermostats or
switched-mode power supplies, etc.) have fixed evolution equations to
maintain just one essential variable within bounds (fuel flow,
temperature and voltage respectively), the ‘set point’ of an autopoietic
machine is its autopoietic organisation, i.e. the topology of relations
allowing the system to exist in the first place. Cells maintain their
basic autopoietic organisation at all times, despite the fact that the
microscopic structure of the system is in a continual state of molecular
turnover (the cell could be growing, moving, changing shape etc.).
Losing the autopoietic organisation implies disintegration, according to
Maturana and Varela.

##### Autopoiesis as Organisational Closure

The definition of autopoiesis can be understood as a certain type of
closure (see \shortciteNP Mossio2013), called organisational closure .
Organisms maintain their organisational closure invariant as their
molecular structure changes. It is useful at this stage to make a brief
detour to develop an intuition of what closure actually means. This can
be done by considering a simple example of closure in a catalysed
chemical reaction network.

In chemical reaction systems, catalyst species help accelerate the
spontaneous rate of chemical reactions, sometimes by many orders of
magnitude, by lowering the activation energy barrier of a reaction,
providing an alternate, easier route from reactants to products. In this
process the catalyst is not consumed or transformed itself. ³² ³² 32 In
a reaction, the catalyst does disappear temporarily – for example,
forming a brief intermediate called an enzyme-substrate complex – but it
is recreated in the final reaction step. Also, a catalyst need not
necessarily be a single molecule, it can be a surface, or the overall
action of a chemical cycle for example.

A collectively autocatalytic set is “a subset of molecules and reactions
where each molecule is created by at least one reaction from this set,
and each reaction is catalysed by at least one molecule from the set”
Kauffman ( \APACyear 1986 ); Hordijk \BBA Steel ( \APACyear 2004 ) . The
crucial point is that each reaction in the autocatalytic set can only
take place when all of the other reactions in the set are also taking
place, because each reaction requires catalysts/products made by the
other reactions (no molecule catalyses its own formation). This
‘collective existence’ property of the reaction set is called catalytic
closure .

Figure 2.4 shows a hypothetical autocatalytic set of reactions in three
different representations. Representations (a) and (b) are equivalent,
with the latter petri net graph giving a more intuitive picture of the
flow and roles of chemical species. Representation (c) shows the same
autocatalytic set in a slightly more abstract way; as a series of
connected processes . An arrow from one process @xmath to another
process @xmath , indicates that @xmath enables the occurrence of @xmath
in some way, and arrows marked with a star represent that @xmath enables
@xmath specifically because @xmath catalyses @xmath .

All four reactions feature in this process representation, as they can
be legitimately described as processes of molecular transformation.
Also, a fifth process @xmath is present, and refers to the continuous
pumping of a high energy food set of molecules ( @xmath and @xmath ) as
being necessary to enable reactions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (and
indirectly @xmath ). Another process omitted from the diagram could be
the ‘containment process’ ensuring that all reactions take place in
sufficient proximity such that their products are accessible by the
other reactions: this would have an ‘enables’ arrow to all four
reactions.

From the process graph in Fig. 2.4 c, it is easiest to observe the
feature of (catalytic) closure, highlighted with thick black arrows. If
reaction @xmath is taken out of the system indefinitely, reactions
@xmath and @xmath can no longer take place, as @xmath was supplying the
reactant a needed by both of them. Likewise, if reaction @xmath is
stopped permanently then @xmath cannot take place as it’s catalyst
@xmath is no longer produced and @xmath also stops because @xmath was
required as a reactant. Finally, knocking out @xmath will first stop
@xmath because catalyst @xmath is no longer produced, and this in turn
will stop the manufacture of catalyst @xmath , halting @xmath .

Thus, given that a continual supply of food resources is available (i.e.
process @xmath is ‘on’), the closed set of reactions @xmath in a sense
form a ‘strongly symbiotic’ group, producing the molecular and catalytic
requirements of each other, in a self-sustained manner. In the long
term, either all reactions @xmath will be taking place together, or none
of them will be taking place. Reaction @xmath is not in the
catalytically closed network, because it simply feeds off product @xmath
made by reaction @xmath (a ‘parasite’ or ‘side reaction’). Permanently
disabling @xmath has no effect on the continuance of @xmath . ³³ ³³ 33
The minimal example presented here is engineered to convey the general
idea of catalytic closure. Recent formal treatment of the problem
Hordijk \BBA Steel ( \APACyear 2004 ); Hordijk \BOthers . ( \APACyear
2013 ) has addressed detecting autocatalytic sets in large randomly
generated reaction systems. Typically, large AC sets exist (maxRAFs),
but these may be further composed of sub-networks which by themselves
are autocatalytic (subRAFs). In turn, subRAFs may be further decomposed
until minimal irreducible self-sustaining sets are reached (irrRAFs).
Therefore, in large systems, it is generally not the case that
permanently disabling one reaction leads to the disappearance of the
entire autocatalytic set.

Now returning to autopoiesis, \shortciteA [Ch7 therein]varela1979 stated
that autopoietic machines implement organisational closure. He meant by
this that, because an autopoietic machine continually constructs its own
material embodiment from ambient nutrients, then every process in the
system necessarily has to be made possible from the actions of other
processes in the system, and thus the group of processes constituting
the system are only viable collectively , just like the closed set of
reactions @xmath in our autocatalytic example. That is, if an
autopoietic machine is taken apart or severely damaged, its
multimolecular, macromolecular and supramolecular components will
disintegrate quickly. An autopoietic machine can be depicted as a
process closure diagram, similar to Fig. 2.4 c. Autopoietic machines
however implement a specific type of process closure, because one extra
requirement is that some of the processes must build a membrane and
constitute the system as a unity in space (part (ii) of the definition
of autopoiesis).

Figure 2.5 shows a single-celled amoeba both in physical space as we
observe it, and the autopoietic organisation giving rise to such a
complex physicochemical system represented (very) abstractly as a
hypothetical graph of closed process dependencies. Processes marked with
@xmath are processes concerned with the production of a semi-permeable
membrane, or processes which are made possible by the fact that a
semi-permeable membrane is produced, such as passive or active molecular
diffusions across the membrane boundary. The closed network of processes
@xmath , marked in black, has the collective action to realise the same
network over time, whilst also materially constructing the amoeba in
space. Dissecting the amoeba, disrupting any one of the processes @xmath
will eventually cause all of the other processes in the closed network
to stop, leading to the irrecoverable disintegration of the amoeba. ³⁴
³⁴ 34 Although there could be some redundancy: if some processes are
stopped, organisational closure could still be ensured by other
processes filling their role. Green process circles denote events whose
operation continues regardless of whether or not the amoeba exists, but
whose presence is required to create a niche in which the amoeba can
survive (e.g. by providing nutrients, or sunlight if the organism is
autotrophic). Blue process circles are events that the amoeba enables
through its operation, but are of no further consequence to the amoeba
(like the excretion of waste products). Red circles are processes
entirely independent of the amoeba, and their existence, or
non-existence, is inconsequential for the bug.

Processes and their closure in Fig. 2.5 b are at a higher level of
abstraction than those in Fig. 2.4 c. In the latter case, processes
corresponded to catalysed chemical reactions, and each process had its
enabling conditions met quite simply: i.e. when the required reactant
and catalyst molecules were present in the (well-stirred) reaction
solution. The autopoietic machine of Fig. 2.5 , however, has a much
richer set of physicochemical phenomena simultaneously happening, not
just catalysed reactions, but processes such as solvent volume changes,
the maintenance of molecular crowding, the use of pH gradients to drive
endergonic reactions, and the formation of supramolecular structures.
This dense web of entangled processes matter for the continuation of the
whole machine. As such, processes in Fig. 2.5 b generally exist on
different levels of abstraction, run over different timescales, and are
generally only made possible by other processes constructing complicated
material constraints (for example, a supra-molecular membrane must be
constructed for an ion-pumping process to become possible). For this
reason, processes in Fig. 2.5 b are harder to pinpoint exactly and are
labelled more anonymously as ‘‘p’’. ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 The difference in
complexity between a cellular organism represented as a closed set of
processes, and an autocatalytic reaction net represented in the same
manner can be seen in a different way. An autocatalytic set can
bootstrap itself into existence from a food set, if some of the initial
reactions can proceed spontaneously at a slow rate, or if some members
of the food set catalyse the initial reactions. However, an autopoietic
machine cannot spontaneously emerge from a nutrient medium. Rather, it
has to come from an existing autopoietic machine, in an unbroken
lineage. The processes in the machine result from the build-up of
complicated material constraints. As such, the machine can self-maintain
from a previous functional state (and go on to divide, continuing the
lineage), but its complexity prohibits a full re-emergence of the system
from the nutrients alone.

Employing an organisational closure diagram to represent an autopoietic
system is beneficial in the following ways:

1.  [label= 0 )]

2.  The diagram gives a method to be specific about the closed set of
    processes and map their relationships. This is one level of
    abstraction less than autopoiesis, which does not detail particular
    process relationships but simply requires that overall, the process
    network should continuously re-create itself.

3.  The diagram makes clear that the closed set of processes
    constituting the autopoietic system need not all necessarily take
    place within the physical membrane of the system. In other words,
    the ‘frontier’ of the autopoietic system is not the same as the
    membrane boundary Virgo \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2011 ) . Indeed,
    vital processes in the organisational closure may take place across
    or even outside the compartment boundary. An organism may fashion
    its environment into an extension of itself, a niche necessary for
    its own self-maintenance (a spider building a web, for example).
    Thus, it is more correct to consider the full extent of an
    autopoietic system to include part of the environment as well.

4.  The diagram makes clear that organisational closure is a non-trivial
    concept. Processes can have different types of enabling
    relationships. One process may be a precondition for the existence
    of another, or it may simply just modify its rate. Alternatively,
    there could be complicated enabling conditions for a process, where
    different subsets of incoming arrows would equally serve to enable
    it Di Paolo \BBA Thompson ( \APACyear 2014 ) .

#### 2.2.3 Other Relational Biology Perspectives Similar to Autopoiesis

Autopoiesis is not unique in providing a theory of the logical
organisation of biological systems. Other researchers have made
different but closely related attempts, and four of these are reviewed
below. The four attempts focussed on, excepting Kauffman, don’t tend to
relate the logical organisation of a living system with its autonomy
like autopoiesis crucially does, but nevertheless, they usefully
illuminate the ideas in autopoiesis from different angles and often in a
less abstract language. In this way, they are useful to include in this
discussion to form a solid appreciation of what autopoiesis means. ³⁶ ³⁶
36 Another cross-board comparison of organisational approaches to life,
with an emphasis on M-R systems, can be found in \shortciteA
Letelier2011. After the related theories have been reviewed, Section 2.3
then explains how an autonomous systems perspective of life converts
into a protocell research program.

##### Kauffman’s Collectively Autocatalytic Sets and Work-Constraint
Cycle

Autocatalytic sets were first proposed by Stuart Kauffman in 1986 as an
alternative paradigm to resolve both the emergence of complex polymers
and the appearance of connected chemical networks in the origin of life
Kauffman ( \APACyear 1986 ); Farmer \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1986 ) .
Already briefly reviewed in Section 2.2.2 , the idea of an autocatalytic
set is a hypothetical network of (two or more) ongoing reactions that
act to mutually catalyse each other and sustain the reaction network as
a whole. This is a different idea to isolated catalysis, where the
product of one reaction catalyses another reaction, and also a different
idea to isolated autocatalysis, where a single reaction speeds itself up
by making more of the catalytic factor which is driving the reaction.
Rather, catalysis is achieved collectively: alone, the reactions would
not proceed, but as a network with catalytic closure, they can.

As well as having implications in the emergence of life ³⁷ ³⁷ 37
Briefly, based on the theory of phase transitions in random graphs,
Kauffman and colleagues argued that the sudden emergence of a large
autocatalytic web of reactions would be inevitable in prebiotic
chemistry, given a sufficient diversity of smaller molecules that could
weakly catalyse the formation of other molecules, including larger ones.
The notion of an autocatalytic set is a general one, not particularly
restricted to certain molecule types, and such autocatalytic sets were
envisaged at different levels: between organic molecules and unspecific
catalysts, to explain how the first connected metabolisms emerged, or
between peptides and peptide catalysts to explain the appearance of
complex peptides. , catalytic closure can be seen as a cornerstone
feature of all extant cellular life. In one sense, cellular metabolism
can be viewed as a complex autocatalytic set. Certainly, in order to
function at all, protein enzymes are required to selectively catalyse
reactions that would otherwise proceed extremely slowly, and the enzymes
themselves are produced as part of the whole metabolic network. In this
regard, an autocatalytic set seems to realise part (i) of the definition
of autopoiesis: it forms a network (of chemical reactions) whose
operation (production of products and catalysts) regenerates that same
network (makes the catalysed chemical reactions possible). From simple
mycoplasma, to all instances of free living cells, Kauffman remarked
“The system as a whole is collectively autocatalytic. Every molecular
species has its formation catalysed by some molecular species in the
system, or else is supplied exogenously as food” (cited in \shortciteNP
[p377]Bedau2010).

In his subsequent work, Investigations Kauffman ( \APACyear 2000 ) and
later, Kauffman appeared to accept that autocatalytic chemical networks
were a crucial part of cellular operation, but not the whole story.
Efficient channelling and synchronisation of reaction pathways by highly
specific enzymes is indeed a feature of cell metabolism because without
the influence of enzymes making specific reactions occur rapidly in
certain sequences, side reactions would ruin the organisation of
metabolism. But, another important feature of metabolism is that cells
coax non-spontaneous (endergonic) synthesis to occur overall by cleverly
linking spontaneous (exergonic) reactions, via various mechanisms.
Living cells don’t obtain all the high energy and structurally complex
organic molecules they require by simply absorbing them from the
environment. Rather, they internally synthesise the majority of these
molecules by tapping an energy flow to piece together smaller molecules
into larger ones. Cells perform biosynthesis by storing some of the
energy released from the oxidation of food (spontaneous reactions) in
energy carrier molecules (ATP being the traditional example) that
diffuse throughout the cell. Such energy carriers then ‘power’
non-spontaneous processes to convert smaller molecules into products
with higher energy Alberts \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2002 ) . Sometimes,
energy carriers enable not only non-spontaneous chemical
transformations, but also non-spontaneous membrane transport processes
as well, like the pumping of ions against a gradient. However,
autocatalytic sets do not deal explicitly with the logistics of
endergonic-exergonic reaction couplings, and contain no notion of a
surrounding membrane, nor any concept of spatial organisation in fact.
³⁸ ³⁸ 38 Also, whether non-catalysed reactions are permitted by the
definition is unclear.

Therefore, perhaps sensing a deeper problem, Kauffman started down the
line of developing a more abstract, more encompassing approach to
investigate the nature of autonomous agents in general, “that mysterious
concatenation of matter, energy, information and something more that we
call life” (Kauffman, \APACyear 2000 , p47) . Inspired by the example of
a bacterium swimming up a glucose gradient to ‘get food’, he asked what
must a physical system be to constitute an autonomous agent? and came up
with a tentative answer: an autonomous agent is a self-replicating
system that is able to perform at least one thermodynamic work cycle
Kauffman ( \APACyear 2003 ) .

The perspective on the logic of autonomous agents that Kauffman arrived
at in his book Investigations was similar in character to autopoiesis,
but instead of being purely relational, made more use of thermodynamic
concepts. Rather than talking about abstract ‘component production’, he
instead looked at the problem of cellular organisation through the lens
of work and energy. Any system able to do useful work has to set up some
kind of constraints on a raw energy flow, to channel this flow toward
some specific means (Kauffman followed \shortciteA Atkins1984 in seeing
work as the ‘‘constrained release of energy into fewer degrees of
freedom’’). Kauffman said that the work performed by cells was indeed
due to constraints existing on energy flows, but these constraints were
mostly not fixed, instead they were actually constructed or manipulated
by the cell itself as it performed work. So, the idea of a
work-constraints (W-C) cycle was born: in cells, work is made possible
by a web of constraints, and this web of constraints exists largely
because work is done. ³⁹ ³⁹ 39 Cells also directly use work, for
movement, etc. This circular thinking has the same flavour as
autocatalytic sets, but is pitched at a higher level of abstraction:
instead of a network of reactions being maintained (that produce
species, enabling those same reactions), a network of constraints is
maintained (that enable work, remaking those same constraints).

Helping to understand the concept better, the following hypothetical
example of propagating work and constraint construction in the cell was
given by \shortciteA [p101]Kauffman2000. Firstly, lipid synthesis for
the membrane takes work to accomplish i.e. spontaneous catabolic
reactions releasing energy from food need to have this energy channelled
into high energy carriers, which then permit the non-spontaneous
biosynthesis reactions making the lipids, to proceed. Once produced, the
lipids then incorporate into and maintain the bilayer membrane, and this
supramolecular structure provides an oily internal environment
favourable to some reactions, because it changes the translational,
vibrational and rotational motions of the reactant molecules. In other
words, the bilayer has modified the boundary conditions of those
reactions (modified the constraint acting upon them), so that they now
take place. Products of such reactions may go on to do more work and
modify more constraints, like diffusing across the cell, giving up
vibrational energy to do work opening an ion channel, and so on.

Therefore, apart from the ubiquitous use of specific catalysts to
channel reaction pathways, cells are generally also in the business of
coupling spontaneous processes to non-spontaneous ones in complex webs
to synthesise components (and also capitalise on the affordances offered
by self-assembly e.g. protein folding and spatial membrane formation),
such that they can exist as complex non-equilibrium systems. We have no
theory, Kauffman claims, that allows us to capture this kind of
organisation where work propagates, makes constraints, and these
constraints enable further work to be done.

A useful metaphor employed by Kauffman to illustrate the concept of
propagating work are machines of the Rube Goldberg type (Fig. 2.6 ).
These machines consist of a series of stages where in each stage some
kind of potential energy is converted to work, and the work done
triggers the next stage. The machine is able to operate, because the
constraints (i.e. the positioning of the apparatus) have been carefully
set up by a human beforehand, and work propagates through the chain only
once. An engine is a machine at a higher level of organisation, able to
bend a linear chain of work tasks into a cycle, arriving back at its
original configuration, because some of the energy released during the
spontaneous steps (gas explosion in the cylinder head) is used to drive
the non-spontaneous steps necessary to reset the cycle (pumping of fuel,
re-compression of cylinder). At a yet further level of organisation lies
a cell, able to perform continuous work like an engine does, but
additionally some of the work it continually produces is used for its
own means to actually remake the cellular structure (the crucial
constraints) in the process. ⁴⁰ ⁴⁰ 40 Rube Goldberg machines and engines
can also dynamically build constraints, but to a much more limited
extent than a cell does. (For example, a step in a Rube Goldberg machine
might spray a wall white, and this act enables a subsequent step to
reflect a beam of light from that wall.)

Departing from autopoiesis, Kauffman cites ‘closure’ as having being
achieved when the cell divides ‘making a rough copy of itself’. For him,
reproduction is a vital aspect of an autonomous agent, and the final
outcome of the web of work and constraints. ⁴¹ ⁴¹ 41 but some cells,
like heart and brain cells do not divide after their initial development
phase, yet still constitute bonafide autonomous living agents.
Autopoietic theory, on the other hand, is typically dismissive of cell
division as a central feature of life, and instead uses ‘closure’ to
mean the closure of processes allowing the continual re-synthesis of the
same system (because for Maturana & Varela, robust self-maintenance
logically preceded the ability to divide).

##### Rosen’s (M,R) Systems

In the late 1950’s, and preceding the notion of autocatalytic sets,
relational biologist Robert Rosen developed a mathematical framework
called (M,R) or metabolism-repair systems aimed at capturing the
essential logic of life (later summarised in \shortciteA Rosen1991; see
\shortciteA Kampis1995 or \shortciteA Cornish-Bowden2007 for
introductory overviews). Rosen observed that living organisms possess
two distinct mechanisms, one for the actual functioning, and another for
the repair of the functional part. Human-engineered machines, on the
other hand, are different: they are typically produced to execute a
specific function, and have no (or extremely limited) means for
self-repair, instead relying on an external agency for this task.
Indeed, as \shortciteA Letelier2006 remark, a human-made machine even
has difficulty providing information to an external agency about the
operational status of all of its components, let alone having the
capacity to repair them.

Rosen observed that every living cell is based on a metabolic network
that relies on catalysts for its operation, but rather than being given
from the outside, these catalysts are synthesised by the metabolic
network itself. Furthermore, Rosen observed that these catalysts (or as
he saw them, mathematical mappings from sets of reactants to sets of
products) had a tendency to become degraded by chemical transformations
and/or diluted by system growth, lessening their concentration, and so
would continually need to be ‘repaired’ by some mechanism. This set up
the following conundrum that Rosen tried to resolve with the
mathematical machinery of functions and category theory:

Catalysts (M) are required for the successful operation of a metabolic
network, but each catalyst inherently degrades and thus is required to
be continually ‘repaired’ by a subnetwork of reactions (R). In turn, the
subnetworks repairing each catalyst also rely on catalysts which also
need to be repaired, and so on.

Only two escape routes exist out of this puzzle; either an infinite
regress (not a valid solution), or catalytic closure, where it is the
collective action of the whole metabolic network that constitutes the
repair mechanism for the repair mechanisms. Rosen’s work was an abstract
- some would argue obscure - mathematical attempt to resolve how
catalytic closure could be realised by a metabolic network. Rosen
additionally required the stronger condition that this catalytic closure
should only be realisable in a single, unique way (so called
‘organisational invariance’ or ‘invertibility’). Essentially, Rosen was
seeking solutions to the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which states that metabolism is effectively a mapping function @xmath ,
which acts on itself, to produce itself Cornish-Bowden \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2007 ) .

At their core, both (M,R) systems and autopoiesis were theories
emphasising that the underlying cause for the existence of an organism
is a closed network of relations, and these relations remain invariant
despite the flowing (far-from-equilibrium) material structure of the
system. Rosen expressed this idea by saying that organisms were ‘closed
to efficient causation’ but open to material causation. Both autopoiesis
and (M,R) were formulated in abstract terms, at the systems level, in a
true relational biology spirit without any mention of material
implementation nor thermodynamic considerations. However, crucial
differences also exist between the two theories. One difference is that
(M,R) systems only appeared to focus on the replacement of catalysts,
not all cellular structures and components as autopoiesis did. Another
obvious difference is that no notion of a membrane entered into (M,R)
systems. Other comparisons have been made by Letelier \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2003 ) .

Although effort has been made to make Rosen’s mathematical approach a
little more understandable Letelier \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2006 );
Wolkenhauer ( \APACyear 2001 ) , it is fair to say that his approach to
biological organisation remains the one most shrouded in mystery and
uncertainty. To the extent that (M,R) systems have been reviewed above,
it seems unclear how they are qualitatively different to autocatalytic
sets. Autocatalytic sets seem to trivially solve the issue of a
catalysed reaction network in which all catalysts are produced by the
network itself, and thus the recursive problem of ‘what repairs the
repair system’ attacked by Rosen seems irrelevant. (M,R) systems without
the ‘organisational invariance’ property seem to be identical to
autocatalytic sets which do not have catalysts supplied in the food set
⁴² ⁴² 42 For example, the (M,R) metabolic system analysed in \shortciteA
Piedrafita2010 could equally be labelled as an ‘autocatalytic set that
has none of the catalysts supplied in the food set’. , and no concrete
chemical examples of (M,R) systems with the elusive ‘organisational
invariance’ property seem to exist. One extra puzzle is why Rosen
himself never discussed worked examples of (M,R) systems using abstract
chemical notation.

##### Gánti’s Chemoton

One intellectual contribution made by Tibor Gánti to clarify attempts at
a definition of life were his absolute and potential lists of life
criteria, already recited in the introduction of this chapter. However,
these life criteria formed just the starting point of Gánti’s research
program. The centrepiece was his Chemoton model, a kind of minimal
blueprint for a proliferating, instruction controlled and membrane-bound
chemical system that satisfied all the life criteria, and one which
Gánti claimed captured the core organisational logic of all living cells
( \shortciteNP Ganti2003a see Fig. 2.7 ). Gánti developed the chemoton
to fill the role of the most fundamental and indivisible unit of
biology, in the hope of transforming the science into a more exact and
well grounded discipline like physics or chemistry.

The chemoton model can be seen as a culmination of some key observations
made by Gánti. First of all, he observed an abstract property shared by
all continuously operating machines, including all lifeforms: all must
set up constrained pathways on the flow of energy between a high energy
and low energy source, transforming part of this energy into useful work
(an observation not dissimilar to Kauffman’s, above). Secondly, he noted
that biological systems are unlike any technological machines that we
can currently produce, in that they manipulate chemical energy by
chemical means. Biological cells are ‘ticking chemical machines’, and
because all parts are implemented at the size scale of molecular and
supramolecular chemistry, this endows they with unique abilities, such
as the ability to synthesise all of their own components for repair,
growth and eventual reproduction. Hence, he narrowed to domain of living
systems to that of fluid automata, remarking that “in looking for the
fundamental principle of life, we have to examine the nature and
organisation of ‘constrained paths’ involving chemical changes capable
of work performance, regulation and control in solutions ” (
\shortciteNP [p74]Ganti2003a, emphasis added. See also \shortciteNP
Ganti2002). Finally, Gánti observed that it would make sense to base a
characterisation of life’s organisational logic at the level of the
simplest cells, the prokaryotes. He observed that all prokaryotes
function by coupling three distinct subsystems: a metabolic system
converting energy and building structures, a genetic information system
that controls this metabolic system and encodes heritable traits, and
finally a membrane system keeping the whole operation together and
facilitating system reproduction. ⁴³ ⁴³ 43 As remarked in Chapter 1 ,
this triad is currently used to guide protocell research, and back in
1971, Gánti was quite unique amongst his peers (excepting Maturana and
Varela) in suggesting a bounding membrane as one of the necessary
components for life. Viruses are ruled out by this triad classification,
because they lack metabolism. Single replicating molecules are also
ruled out as ‘living’ too. For Gánti, life was not embodied in single
molecules, but was rather a systemic property based on the tight
integration of the latter three subsystems.

With the chemoton model, Gánti essentially tried to solve the problem,
to a first approximation, of how a metabolic, genetic and membrane
chemical system must be stoichiometrically coupled together , in order
to form the most basic instance of a proliferating chemical microsphere
system, whereby microsphere reproduction was program controlled and
sustainable. ⁴⁴ ⁴⁴ 44 \shortciteA Morowitz1988 also described a logic
for a proliferating minimum protocell system, based on realistic
prebiotic considerations. Their hypothetical system did not have
template program control, but could still proliferate by capturing light
energy via pigment molecules in the membrane. This energy was stored in
electrochemical ion gradients across the membrane, which, in turn, could
enable internal lipid synthesis from a precursor, growing and
proliferating the system. Referring to Fig. 2.7 , the chemoton functions
as follows. The autocatalytic metabolic cycle in the chemoton transforms
high energy nutrient @xmath into low energy waste product @xmath , and
as it turns, produces template monomers @xmath and membrane precursor
@xmath . The template monomers @xmath accumulate inside the system until
a threshold concentration is reached. Once the threshold concentration
is superseded, the template molecule @xmath spontaneously ‘unzips’ into
two complementary base strands. ⁴⁵ ⁴⁵ 45 Although the problem of
non-enzymatic replication of nucleic acids is actually far from being
solved Szostak ( \APACyear 2012 \APACexlab \BCnt 2 ) . At this moment,
monomers @xmath start pairing to the base strands, constructing two new
whole template molecules, whilst also producing a byproduct @xmath in
the process. This byproduct combines with the membrane precursor @xmath
, creating new amphiphilic molecules for the membrane, which grows,
deforming in shape until division is achieved. Therefore, the membrane
grows in bursts, synchronised with the replication of the template
molecule inside the chemoton. ⁴⁶ ⁴⁶ 46 Gánti did not indicate how
reliable spatial segregation of the newly formed template molecules into
the daughter chemotons was achieved. This could also be argued as very
relevant to the logic of proliferating life. The system is program
controlled by the template, in the minimal sense that the length of the
template (the template, after all, has no sequence data) affects the
reproduction time and thus the dynamics of the cell cycle of the
chemoton. ⁴⁷ ⁴⁷ 47 In order for a pattern to count as ‘information’,
Gánti required that another system existed capable of reading and
interpreting the pattern. The chemoton system read and interpreted the
length of the template to control the dynamics of the division cycle.
Crucially, all three subsystems are mutually dependent on each other,
and the program controlled reproduction of the whole ‘super system’ is
only possible when all three are present and functioning. Notably, Gánti
argued that correct functioning could only be obtained if each of the
three cycles was autocatalytic. ⁴⁸ ⁴⁸ 48 The membrane growth process can
be regarded as autocatalytic because the membrane absorbs membrane
monomers at a rate proportional to its surface area, accelerating its
growth as it grows larger. In the personal view of the present author,
the claim that all cycles require to be autocatalytic for correct
functioning is not immediately obvious.

To summarise, the chemoton system used chemical cycles to channel an
energy difference existing between nutrients and waste into the
construction of more program controlled micro-sized ‘ticking’ machines.
Undoubtedly, the chemoton is a false model of cellular life, for indeed
no life form either directly implements, nor could be artificially
constructed using the exact chemical sequences proposed by Gánti.
However, Gánti’s objective was to propose a false model which was
nevertheless instructive or heuristic in understanding something about
the essence of living organisation. Gánti’s engineering background gave
him a practical approach to the problem of ‘what is life?’, absent from
the other more abstract relational biology approaches discussed in this
subsection. The emblematic schematic of the chemoton represents a visual
thinking point that has directly inspired a number of protocell
simulation studies (e.g. \shortciteNP
fernando2004,Munteanu2006,Mavelli2007,Ruiz-Mirazo2008,VanSegbroeck2009,zachar2011).

Similar to an autopoietic system, a chemoton operates in physical space,
synthesising its own components, including a bounding membrane that
enables the internal processes to keep running. Departing from
autopoiesis (and the other perspectives discussed here on biological
organisation), the chemoton also includes a heritable ‘genetic
information’ system as an essential participant in the organisational
logic of life. The chemoton is constructed to address Gánti’s absolute
and potential life criteria, whereas autopoiesis only targets the
absolute criteria. In fact, the chemoton does not operate in a
stationary self-maintaining state, as an autopoietic system is envisaged
to do. Rather, to avoid an osmotic burst eventually caused by the
exponential accumulation of impermeable internal components, a
functioning chemoton must continuously synthesise membrane material and
then divide. On this difference, Gánti remarked that “living systems are
fundamentally growing (accumulating) systems, in which more matter
enters than leaves. A growing system cannot be in a stationary state”
(Ganti, \APACyear 2003 , p73) . Differing from autocatalytic sets and
M-R systems, the chemoton circuit diagram contains no chemical paths
accelerated by catalysts. Only spontaneous reactions are included.
Rather than being essential for life, Gánti argued that catalysts only
speed up reactions that can already occur spontaneously and don’t
influence the stoichiometry of the overall chemical change between
reactants and products. Stoichiometric coupling and not kinetics was the
level of analysis that interested him. He stated that “The truly
fundamental elementary units of biology should not be sought in the
enzymatic regulation, but in the system regulated by the enzymes”
(Ganti, \APACyear 2003 , p63) .

##### Constructive Dynamical Systems and Component Systems

Through a series of inspiring papers in the mid 90’s, Walter Fontana and
Leo Buss enquired into the shortcomings of the traditional dynamical
systems perspective as being able to represent biological organisation.
They argued that the way Newton taught us to formulate and solve
dynamics problems was correct, but did not reach far enough to describe
the processes and material transformations happening in whole organisms.
What was needed, they said, was a new theory of constructive dynamical
systems Fontana \BBA Buss ( \APACyear 1996 , \APACyear 1994 ) .

Their essential point was as follows. Traditional dynamical models can
only capture change in the system they model by value changes in scalar
state variables. From the outset, the modeller is charged with
identifying all of the relevant variables and their coupling for the
entire lifetime of the system being modelled, such that the state space
is of fixed size and mathematical tools such as stability, sensitivity
and bifurcation analysis can be applied. However, this setup is quite
brittle, for it cannot cope with more profound changes in the system
being modelled, such as the creation of qualitatively new objects or new
constraints (boundary conditions) which emerge through the action of the
system dynamics. ⁴⁹ ⁴⁹ 49 It is true that some finite amount of
structural change in a system can be accommodated by using a traditional
dynamical system. For example, varying parameters can be handled by
making them state variables. Or, changing degrees of freedom can be
accommodated by starting with a high dimensional state space and
specifying dormant state variables that become active when necessary.
However, most systems with emergent constraints can outgrow a fixed
description. Fontana and Buss called this is the ‘object problem’ of
dynamical systems Fontana \BBA Buss ( \APACyear 1996 ) . ⁵⁰ ⁵⁰ 50
Advances have been made in the analysis of hybrid dynamical systems that
combine continuous and discontinuous state changes Goebel \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2009 ) . But, such hybrid systems still have a fixed equation
structure, and thus still face the object problem. The problem arises
because converting a real world system into a traditional dynamical
model always loses a handle on the actual objects which are interacting;
these objects are instead dissolved into scalar state variables. In the
final dynamical equations, there exists no mechanism and no information
with which to construct new evolution equations if the underlying
objects represented by the system change, i.e. when the current state
variables fall into critical ranges or ratios. Indeed, this is by
design, as any dynamical model ‘freezes’ the problem domain, and it is
assumed all that is relevant about the problem has been included in the
model.

However, the construction/destruction of objects and the
appearance/disappearance of constraints is a crucial feature in the
biochemical dynamics of living systems. ⁵¹ ⁵¹ 51 Also, constraint
construction via dynamics is also feature of the operation of social
insect systems, i.e. in the concept of stigmergy Bonabeau ( \APACyear
1999 ) whereby individual agents lay down structural constraints in the
environment as a cue to later guide the behaviour of other passing
agents. By this process, wasps are able to indirectly communicate and
build a honeycomb, and ants are e.g. able to organise collective
cemeteries for the dead. In response to perturbations, cells can
synthesise new components and radically change the properties of their
embodiment, effectively becoming a dynamical system with different
relevant state variables and evolution equations. Cells can do more than
simply change their state. Therefore, Fontana and Buss said that a new
type of dynamical model would be required to fully capture biological
organisation: one that can move in an object space (a structural space
of evolution equations), as well as in the standard phase space (a space
of states possible with the current set of evolution equations). This
new type of dynamical system would not only flow in phase space, but
could also change the dimensionality and flow features of the phase
space, as it evolved along the state trajectory.

As a first example of a dynamical system able to deal with the object
problem, Fontana and Buss proposed a model artificial chemistry able to
execute reactions over a growing variety of chemical species (where
molecules were implemented as expressions in lambda calculus). This
constituted a rudimentary example of a dynamical system able to modify
its object structure (the types of species present: novel ones could
appear) as well as changing its state (the concentration of each species
present). Appendix A of this thesis presents a different approach to
simulate general constructive dynamical systems by using a framework
based on petri nets.

From the dynamical systems viewpoint offered by Fontana and Buss, a
self-maintaining system is one whose equation structure is not fixed a
priori, but results as a stabilised aspect of the component dynamics it
causes (i.e. the system occupies a stable attractor in object space ).
This notion of biological organisation can be seen as a more formal
statement of autopoiesis. It differs only in that there is no explicit
mention of a bounding membrane.

Another proposal congruent to constructive dynamical systems is
component systems Kampis ( \APACyear 1991 ) . Component systems are made
of interacting components able to create an open-ended variety of new
components, or destroy existing ones. Therefore, they also constitute
systems able to build their own internal constraints and modify their
governing dynamical description. Kampis holds the view that component
systems are only computable over the short term when their dynamical
description remains static. In the longer term, he says, they are not
computable because their changing description prohibits them from being
mapped to any single simulation algorithm.

### 2.3 Autonomy is a Missing Conceptual Backdrop for Origins of Life
Protocell Research

At this point, it is useful to recapitulate what has been said in this
chapter so far. Firstly, the introduction revealed that two distinct
general conceptions of life are followed by (and indeed partition most)
scientists and philosophers, in lieu of a unanimously agreed definition
of life. The pair were the ‘evolution’ and ‘autonomy’ conceptions of
life.

Under the popular ‘evolution’ (or diachronic) conception of life, a cell
is primarily considered as a self-reproducing entity that evolves . This
view holds that the most significant feature of living systems is their
genetic information content (DNA) and the replication and passing on of
this information content to future generations. Through a pure
evolutionary lens, the origin of life is straightforwardly conceived as
a continuum between replicating ‘informational’ molecules at one end and
more complex reproducing living cells (that embed replicating
informational molecules) at the other end. The broad challenge of the
evolutionary-based origins of life research program is to decipher how
the first self-replicating RNA molecules appeared and then how they
evolved, via natural selection at the level of chemical assemblies, into
membrane bound DNA-RNA-protein architectures (“cells”). The current
mainstream line of investigation in protocell research is located firmly
within the evolutionary view. Szostak’s ribocell thesis (Section 2.1.1 )
posits that a major transition in prebiotic chemical evolution was the
insertion of RNA molecules into lipid compartments: this duo opened the
floodgates of evolution (leading onto the development of internal
metabolism, translation machinery, energetics etc.) as soon as the
replication of the RNA and the division of the compartment became
synchronised. The long term goal of the ribocell project is therefore to
achieve a minimal synthetic system that solves this synchronisation
problem.

Conversely, under the marginalised ‘autonomy’ (or synchronic) conception
of life, a cell is primarily considered as an autonomous system that,
through its organisation, self-produces and self-maintains its own
localised material existence in space . This view holds that the most
significant feature of living systems is their system-level
‘autopoietic’ organisation that allows for their continued existence and
produces their outward purposive behaviour (as reviewed in Section 2.2.2
). The systems-oriented autonomy perspective does not exclude that
genetic molecules are important, but they are not the key issue (see
below).

As has been discussed, the evolutionary perspective is already heavily
embedded in research programs into origins of life. The questions that
the remainder of this section attempts to answer are: what alternative
type of research program into origins does an ‘autonomy’ conception of
life propose? what are its main claims? and why is such a program vital
to develop protocell research further?

A key point is that the autonomy conception of life instils a deep
systemic appreciation of the way molecules have to organise in space and
time in order to form a functional far-from-equilibrium biological cell.
The autonomy approach to origins projects these same systems-level
considerations back onto the protocells that proceeded the first cells.
Although perhaps more difficult to articulate than the evolutionary
view, the autonomous systems view is primarily concerned with explaining
how protocells developed in organisation up to the extremely complex
autopoietic organisation of full-fledged cells. The main question posed
is along these lines: how did protocells transition from more
rudimentary self-maintaining chemical reactors into chemical ‘agents’
that are able to fabricate the majority of their components by
controlling energy/matter flow through a boundary that, also, is of
their own making?

The role of the protocell membrane is a crucial aspect in the autonomy
view of origins. Rather than being regarded simply as a secondary
‘container’ holding things together, under the autonomy account, the
membrane is regarded as a key integrated part of the protocell system.
The membrane is the primary interface that controls energy and matter
exchanges between a protocell and its environment. Autonomy brings to
the fore the fundamental issue of how protocells were able to
progressively take control of their membranes (by effectively coupling
internal metabolic networks with membrane production and trans-membrane
processes, see Chapter 3 ), first turning into basic autonomous agents
capable of robust far-from-equilibrium self-production in varied
environments, and then into more complex autonomous agents with reliable
division and heredity properties Ruiz-Mirazo \BBA Moreno ( \APACyear
2004 , \APACyear 2000 ) . The role of a self-assembled membrane in
channelling matter and energy flow through a protocell system only
becomes obvious from an autonomy perspective. Most evolutionary-based
protocell research does also see membranes as relevant, but not in such
a strong sense: here, membranes are simply passive structures that serve
to segregate molecular populations.

In trying to grasp the tenets of an autonomous system account of
protocells, it is revealing to compare it with the evolutionary ribocell
approach. The ribocell approach postulates that ‘limping’ protocells
composed of naked RNA genes in compartments, with the help of fortuitous
environmental conditions ⁵² ⁵² 52 such as the availability of nucleic
acid precursors, shear forces to prompt compartment division and heat
cycling to separate RNA strands. , managed to get onto the runway of
evolution by natural selection. Conveniently, evolution then solved all
of the harder problems to make functioning, fully integrated cellular
systems. How evolution actually achieved each stage of protocell
integration is outside the scope of the ribocell project. On the other
hand, the autonomous systems perspective directly confronts the hard
issue of cellular integration. It tries to explicitly explain how
protocells incrementally developed in order to solve the key problems of
cellularity -- such as problems of selective permeability (adequate
nutrient access and waste disposal from compartment), osmotic water
flow, and the harnessing and distribution of free energy resources -- so
that they could eventually exist as robust and adaptive
far-from-equilibrium systems. Whilst postponed ‘for evolution to deal
with’ by ribocell project ⁵³ ⁵³ 53 Although under criticism here, it
should be noted that the ribocell research program does not contradict
the autonomous systems approach. It is simply more of a shortcut towards
integrated protocells. The ribocell program does indeed see the linking
of protocell metabolism and membrane as relevant (see for example
\shortciteNP Chen2004,Chen2004b,Adamala2013). Additionally, the ribocell
program is generating a wealth of excellent data about lipid vesicles
(e.g. permeability measurements) and relevant physical effects (e.g.
protocell competition) within the origins of life field. , the systems
integration problem is the main problem in the origins of cellular life
and imperative to confront in detail if a comprehensive account of
origins is to be reached. This is the reason why the autonomy
perspective is the ‘big picture’ framework vital for protocell research
(even if the integration problem is a harder and more diffuse scientific
challenge than the well-defined synchronisation problem of the
ribocell).

Additionally, protocell behaviour (and how this stems from the chemical
organisation of a protocell) is also naturally included under an
autonomous systems account of protocell development. How protocells
originated the ability to act on their own behalf as agents, to adapt to
new or varied environments, or how they developed mechanisms to move in
a more directed way (other than just by brownian motion or convection)
are important lines of research that are not normally included under the
evolutionary view. Recently, an increasing number of studies are
acknowledging that a protocell that only replicates would be a poor
mimic of cellular life. As \shortciteA Forlin2012 state, “life is not
simply a machine that divides. Instead, life is integrated with its
surroundings, both on a cellular and a chemical level.” (p591).
Therefore, there now exists a building inertia to investigate how the
non-replicating’ aspects of cellular life could have had precursors in
protocells too Monnard \BBA Walde ( \APACyear 2015 ); Forlin \BOthers .
( \APACyear 2012 ); Del Bianco \BBA Mansy ( \APACyear 2012 ); Melkikh
\BBA Chesnokova ( \APACyear 2012 ); Froese \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2014
); Hanczyc ( \APACyear 2011 ); Mann ( \APACyear 2012 ) .

Finally, on the controversial issue of genetic material, the autonomous
systems account favours the appearance of simpler self-maintaining
protocell systems first, followed by protocells with template-controlled
metabolisms later. ⁵⁴ ⁵⁴ 54 In terms of the Template (T), Metabolism (M)
and Compartment (C) subsystems of protocells, the autonomy approach
tends to favour the hypothesis that M+C @xmath T+M+C (far-from
equilibrium self-maintaining reactor systems later incorporated
templates), and the ribocell approach supports the hypothesis T+C @xmath
T+M+C (close to equilibrium ‘gene bags’ later evolved metabolism). This
is for the reason that protocells would first have to become units of a
basic complexity, adequately controlling energy and matter flows, in
order to be able to support a further increase of complexity brought
about by templates. As \shortciteA [p249]Ruiz-Mirazo2004BAS explain:
“Before higher levels of complexity (based on macromolecular mechanisms,
e.g., genetic or enzymatic mechanisms) are achieved, there has to be
some self-constructing organization…through which the material and
energetic problems associated to the actual capacity to generate that
complexity are solved.”. Another, more basic reason for considering
templates after metabolism is that metabolism may be necessary for
assisting the fabrication and repair of the templates. Once templates
had successfully become incorporated into metabolism, they would then
open up new possibilities of metabolic control (e.g. enzymatic control
of metabolic pathways) and would enable the synthesis of new structural
elements not possible before. Additionally, templates would enter
autonomous protocells into an evolutionary dimension, allowing for the
reliable division and heredity of their complex organisations (discussed
in \shortciteNP Ruiz-Mirazo2012, Moreno2015).

Now that a broad outline has been sketched of how the autonomous systems
conception of life transfers into a protocells research agenda, Chapter
3 goes into more detail about how the origin of autonomy in protocells
can be modelled and defines the area in which this thesis makes its
contributions. Later on, the discussion (Section 5.1 ) elaborates more
on the arguments made in this section.

## Chapter 3 Autonomy in Protocells: A Semi-Empirical Approach

The biological autonomy conception of life was introduced in detail in
Chapter 2 as a constellation of ideas revolving around the abstract
principle of autopoiesis, and the conclusion of Chapter 2 started
outlining how such an autonomous perspective can transfer into an
important systems-oriented framework for research on protocells. This
Chapter aims to bridge the conceptual and scientific worlds by making
more precise how the origin of autonomy in protocells can be approached
through a ‘semi-empirical’ scientific research program based on
theoretical modelling (Section 3.3 ) and goes on to define the sub-area
in which this thesis makes its primary contributions (Section 3.4 ). To
begin, however, it is explained why the theory of biological autonomy
fundamentally requires parallel efforts in theoretical and empirical
modelling in order to understand the origin of autonomy in protocells.

### 3.1 Perspective: The Development of Biological Autonomy Theory

The concept of biological autonomy has undergone much development over
the past 40 years. This can be attested by comparing Francisco Varela’s
original abstract exposition of it, closely tied to autopoiesis Varela (
\APACyear 1979 ) , to the state of the art synthesis Moreno \BBA Mossio
( \APACyear 2015 ) , still conceptual and bearing the legacy of
autopoiesis, but considerably expanded (notably, reconciling autonomy
with evolution), and more closely linked to empirical examples.

Some of the key developments to biological autonomy will be briefly
recapitulated here, with pointers to the relevant literature for the
interested reader. To begin, one development has been the clarification
of the notion of organisational closure (discussed in Chapter 2 ), and
how it maybe more accurate to think of a closure of constraints
operating in organisms, when speaking of an organisational closure
Montévil \BBA Mossio ( \APACyear 2015 ); Mossio \BBA Moreno ( \APACyear
2010 ); Kauffman ( \APACyear 2000 ) . ¹ ¹ 1 ‘Constraints’ are boundary
conditions that emerge through the dynamics of the system itself. They
are usually material configurations and in turn reduce the degrees of
freedom of certain components in the system. This work has helped
sharpen what separates autonomous biological systems from less complex
physical systems exhibiting closure, like the water cycle, or exhibiting
self-organisation, like dissipative structures such as candle flames or
hurricanes Mossio \BBA Moreno ( \APACyear 2010 ); Moreno \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2008 ) .

Other developments to biological autonomy have involved identifying
important aspects that the theory of autopoiesis either missed out, or
treated in an inappropriately trivial way Moreno \BOthers . ( \APACyear
2008 ) . The role of the cell membrane was one aspect not emphasised
enough by autopoiesis. It has since been emphasised that whilst the
membrane does indeed bound an autonomous agent in space, it more
significantly serves as the interface through which the autonomous
system controls its relations with the outside world, including the
energy-matter flow through it Ruiz-Mirazo \BBA Moreno ( \APACyear 2004 ,
\APACyear 2000 ) . This shifted the perspective: autonomous systems
regarded before as systems ‘resisting perturbations and maintaining
their organisation’ became more regarded as systems that necessarily
interacted with the environment as agents as an essential part of their
autonomy. Another important aspect neglected by autopoiesis was the
historical dimension of autonomous agents, i.e. the relevance of genetic
templates, populations and evolution. Some recent work has indicated
that genetic templates, being dynamically decoupled from the
self-maintaining organisation of an autonomous system are a relevant
addition to the theory of biological autonomy. ² ² 2 Under this type of
terminology, a ‘dynamically decoupled’ component or subsystem is one
that is “sufficiently independent of the processes of material and
energy flow that it can be varied without disrupting these basic
processes, but still able to be linked to parts of the mechanism so as
to be able to modulate their operations” Ruiz-Mirazo \BBA Moreno (
\APACyear 2012 ) . Such templates grant a biological system capacities
of increased robustness (for example, by allowing the system to switch
into qualitatively different modes of self-maintenance; \shortciteNP
Bich2015), and they also open the way for reliable heredity and the
eventual open-ended evolution of autonomous systems Ruiz-Mirazo \BBA
Moreno ( \APACyear 2012 ); Ruiz-Mirazo \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2008 ) .

Further clarifications to the biological autonomy framework have
consisted in debates about about autopoiesis being necessary and
sufficient (or just necessary) to capture the phenomena of cognition and
life Bourgine \BBA Stewart ( \APACyear 2004 ); Bitbol \BBA Luisi (
\APACyear 2004 ); Di Paolo ( \APACyear 2005 ); Vakarelov ( \APACyear
2011 ) . ³ ³ 3 ‘Cognition’ roughly means the operation of acquiring,
processing and storing sensory inputs, and then using this information
to guide successful future actions in the environment. Whereas Maturana
and Varela always held the position that cognition and life were
entailed by the implications of autopoiesis, the consensus view emerging
from these debates is that autopoiesis is only necessary and not
sufficient for cognition and life.

Yet other supplements to the theory of biological autonomy have dealt
with making the notion of ‘norms’ more concrete Barandiaran \BBA Egbert
( \APACyear 2014 ) and research on how autonomy could be extended beyond
the paradigmatic case of the single cell towards communities or
aggregates like biofilms or multicellular organisms Moreno \BBA Mossio (
\APACyear 2015 ) .

Finally, a very important contribution to the theory of biological
autonomy has been the insistence that biological systems are physical
systems Ruiz-Mirazo \BBA Moreno ( \APACyear 2004 , \APACyear 2000 );
Moreno \BBA Ruiz-Mirazo ( \APACyear 1999 ); Kauffman ( \APACyear 2000 );
Fleischaker ( \APACyear 1990 ) and, therefore, should not be treated
purely as abstract mathematical objects implementing closure (i.e. as
autopoiesis regards them). Rather, organisms are constrained to further
obey the laws of thermodynamics. This realisation has helped to make a
list of basic ingredients necessary for achieving the synthesis of
autonomous systems (e.g. semi-permeable membranes, catalysts and energy
currencies are required ⁴ ⁴ 4 Semi-permeable membranes are necessary for
any autopoietic system. If a membrane is fully permeable, then there is
no distinction between cellular system and environment. If a membrane is
completely impermeable, then the cell cytoplasm will settle to chemical
equilibrium. Catalysts in turn are necessary for the temporal
coordination of reaction pathways, and energy currencies are necessary
to drive endothermic processes at different sites around the cell. ),
and has also highlighted that all autonomous systems necessarily require
to be thermodynamically open systems, continually traversed by a flow of
matter and energy.

Therefore, the theory of biological autonomy has been quite fertile as
regards to developments in the past 40 years. However, whilst
undoubtedly valuable, these developments have not really ventured
outside the domain of abstract relational biology. Instead of modelling
cellular autonomy in a concrete way, they have been exercises in
expanding, re-ordering and making more precise the high-level
characterisation of biological systems.

#### 3.1.1 Why Biological Autonomy Needs Theoretical Models

Staying at the conceptual level is valid if the overall goal is to use
biological autonomy as a tool to define life, or to articulate
alternative general standpoints, for example as some authors have done
in cognitive science. ⁵ ⁵ 5 In cognitive science, autopoiesis underlies
new currents of thinking which links cognition in living systems with
the fact that their bodies are self-individuating and ‘flowing’ dynamic
structures Di Paolo \BBA Thompson ( \APACyear 2014 ); van Duijn (
\APACyear 2006 ) . This position stands in contrast to previous views
that saw embodiment as irrelevant to cognition/intelligence, or only
relevant in a limited role, i.e. as just an interface getting inputs
from and delivering outputs to the environment). However, if the aim is
to (i) develop a grounded account of how autonomy is actually realised
in specific instances of biological cells or (ii) to develop an
understanding of how autonomy first originated in protocell systems (as
is the aim in this thesis), then a level of analysis based at the
overall organisational logic of autonomous systems is inappropriate.
Rather, the level of analysis must be taken down towards the detailed
molecular structure of particular cell or protocell systems and
theoretical models need to be developed where time, states, frequencies,
flow rates, spatial details, molecular details, molecular interactions
etc. are all returned to the picture. An abstract theory of biological
autonomy is able to discuss the generic organisation of autonomous
systems at length, but lacking empirically-based models, it is
prohibited from taking the further steps of being able to accurately
explore system dynamics and make predictions about the behaviour of
specific cells/protocells. Therefore, only theoretical/computational
models, mathematical systems-level analysis and targeted experiments
will potentially give insight into how autonomy is actually realised in
living cells and how it arose in protocells.

The main problem with modelling biological autonomy is that the goal of
autopoiesis (at the centre of the framework) was precisely the opposite:
to purposely throw away all of the structural details of the cell in
order to keep only the core organisational logic of the system.
Autopoiesis and similar relational biology approaches like Kauffman’s
W-C cycle, or Rosen’s M-R systems are hence - and unsurprisingly - not
suggestive of immediate routes to low-level cell dynamics models. ⁶ ⁶ 6
In general, high-level theoretical frameworks give a hint of how a
certain system operates overall, but no clue as to the behaviour of
specific instances (i.e. they underdetermine the phenomena they relate
to). In biological autonomy, autopoiesis broadly defines global cellular
logic, but does not determine the complex dynamic behaviour of a
particular cell. The theory of evolution by natural selection identifies
the general requirements for an evolving system, but does not determine
which lineages will develop in any particular population (or when
increasing complexity will result). Likewise, in physics, the second law
of thermodynamics states that entropy always increases in physical
systems, but this does not determine the ordered phenomena demonstrated
in certain far-from-equilibrium systems (dissipative systems). In fact,
mathematically speaking, relational models start from completely
different primitives than dynamical models do, as \shortciteA Kampis1995
has stated: “[Relational biology gives] a different language talking
about things, a language that does not translate to ‘ordinary’
mathematics. In other words, there is no road whatsoever from relational
models to differential equations or computer programs.” (p95).

One way out of the dilemma of modelling autonomous systems is to start
by constructing simple cell models that embody autopoiesis in the most
reduced, minimal way possible. Such models are reviewed in Section 3.2
to follow. Before getting there, it is first worth commenting on the
relationship between modelling biological autonomy and Systems Biology,
since the latter discipline also takes an integrative approach to deal
with the biological complexity of the cell.

#### 3.1.2 Systems Biology and Modelling Biological Autonomy

Systems biology, like biological autonomy, ultimately seeks an
integrated systems account of living organisms: that is, how their
structure and function emerges from a complex system of diverse
components with various interdependencies. Whereas biological autonomy
comes from the top-down, from a systems-theoretic account of cell
organisation, systems biology works from the bottom-up, iteratively
developing and refining precise quantitative models of organisms like E.
coli or Mycoplasma Pneumoniae (for example, see \shortciteNP
Wodke2013,Guell2009,Kuhner2009). As such, it would appear that systems
biology should be ultimately guided by, and working towards, modelling
the core concepts emerging from the theory of biological autonomy.
However, even though certain eminent systems biologists have seen the
work of Rosen, for example, as relevant to informing the field of
systems biology Wolkenhauer ( \APACyear 2001 ) , and indeed the
definition of “Autopoietic Systems” does exist in Springer’s
Encyclopedia of Systems Biology Bich \BBA Etxeberria ( \APACyear 2013 )
, in general, mainstream systems biology is largely ignorant of (or
agnostic to) the more abstract system-theoretic approaches to living
systems.

Why is this so? As \shortciteA OMalley2005 explain, “systems” biology
can be interpreted in a pragmatic way, or in a ‘hard line’
systems-theoretic way. Most practitioners of systems biology are
pragmatists . They are not so much concerned for abstract principles and
laws of cellular organisation, but rather they perceive that an
‘understanding’ of a living system is reached through a process of
pooling all the empirical information sources available for a particular
organism (e.g. genome, transcriptome, proteome, metabolism, spatial
information etc.) and then creating a mathematical model that predicts
some aspects of its behaviour. The fundamental question of how cellular
behaviour is connected to the mode in which a cell fabricates its own
embodiment -- the question that biological autonomy investigates -- is
not of immediate relevance for a pragmatic systems biologist, whose
principal task is instead to construct an effective model ⁷ ⁷ 7 Systems
biology models have traditionally focussed on simulating cells as ‘one
pot’ metabolic networks. Other forces and physical effects that come
about through the embodiment of a chemical network in space are often
disregarded (but this is changing). of some sub-part of an already
living, already autopoietic cellular system. It is perhaps appropriate
that ‘cellular weather forecasting’ has been used to refer to the
practice of systems biology Wolkenhauer \BBA Mesarovic ( \APACyear 2005
) .

Having made the critical observations above, it should be pointed out
that systems biology does include a more conceptual/theoretical strand
which seeks to identify more foundational principles defining the
possible ‘design space’ of all living systems. The beginnings of a
theory of biological robustness Kitano ( \APACyear 2007 , \APACyear 2004
) , for example, is located within this strand, and as \shortciteA
Rosslenbroich2009 points out, this theoretical framework has certain
parallels to biological autonomy. The theory of robustness generally
tries to account for how organisms can survive as invariants units,
maintaining their core functions in the face of constant internal
changes and external environmental perturbations. Investigated under
this approach are the mechanisms that an organism employs to maintain a
stable overall presence, which can involve the organism switching into
qualitatively different dynamical regimes, such as entering a dormant
state under extreme dehydration. The idea of robustness is thus wider
than that of homeostasis (which is just maintaining a set of dynamical
variables within bounds), and could be seen under the light of
biological autonomy as related to how organisational closure is
maintained. However, systems biology seems to have been isolated from
the systems-theoretic ideas and concepts in the biological autonomy
literature, and hence “curiously these two lines of discussion seem to
have no connection to each other” (Rosslenbroich, \APACyear 2009 , p625)
.

The concept of biological autonomy, in fact, has not percolated
significantly into biological science. One main reason could be that the
framework has been perceived as too abstract: whilst it offers
insightful semi-formal concepts about cellular organisation to ‘keep in
the back of the mind’, these concepts don’t easily translate into
low-level concrete models that can be related to real empirical examples
of cells (as discussed above). As such, rather than specifically aiming
to model biological autonomy, systems biology instead takes a low-level,
practical, data-driven route to understanding the complexity of the
cell. Nevertheless, biological autonomy still stands at the conceptual
epicentre of systems biology, and its system-theoretic concepts will be
necessary to incorporate eventually if cells are ever to be understood
in their entirety.

### 3.2 Dynamic Models Capturing Minimal Autopoiesis

One start to modelling autonomy in cells or protocells could be argued
to be present in minimal models of autopoiesis which reduce cellular
autopoiesis down to its most nominal expression, and then try to
implement this with dynamical components either in-silico inside the
computer, or in-vitro in real chemistry. These models are critically
reviewed below, leading on to Section 3.3 where a combined
“semi-empirical” approach is put forward as a promising route for
modelling basic autonomy in protocells.

#### 3.2.1 Computational Models of Autopoiesis in Artificial Chemistry

The field of ‘computational autopoiesis’ McMullin ( \APACyear 2004 ) is
a distinctive sub-field of Artificial Life, with the goal of simulating
and formalising (minimal) autopoiesis in abstract ‘cell-like’ models.
Such models, typically implemented as 2D lattice artificial chemistries,
embed the circular logic of autopoiesis by featuring a metabolism and
membrane that co-support each other. The metabolism synthesises the
membrane (that would decay otherwise) whilst the membrane encloses the
metabolism and provides the correct conditions to sustain it (e.g. by
limiting the diffusion of metabolites). In addition to being orders of
magnitude more abstract, computational autopoiesis models depart from
systems biology models of cells because they explicitly account for how
the membrane of the cellular entity is produced and maintained as a
whole. In other words, the cellular membrane is not treated as a
pre-given boundary condition for the cell dynamics. Rather, the membrane
is a boundary condition that emerges through the dynamics of the system
components, and cannot be present without them. ⁸ ⁸ 8 ‘Boundary
conditions’ for a dynamical system are here meant in the sense of (i)
parameters used in the evolution equations, or more generally (ii)
factors affecting the algebraic structure of the evolution equations.
This is usage is different to what ‘boundary conditions’ refers to in
boundary value problems in mathematics (i.e. solution of a differential
equation, subject to extra constraints). Confusing matters further,
‘boundary’ is sometimes used to refer to the cellular membrane!

Models of computational autopoiesis bring autopoiesis out of the
abstract relational biology domain, and provide an experimental test bed
to start asking dynamical questions about organisational closure. ⁹ ⁹ 9
In a related field, the kinetic modelling of autocatalytic sets
Filisetti \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2012 ) aims to explore catalytic
closure in concrete instances of chemical reaction networks. Such
questions include: How does the cellular system respond to specific
perturbations, of specific durations? What type of perturbations is the
system robust to? If lesions are made to crucial pathways and/or some
processes are temporarily stopped, can the system recover from this
interference, or does its organisational closure break down permanently?
To what extent is the agents behaviour (e.g. movement) related to its
continuing metabolic self-maintenance? Generally, which are the open and
unresolved issues in autopoietic theory requiring further formalisation?

Computational autopoiesis models span from extremely abstract models
running on ‘toy’ physics, at one end, to more elaborate models with
physically justified component interactions at the other (Fig. 3.1 ). To
give an idea, a survey of notable models will be conducted below.

Perhaps at the most abstract end of the computational autopoiesis
spectrum lies the analysis of recurrent spatiotemporal patterns in the
Game of Life, such as gliders ( \shortciteNP Beer2004,Beer2014; see Fig.
3.1 a) and blocks and blinkers Beer ( \APACyear 2015 ) . These special
patterns can be seen as autopoietic systems because they are entities
that produce and dynamically maintain their own bounded unity, albeit in
a universe ruled by “game-of-life physics”. Although as far from living
cells as one could imagine, the analysis of such mathematical patterns
has helped sharpen some of the autopoietic concepts outlined by Maturana
and Varela, such as the concept of a cognitive domain, and the dichotomy
between organisation and structure in an autopoietic system.

Similarly abstract was the the original model of computational
autopoiesis, presented as part of the first journal publication
explaining the concept of autopoiesis ( \shortciteNP Varela1974,
corrected in \shortciteNP McMullin1997; see Fig. 3.1 b). In this model,
three types of chemical component - substrates, catalysts and links -
randomly floated around on a square lattice. The catalyst particles were
able to convert substrates into links which, when adjacent, bonded
together into larger membrane segments. Eventually, closed membranes
would form around the catalyst particles, and, even though the membrane
links would spontaneously decay, they would be continually
re-synthesised by the entrapped catalyst. Thus, ‘autopoietic’
self-maintaining entities were created. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Technically, the
entrapped catalyst was not itself synthesised by the system, and so some
disputed the ‘autopoietic’ status of the cell-like entities formed.
Variants of the original 1974 model have since been implemented on
hexagonal lattice grids ( \shortciteNP Sirmai2011,Sirmai2013; see Fig.
3.1 c), using mixed lattice/off-lattice simulations ( \shortciteNP
Wang2014; see Fig. 3.1 d), and even just in one dimension Ono \BBA
Ikegami ( \APACyear 2000 ) .

One interesting extension to the \shortciteA Varela1974 model, later
made by \shortciteA Suzuki2009, was to modify the membrane link
behaviour such that the autopoietic cell structure became motile and
gradient-climbing. Motivated by the general autonomy-related question
“When does a chemical network bounded by a membrane become a cell that
has its own intention?” (p59), the latter authors conjectured that
self-producing protocells could use their dynamic membrane shape to both
sense environmental conditions and produce motor movement of the whole
system (without the need for explicit sensors and effectors). Using a
different cell-like model, ( \shortciteNP Egbert2009; see Fig. 3.1 e)
similarly explored how chemotactic movement and cell self-maintenance
were related, and specifically the extent to which the latter determined
the former. In the Egbert & Di Paolo model, the membrane of the cell was
represented as a flexible loop of connected springs and the whole cell
translated to a new location determined by the overall direction of
force produced by locally activated membrane cilia. In the Suzuki &
Ikegami model, movement was produced by the gradual amoeba-like flowing
and migration of the membrane.

Moving onto more physically grounded models of computational
autopoiesis, \shortciteA Ono2005 presented a model to investigate
general conditions for the emergence of membrane-bound protocells on a
surface where there was a population of self-replicating catalysts that
could also synthesise membrane molecules (Fig. 3.1 f). In this model,
particles were designated as hydrophobic, hydrophilic or neutral, and
they followed random walks across a lattice biased by interaction
potentials between particles. Under the correct parameter regimes, the
emergence of connected membrane compartments could be observed on the
lattice, encapsulating the underlying chemistry and, in turn, produced
and maintained by it (even when resource gradients were present).

More recently, Agmon et al. ( \shortciteNP Agmon2014,Agmon2015; see Fig.
3.1 g) have proposed a computational autopoiesis model based on a
modified reaction-diffusion (RD) system. Reaction-diffusion systems
simulate the time evolution of a smooth concentration field rather than
the time evolution of single molecules. The RD system of Agmon et al.
contains reacting and diffusing metabolic chemicals, and these can
produce amphiphilic molecules for the membrane with special aggregation
properties. The authors prime the two-dimensional model with an initial
self-maintaining ‘protocell’ configuration (a membrane surrounding a
concentration of metabolic chemicals), and then quantify the robustness
of the ‘protocell’ configuration by systematically mapping how the
configuration responds to localised perturbations of its structure.

Finally, it should be noted that the standard reaction-diffusion systems
of physics have sometimes been considered as models of computational
autopoiesis. Under certain parameter settings, RD systems can exhibit a
stable regime of localised ‘spots’ with differing chemical
concentrations to the surrounding medium, both in still fluids Virgo
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2011 ) and in fluids with convection (
\shortciteNP Bartlett2015; see Fig. 3.1 h). Even though such spots have
no surrounding membrane surfactant layer, they are nevertheless
distinguishable individuals that dynamically maintain their own
continued existence. They can also move, responding to perturbations and
following resource gradients. Therefore these ‘spot’ patterns have been
argued to fulfil the autopoietic definition. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 \shortciteA
Popa2004 comments that dissipative structures lacking a topological
membrane cannot store energy in alternative reserves, and also require
to exploit their energy resource as is, with no energy transduction
(p51).

On reflection, the field of computational autopoiesis has been most
useful for making more precise the abstract concepts of autopoiesis, and
for outlining where grey areas still remain. ¹² ¹² 12 For example,
through exploration with their model \shortciteA Egbert2009 discuss the
possibility that the network of process dependencies implementing
organisational closure in an autopoietic system is not invariant, but
can change over time, still retaining closure. Additionally,
computational autopoiesis models usually have a strong aesthetic appeal
(i.e. they depict colourful cellular systems moving around and
responding to environmental perturbations), and this quality helps them
to capture attention and articulate the theory of autopoiesis to a wider
audience. With regards to modelling autonomy, computational autopoiesis
models make a rudimentary start: there is the notion of a minimal
organisational closure wherein constraints emerge and support each other
to create the cell entity (i.e. the membrane supports the metabolism
which in turn supports the membrane).

However, the major shortcoming of computational autopoiesis models for
investigating the origin of autonomy in protocells (or cellular
autonomy) is that they bear only a very superficial resemblance to real
protocells (or cells). Beyond a weak qualitative correspondence, it is
difficult to map such models to empirical systems and experimental data.
The computational models usually have an unrealistic size scale, an
undefined timescale, and some even use implausible physics. ¹³ ¹³ 13
Most models are single-molecule implementations, meaning that the size
scale of the membrane is unrealistically small with respect to the
metabolites. Other implausible physical aspects have included membranes
made from strong chemical bonds (whereas semi-permeable lipid membranes
are actually held together only by weak forces) and waste particles
magically disappearing in the cell interior. Also in all models
described so far, there is no account of osmosis. A main problem with
computational autopoiesis models is identifying what role contingency
plays. Often a circular collection of grid elements will be labelled as
a ‘protocell’ and then used as a vehicle to make claims about the
origins of cellular life. But, lacking any empirical grounding, it
remains unclear to what extent the behaviour and characteristics of the
studied ‘protocell’ model are dependent on the particular details of the
computational implementation.

#### 3.2.2 Experimental Models of Autopoietic Lipid Aggregates

In past years, there has also been interest in implementing chemical
aggregates that can be said to be ‘autopoietic’ Stano \BBA Luisi (
\APACyear 2010 ) . The aim was to produce a synthetic chemical system
that shared, albeit in a minimal form, the same fundamental chemical
organisation implemented by all biological systems (thereby, arguably
creating a type of ‘living’ matter from inert components). Before
reading the following experimental descriptions, the reader may benefit
from reviewing Section 4.1.1 .

At the end of the 1980s, \shortciteA Luisi1989 speculated that the
implementation of minimal autopoietic systems in real chemical media was
indeed feasible, and suggested reverse micelles as a candidate
structure. They envisioned an organic (oily) solvent containing
dissolved precursors and also tiny water droplets each wrapped by a
single layer of surfactant (reverse micelles). The precursors would
diffuse into the small watery core of the micelles and subsequently
react to produce new amphiphiles for the micelle membrane. Each
individual micelle would hence be autopoietic in the following sense:
the molecular components forming the bounded micelle (a cluster of lipid
amphiphiles) would provide the adequate conditions for a simple
metabolic process (a single chemical reaction) that, in turn, would
synthesise the components (lipid amphiphiles) for the bounded micelle. A
secondary effect resulting from this process would be that the micelles
would also grow and divide, self-reproducing at the same time. Hence,
the micelles were said to carry out ‘‘autopoietic self-reproduction’’.
¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 In this low level of complexity, the autopoietic network is
incredibly minimal. It could be argued that the most significant feature
of the system is not the self-maintenance but the self-reproduction of
the micelle aggregates. Some authors have focussed just on this latter
aspect to develop thermodynamically grounded models of micelle
reproduction life cycles Fellermann \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2015 );
Fellermann \BBA Solé ( \APACyear 2007 ); Fellermann \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2007 ) .

The vision outlined by Luisi and Varela was empirically realised shortly
afterward by Bachmann and colleagues, initially for reverse micelles in
isooctane Bachmann \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1990 ) , and then for normal
aqueous micelles Bachmann \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1992 ) . Two years
later, autopoietic self-reproducing vesicles were realised by
\shortciteA Walde1994. The essential logic of the latter two
experimental studies, without going into too much chemical detail is
depicted in Fig. 3.2 a and can be summarised as follows. Initially, a
chemical mixture was prepared that consisted of two immiscible phases:
an aqueous phase and oily phase made of lipid precursor (that floated on
top, shown as dark blue in Fig. 3.2 a). Along the interface of these
phases, the precursor would slowly be hydrolysed (e.g. split by
accepting a water molecule) to form the lipid surfactant and a side
product. The surfactant would slowly populate the interfacial area and
exist in slowly increasing concentration in the water phase until such a
time that the critical micelle concentration (or critical vesicle
concentration) was reached (see Section 4.1.1 ). At this point, micelles
(or vesicles) would suddenly form spontaneously in the water phase and
they would start to sequester some of the precursor inside their oily
membranes. As a result, the contact area between the precursor and the
water phase would start to increase significantly and a type of
‘physical autocatalysis’ would start to take hold: the increased
hydrolysis rate of precursor would create more micelles (or vesicles),
creating more interfacial surface area and thereby increasing the
hydrolysis rate of precursor yet further. This positive feedback effect
is observed experimentally as a sharp increase in the concentration of
micelles (or vesicles) after a long onset time, and ceases when all the
precursor in the closed system has been used up, leaving a single phase
suspension of micelles (or vesicles) in equilibrium.

As a side note, \shortciteA Bissette2014 have lately reported on an
experimental scheme for autopoietic self-reproducing micelles closer in
spirit to the original vision of Luisi & Varela. In this scheme, the
amphiphile for the micelle membrane is synthesised from two simpler
molecules, rather than being created by the hydrolysation of a more
complicated precursor which is more realistic from a prebiotic point of
view.

In another recent experimental work, the idea of the autopoietic
self-reproduction of vesicles has been extended to a system of
phospholipid vesicles able to grow and divide in an indefinite cycle
Hardy \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2015 ) . Phospholipids are more complicated
two-tail lipids that form the basis of all modern cell membranes. For
their synthesis to be achieved, a more elaborate chemistry, more like a
minimal metabolism, had to be included onboard the vesicles. Vesicles
had to include a specific catalyst that joined a precursor phospholipid
to another molecule in order to synthesise the new phospholipids. This
requirement meant that, in order for daughter vesicles to go on growing
and re-producing themselves, the chemistry happening onboard the
vesicles also required an extra reaction pathway to produce more of the
catalyst. Thus, two reaction pathways took place on the vesicles (and
three precursors were required in the external solution). Generally,
this study serves as a neat illustration of an essential point: in order
to be able to divide into functional progeny, complex protocell systems
would have to possess chemical pathways to synthesise all of their key
chemical components (e.g. have an autopoietic organisation). In fact,
this experimental work is an implementation that comes very close to the
original computational autopoiesis model Varela \BOthers . ( \APACyear
1974 ) . One difference is that, in the experimental system, all
chemistry happens on or inside the vesicle membrane, not in the internal
aqueous phase of the vesicles. In fact, the experimental system
represents an advance over the computational model scenario, since the
catalyst can be reproduced, permitting growing daughter cells.

Finally, another landmark study in the field of chemical autopoiesis is
that of \shortciteA Zepik2001. Here, the authors experimentally
demonstrated that aggregates could be made to simply self-maintain
without necessarily entering into a self-reproductive regime (Fig. 3.2
b). Their experiment consisted of feeding a suspension of vesicles not
only with a precursor that hydrolysed to give surfactant, but also with
a second compound that had the opposite effect, causing the oxidation
(the loss of electrons) of existing surfactants. When oxidised, the
surfactants in the vesicle membranes transformed into a molecular form
which did not form vesicles (marked ‘NS’ in Fig. 3.2 b). Depending on
the relative supply rates of the precursor and oxidising compound, they
showed vesicles could be placed in a growing/proliferating regime (in
the sense of Bachmann), in a homeostatic regime (closer to the basic
idea of autopoiesis), or in a decaying regime.

It can be observed that the experimental route for demonstrating minimal
chemical autopoiesis has a very different character from computational
studies on abstract ‘cell-like’ autopoietic systems. Real chemistry is
difficult to control (specific aspects cannot be fine-tuned, and all
interactions are frequently not known), and often the behaviour of
aggregate chemistry at the nm/ @xmath m size scale cannot be observed
directly. Instead nano or micro-scale mechanisms have to be carefully
deduced by indirect means i.e. by making a suitable hypothesis
consistent with population-level behaviour (although observation of
single systems is now becoming possible with modern microscopy and
imaging techniques). On the other hand, to counter these drawbacks, real
chemical implementations of autopoiesis do not suffer the reality gap
that plagues computational autopoiesis simulations.

Minimal chemical models of ‘aggregate autopoiesis’ are relevant in the
effort of modelling autonomous protocells, because they represent an
empirical start in the direction of creating compartment-based systems
where chemistry is coupled with self-assembly processes. The criticism
of chemical autopoiesis is that it has not gone far enough to create
elaborate self-maintaining chemical aggregates. In particular, the
concept of ‘metabolism’ was minimal and chemistry always took place on
the aggregate surface, rather than being a complex aqueous-based
chemistry inside a vesicle. ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Recently, \shortciteA Luisi2014 has
issued a challenge for future chemical autopoiesis attempts: “can one
obtain such a Zepik system… with other kind of organic chemistry
reactions, and possibly in a way that an internal mechanism – more than
reactions at the bilayer – are involved?”

### 3.3 A Scientific Research Program Toward Basic Autonomous Protocells

In this thesis, the stages leading up to the first basic autonomous
protocells are investigated by modelling the co-evolution of protocell
metabolism and membrane through a ‘semi-empirical’ approach. These terms
will be described in due course. As compared to the minimal autopoiesis
models of Section 3.2 , this approach entails constructing more
chemically realistic (empirically based) computational models of early
protocells and considers that the protocell metabolism, membrane and the
coupling between metabolism and membrane can be much more elaborate. In
particular, rather than the protocell membrane just serving to localise
a metabolic network that in turn produces the membrane, the membrane is
instead regarded as an active interface controlling energy and matter
flow through the system (as explained in Section 2.3 ) and various
functional components for the membrane can be produced by the
metabolism. Hence, an ‘autopoietic’ systems perspective on protocell
self-production and function is maintained, but the development of
models is not constrained to the strict path of minimal autopoiesis.

The following section describes what a ‘co-evolution of protocell
metabolism and membrane’ approach entails, the rationale behind it, and
why this approach defines a scientific research program into the origin
of the first basic autonomous protocells. Then, Section 3.3.2 explains
the ‘semi-empirical’ modelling approach followed to construct different
protocell membrane-metabolism couplings. Section 3.3.3 goes on to review
two specific scenarios of membrane-metabolism co-evolution explored with
semi-empirical modelling.

#### 3.3.1 Framework: Co-Evolution of Protocell Metabolism and Membrane

The early earth would have resembled a formidable cauldron; an
expansive, heterogeneous and certainly not well-mixed chemical
environment whose properties are nigh impossible to classify. Different
chemical networks would have likely existed on catalytic surfaces, in
micro-enclosures (e.g. in porous rocks), in water-oil emulsions, in
spatially separated parts of solution, in the atmospheric gas phase, and
in complicated structured media (arrays of interacting reaction zones,
separated by, for example, self-assembled supramolecular structures), to
name but a few scenarios. ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Some constraints could be placed upon
chemical possibilities if the geography, climate and chemical
composition of the early earth was known, but this information is
unavailable. Rather, educated guesses have to be relied upon, see
\shortciteA deamer2011. There would have been uncontrolled merging,
mixing, and transfer between different chemical collectives and
assemblies, driven by energy fluxes such as thermal and chemical
gradients, lightening discharges, comet impacts, fluid convections,
volcanic activity and solar radiation. In solution, other free-floating
compartment systems apart from vesicles could have existed too, such as
coacervates (blobs of macromolecules and other organic ingredients held
together by electrostatic charges), and these could have also played a
role in promoting certain kinds of reactions and in establishing the
first protocells. Additionally, competition or symbiotic colony effects
could have taken place in some communities of chemical aggregates.

As for the development of protocells, given the chaotic prebiotic
chemistry conditions described above, it is certainly naive to assume
that their lineage comprised a smooth set of transformations whereby
free-floating equilibrium lipid vesicles gradually and elegantly became
far-from-equilibrium biological cellular systems. As \shortciteA
Monnard2015 remark “the appearance of protocells was not likely the
consequence of a single system lineage that can be traced back to its
roots on the early Earth” (p1243). In the beginning, there could have
been several very discontinuous transitions leading up to functional
protocells, and indeed multiple scenarios can be envisaged for the
creation of vesicle-based chemical systems. One hypothesis, called the
‘obcell’, even advances that vesicles developed metabolic systems on the
outsides of their membranes first, absorbing elements from a complex
surrounding ‘protocytoplasm’, before becoming inverted into protocells
Griffiths ( \APACyear 2007 ); Blobel ( \APACyear 1980 ) .

Such a state of affairs might seem to present an intractable starting
point for any investigation into the origin of autonomous protocells. It
would seem that a multitude of unknown and contingent pathways could
have lead to the first protocells. However, possibilities can be
narrowed down. An important bottleneck can be identified that fixes a
waypoint through which prebiotic protocell systems must have passed: the
first functional or ‘basic autonomous’ protocells with the ability to
robustly maintain themselves far-from-equilibrium – and with the ability
to divide in a controlled way into equally functional progeny – could
only have existed as such if their metabolic and membrane systems were
tightly integrated . This point is absolutely crucial.

Numerous times in prebiotic chemistry, there may have occurred the
chance insertion of complex reaction systems, developed in different
chemical contexts, into various self-assembled compartments (e.g. into
the internal aqueous phase and/or membrane of lipid vesicles). However,
such structures would have been unlikely to result in stable functional
protocell systems since the membrane would probably not possess the
correct composition, nor contain the correct molecular machinery
(selective channels, carriers, ion pumps, mechanisms to transduce
external energy into a form usable by chemical reactions etc) in order
to meet the permeability, catalytic and energy requirements to keep the
metabolism running, and at the same time avoid e.g. osmotic burst.
Equally, the metabolic processes would probably not be able to
synthesise all of the key system components enabling division into
equally functional offspring.

The bottleneck arising from the need of tight membrane-metabolism
integration in protocells during origins of life is useful because it
has implications for the stages immediately preceding the bottleneck. ¹⁷
¹⁷ 17 However, the further back from this bottleneck one goes, the less
clear the scenario becomes. The bottleneck implies that a co-evolution
of membrane and metabolism must have taken place over time in
protocells, to ensure the high level of integration required to pass
through it. Even if metabolism first developed directly on board
protocell membranes, and not in their internal medium, then still an
integration of membrane and metabolism must have occurred. Pure chance
meetings of diverse chemical components would likely have produced
complicated conglomerates, but it would not be the type of organised
complexity necessary for functional protocells with the ability to
proliferate into equally functional protocells. Therefore, from a
certain point, protocell membrane and metabolism must have increased in
complexity together, bootstrapping each other’s functionality in a
cyclic way so as to coordinate the dynamical behaviour of their
respective components at each stage.

The co-evolution of metabolism and membrane implication is able to
define a research program toward the first autonomous protocells. As
Szathmáry ( \APACyear 2007 ) articulates, the problem is to investigate
how simple ‘leaky’ protocells with a strong heterotrophic requirement
were able to become progressively sequestered from their environments,
turning into more impermeable and selective autotrophic systems that
used sophisticated means, such as internal component synthesis, active
transport and enzymatic metabolism, to stay far-from-equilibrium.

#### 3.3.2 Methodology: Semi-Empirical Modelling

The co-evolution of protocell metabolism and membrane scenario
introduced above is investigated in this thesis via a ‘semi-empirical’
modelling approach. The semi-empirical approach aims to create a
theoretical modelling paradigm that goes some way to bridging the gap
between pure in-silico and pure in-vitro implementations of protocell
systems, taking the best from both worlds.

As discussed in Section 3.2.1 , pure in-silico cell or protocell models
can be configured to an exact specification, directly monitored, and
there is full knowledge of all mechanisms. But, often, they lack
physical and chemical plausibility. Conversely, purely experimental
protocell implementations (Section 3.2.2 ) have the opposite problem;
there is no reality gap, but it is extremely difficult to construct
nano-sized chemical aggregates to an exact specification and often
impossible to monitor their dynamic behaviour directly. The goal of the
semi-empirical approach is to create theoretical protocell models able
to incorporate realistic physical effects, empirical constants, size
scales and time scales such that they can be directly interfaced to, and
developed in parallel with, experimental research on lipid aggregates.
Having a hybrid experimental-theoretical approach has considerable
value. Realistic theoretical models can be suggestive of molecular
mechanisms underlying experimentally observed phenomena, and models can
further guide new experiments. Moreover, once validated experimentally,
theoretical models can be used in an extrapolative way, to test more
complex protocell scenarios that are difficult to construct directly in
the lab.

The ideal semi-empirical protocell model would have a full
representation of space, be able to cover both short and long
timescales, allow the inclusion of empirical data and constants
(granting quantitative comparison against experiments) and would be
amenable to full mathematical analysis to yield elegant and
human-intuitive solutions. Of course, no theoretical model possesses all
of these desirable qualities. Rather, the art is to reach a suitable
compromise dependent on the context.

The semi-empirical protocell model used in the scientific work of this
thesis is the kinetic vesicle model introduced by \shortciteA
Mavelli2010 ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 The vesicle model can be seen to have roots in
earlier kinetics models designed to capture the mechanisms of
autopoietic self-reproduction of micelles and vesicles (Section 3.2.2 ),
see \shortciteNP Chizmadzhew1994, Mavelli1996,Mavelli2010a. , summarised
in its most basic mathematical form in Box 2. ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 In Box 2, the
model is stated in a deterministic formulation, in terms of particle
numbers. It is possible to express the model in different ways. A
deterministic formulation in terms of concentrations is given in
\shortciteA shirtediss2015 and the original stochastic formulation, in
terms of particle numbers, is best summarised in \shortciteA
Mavelli2010,Mavelli2012. This model represents a good compromise of the
factors mentioned above. The vesicle model is able to represent a
protocell operating far-from-equilibrium, where the protocell metabolism
and protocell membrane are both dynamic objects able to interact with
each other. Many different membrane-metabolism couplings can be
dynamically tested on the kinetic vesicle model, with the membrane able
to admit different lipid compositions (e.g. changing its permeability
and fluidity) and able to embed various hydrophobic molecules that
further modify the membrane function (e.g. by making selective
channels). Most implementations of the model so far have been similar to
simulation models of Gánti’s Chemoton (see Section 2.2.3 ) but crucially
differ in some important aspects. Most notably, osmotic water flow is
rigorously included and the protocell has a variable volume interior
aqueous pool. Volume is independent from the surface area of the bilayer
membrane, which means that the protocell can assume different shapes,
dependent on the volume-surface area relationship at any given time. ²⁰
²⁰ 20 Cell or protocell models that consider surface area and volume as
independent properties are quite rare. Perhaps the closest current
approach is the physicochemical cell model of \shortciteA Surovstev2007.
Also, passive diffusion of solutes by Fick’s first law across the lipid
bilayer membrane is included (an obvious feature, curiously absent in
all Chemoton models so far). Moreover, the model incorporates realistic
physical features such as accurate surface areas and volumes of lipids,
molecule numbers, membrane thickness, membrane lipid exchange rates (to
match the CVC - see Section 4.1.1 ), concentration ranges and mass
action kinetics of the internal chemistry. Based at the coarse grain
level of kinetics , the model is able to directly incorporate rate
constants from experimental papers (e.g. solute permeability constants)
and therefore, the model timescale is generally well defined. The
interested reader is directed to \shortciteA Mavelli2014 for a recent
review of applications.

{tcolorbox}

[colback=mybrown!50!white,colframe=mybrown!75!black,title=Box 2: Mavelli
& Ruiz-Mirazo Unilamellar Vesicle Model]

[]

##### Vesicle reduced surface (scalar value representing vesicle shape)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### Lipid exchange kinetics for bilayer (of single lipid type)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### Internal solute kinetics

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### Internal aqueous volume changes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

{tcolorbox}

[colback=mybrown!50!white,colframe=mybrown!75!black,title=Box 2
Continued: Mavelli & Ruiz-Mirazo Unilamellar Vesicle Model]

##### Description of model constants and symbols*

  -------- ------------------------------------------------------ ------------------- -------------
           Description                                            Unit                Value (typ)
  @xmath   Avogadro’s constant                                    @xmath              @xmath
  @xmath   Litre volume of vesicle aqueous pool                   @xmath ( @xmath )   @xmath
  @xmath   Scaled vesicle volume: @xmath                          @xmath              
  @xmath   Bilayer surface area (equal for both leaflets)         @xmath              @xmath
  @xmath   Bilayer thickness                                      dm                  @xmath
  @xmath   Lipid @xmath head area                                 @xmath              @xmath
  @xmath   Number of solute species types inside vesicle                              
  @xmath   Particle number of solute @xmath inside vesicle                            
  @xmath   Concentration of solute @xmath inside vesicle          M                   up to mM
  @xmath   Vector of all solute concentrations @xmath             M                   
  @xmath   MAK kinetics functions producing solute @xmath         @xmath              
  @xmath   Concentration of solute @xmath in environment          M                   up to mM
  @xmath   Diffusion constant for solute @xmath                   @xmath              @xmath
  @xmath   Free lipid number inside vesicle                                           @xmath
  @xmath   Free lipid concentration inside vesicle                M                   @xmath
  @xmath   MAK kinetics functions producing lipid @xmath          @xmath              
  @xmath   Lipid desorption rate constant                         @xmath              @xmath
  @xmath   Lipid absorption rate constant                         @xmath              @xmath
  @xmath   Total lipid number in both bilayer leaflets                                @xmath
  @xmath   Function accelerating lipid uptake when mem. tension                       
  @xmath   Free lipid concentration in environment                M                   @xmath
  @xmath   Total concentration of all species in environment      M                   
  @xmath   Number of buffer particles trapped inside vesicle                          @xmath
  @xmath   Concentration of buffer species inside vesicle         M                   @xmath
  @xmath   Molar volume of water at room temperature              @xmath              @xmath
  @xmath   Macroscopic permeability constant for water            @xmath              @xmath
                                                                                      
  -------- ------------------------------------------------------ ------------------- -------------

* Values typical for a 100nm diameter unilamellar vesicle.

#### 3.3.3 Semi-Empirical Models Toward Basic Autonomous Protocells

In the co-evolution of metabolism and membrane research program toward
autonomous protocells, the vesicle model has so far been employed in two
distinct ways (Fig. 3.3 ).

The first scenario, depicted in Fig. 3.3 a, has been to model a
‘lipid-peptide’ protocell Ruiz-Mirazo \BBA Mavelli ( \APACyear 2008 ) .
In this scenario, an autocatalytic reaction cycle inside the protocell
produced peptide monomers that assembled into short peptides in the
protocell interior (or inside the bilayer membrane itself), before
orienting and spanning across the membrane where they functioned as
rudimentary channels. Once in place, the peptide channels enhanced the
permeability of certain solutes across the bilayer membrane – including
the waste made by the metabolic cycle – and also contributed to the
‘elasticity’ of the membrane, i.e. the range in which the membrane was
stable. The logic was that by producing rudimentary transport channels
for the membrane interface, the protocell system could gain some
additional control over its own far-from-equilibrium maintenance and
become more robust to changes in external conditions as a consequence.
Preliminary results indicated that production of membrane channels could
prevent an osmotic burst from certain initial conditions, but could also
shorten the division time of the protocell system by making the membrane
more rigid.

Related to the lipid-peptide protocell, Fig. 3.3 b shows some steps for
the evolution of protein channels in protocells hypothesised by one
recent study ( \shortciteNP Wilson2014; see also \shortciteNP
Pohorille2005). The authors hypothesised that membrane channels
co-evolved with protocell metabolism, initially starting from
membrane-bound oligopeptides (Fig. 3.3 b, steps 1 and 2), which then
became ion conducting channels (step 3), turning into more rigid
channels (step 4) and then, finally, channels capable of energy
transduction and the utilisation of energy for active transport against
concentration gradients (step 5). Contemporary biological cells
critically rely on the latter to remain in far-from-equilibrium
conditions.

The second scenario addressed with the semi-empirical vesicle model has
been a ‘lipid-producing’ protocell (Fig. 3.3 c). The aim was to start
investigating what advantages were brought to a protocell that could
control its own membrane lipid composition (and hence permeability,
fluidity, elasticity) by endogenously synthesising a more complex lipid
type, like a two-tailed phospholipid Piedrafita ( \APACyear 2013 );
Ruiz-Mirazo \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2011 ); Piedrafita \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2011 ) . Internal synthesis of elaborate phospholipids to
compose a surrounding membrane is a critical operation that all living
cells perform. Given that primitive protocells would likely have
self-assembled from simpler lipids types that were locally available,
the transition from self-assembled to self-produced membranes (and its
implications) is an important avenue to research in the development of
protocells.

In the model, the protocell reaction network consumed a simple
single-tail lipid ( @xmath ) already present in the protocell membrane
(supplied by the outside medium), and by absorbing high energy
precursors @xmath and @xmath , was able to modify this lipid into a
two-tail lipid ( @xmath ) whilst also producing waste products ( @xmath
). ²¹ ²¹ 21 \shortciteA Piedrafita2013 explored a similar model, but
changed the internal metabolism from a Gánti autocatalytic cycle to an
‘M-R’ system (that did not use the simple lipid type ( @xmath ) as a
precursor). On incorporating the two-tail lipid, the membrane would
become both less elastic, and less permeable to solutes (see below).
Preliminary results indicated that, dependent on parameters, different
asymptotic lipid-phospholipid membrane compositions could be achieved.
Also, the observation was made that by requiring simple lipid ( @xmath
), the metabolic reaction cycle naturally ran more slowly (hence
producing less waste) in cases when the membrane composition was
dominated by phospholipids and thus less permeable.

The ‘lipid-peptide’ and ‘lipid-producing’ protocell scenarios are models
of how simple protocells began coupling internal reactions with
trans-membrane processes or membrane composition respectively, in order
to become more elaborate and more robust. In fact, the two scenarios are
quite related. Protocells made of an increased phospholipid content
would have faced a ‘sealing off’ problem, like all living cells do. The
close-packing and the long chain length of phospholipids grant liposomes
with better stability characteristics ²² ²² 22 In terms of temperature
range, pH range, and typically lower CVC value (see Section 4.1.1 ). ,
but at the same time make membranes that are quite impermeable to
solutes. Cells solve the ‘sealing off’ problem (and even take advantage
of it ²³ ²³ 23 A closed membrane barrier with permeability controlled
solely by transport mechanisms can allow selective and controlled
molecular trans-membrane movement. The cell decides what is transported
in and out, even against concentration gradients. On the other hand, a
permeable membrane barrier that permits passive diffusions cannot be so
selective, and it is actually the molecular properties of the solutes
that determine what is transported in and out. ) by employing
specialised machinery like channels to selectively move molecules across
their phospholipid membranes. Hence, as protocell membranes became
increasingly based on more elaborate lipid types like phospholipids,
membrane protein machineries like channels would have likely co-evolved
so that protocells could maintain their metabolic function Budin \BBA
Szostak ( \APACyear 2011 ) .

One can imagine many immediate extensions to the ‘lipid-peptide’ and
‘lipid-producing’ protocell scenarios that would explore the
co-evolution of the metabolism-membrane coupling further, hence moving
the model closer toward basic autonomous protocells. For example, the
two approaches could be combined to explore the dynamics of protocells
that could synthesise impermeable ‘sealed’ membranes that were
nevertheless made selectively permeable through the parallel synthesis
of peptide channels (a scenario closer to real biological membranes).
Also, a start in modelling the active transport of solutes across the
protocell membrane could be made to see what general stability and
control advantages the non-spontaneous molecular movement against
concentration gradients could bring to the protocell system.
Furthermore, a plethora of metabolic networks could be investigated
beyond Gánti’s autocatalytic cycles or Rosen’s M-R systems. See Section
5.2.3 for a discussion of the challenges associated with extending the
semi-empirical protocell research program.

The scientific modelling work carried out in this thesis actually
constitutes a prequel rather than a sequel to the existing
‘lipid-peptide’ and ‘lipid-producing’ protocell schemes. As the
following section explains, there exists rich protocell scenario to
investigate before protocells started producing complex components such
as lipids and membrane proteins.

### 3.4 Before Basic Autonomous Protocells: Modelling the Early
Interplay of Chemical Reactions and Dynamic Compartments

Both of the protocell models proposed as getting closer to basic
autonomous protocells in the preceding Section 3.3.3 were
‘self-producing’ protocells. Inside the lipid-peptide protocell, an
autocatalytic reaction cycle produced peptide monomers that eventually
assembled into membrane channels and also produced simple membrane
lipids. Inside the lipid-producing protocell, a reaction cycle instead
manufactured a complex two-tail lipid. Rather than extending these
models further, a valid argument can be made for rigorously
investigating more simple protocells instead, that did not synthesise
their own membranes, nor complex membrane proteins.

Jumping straight into modelling lipid-synthesising protocells in fact
brings some problems. A first issue is that, in cells, fatty acids and
phospholipids are synthesised from small molecule precursors in a long
sequence of linked reaction steps, where some steps require specific
organic catalysts to proceed, or energy input from e.g. ATP in order to
become spontaneous, or both factors. Realistically, lipid synthesis
(fatty acids, or even more difficult, phospholipids) from small molecule
precursors is not a trivial task, and would not be achievable by a
simple chemical cycle. In early protocells that likely operated at a
strongly reduced level of molecular and organisational complexity, it
can be questioned whether ‘bottom up’ lipid synthesis from small
molecules was feasible, given the advanced catalytic and energetic
requirements, or whether this was a relatively late addition.
Incidentally, the chemical autopoiesis approaches in Section 3.3.2 did
not solve the issue of prebiotic lipid synthesis, but rather used a
shortcut to bypass this problem. This shortcut, available to human
synthetic biologists but not necessarily to prebiotic protocells,
involved supplying the self-sustaining/replicating system with
precursors that were already structurally very close to being
amphiphilic aggregate-forming molecules. These precursors typically
required just a slight modification, often performed by just a single
reaction, in order to make them amphiphilic.

A second issue with modelling internal lipid synthesis is that internal
synthesis can have various biophysical effects on a vesicle. Some
experimental studies with giant unilamellar vesicles have shown that in
cases where lipid synthesis inside vesicles has been achieved
artificially, the newly produced lipids don’t always behave in an
expected way i.e. they don’t always grow the existing membrane
uniformly. Rather, it has been observed that internal lipid synthesis
can lead to multiple new vesicles self-assembling inside the water pool
of the parent vesicle instead Takakura \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2003 ) .
²⁴ ²⁴ 24 Also, in \shortciteA Hardy2015, the phospholipid vesicle grows
not by enlarging a single membrane, but by folding into a multilamellar
vesicle. Other have noted that asymmetries in area of the inner and
outer leaflet of a vesicle bilayer – as could take place when internally
produced lipids associate with the inner leaflet – can lead to vesicle
morphology transformations Mui \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1995 ) . These
findings point to the need for non-trivial theoretical models to
accurately account for the effects of internal lipid synthesis.

In any case, an under-explored protocell area exists before reaching a
scenario of protocells which endogenously produce complex components
like lipids, or peptides: far-from-equilibrium chemistry in dynamic
lipid compartments . In this early protocell scenario, chemical networks
could be envisaged to interact with semi-permeable membranes, not by
producing them, but in more indirect ways, to form protocell aggregates
or ‘reactors’ with interesting non-linear dynamics, and possibly
adaptive behaviours.

Figure 3.4 gives four examples of factors that can potentially lead to
interesting emergent chemical behaviour in a purely self-assembled
protocell chemical reactor, based on a vesicle, that does not have lipid
or peptide synthesis capability.

First of all, surface interactions can serve as an indirect coupling
between metabolism and membrane (Fig. 3.4 a). The interior surface of a
vesicle (or alternatively the hydrophobic interior of its bilayer
membrane) can provide an environment that favours certain types of
chemical reactions. As such, a vesicle membrane is able to act as a
promoter or regulator to certain reactions in the protocell metabolism
Walde \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2014 ) . Moreover, surface chemistry has
often been found to accelerate reactions inside small compartments with
a high surface-to-volume ratio Fallah-Araghi \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2014
); Sunami \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2010 ) .

Secondly, vesicles have a semi-permeable and elastic membrane enclosing
an aqueous volume, and for these reasons, the internal aqueous volume
can be significantly variable due to osmosis (Fig. 3.4 b). This
variation in the size of the molecular collision space can have various
ramifications for the dynamics of an encapsulated chemistry (
\shortciteNP Lizana2008, Lizana2009. See also Section 4.3.2 for a
detailed discussion).

Thirdly, vesicles are not just spheres that divide. Rather, vesicles
exhibit a rich variety of morphological transformations, triggered by
changes in membrane composition, osmosis and external forces (Fig. 3.4
c). For example, vesicles can grow into long filaments, and then divide
Zhu \BBA Szostak ( \APACyear 2009 ) , or alternatively can reach a
‘pearling’ instability whereby they rapidly convert into a beaded string
Bar-Ziv \BBA Moses ( \APACyear 1994 ) . Also, vesicles can undergo
oscillatory dynamics when placed in a hypotonic (diluted) environment,
swelling with water, and then transiently bursting to release contents
before resealing – iterating the cycle until solute gradients are
equalised Oglecka \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2014 ); Mally \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2013 ); Popescu \BBA Popescu ( \APACyear 2008 ) . Vesicles can
fuse together, mixing chemical contents and membrane composition, and
increasing their surface-to-volume ratio Caschera \BOthers . ( \APACyear
2011 ) . Furthermore, vesicles can bud smaller vesicles both externally
and internally Oglecka \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2012 ) , and often exist
in a range of multilamellar and nested structures (vesicles within
vesicles, like Russian dolls) that provide an interesting compartmented
scenario for reactions.

Fourth and finally, dynamical effects can be provoked in vesicles by the
presence of external forces, energy sources (e.g. \shortciteNP Zhu2012),
and changing environmental concentrations which may also originate from
neighbouring vesicles (Fig. 3.4 d).

In summary, there exists a huge landscape of interesting possibilities
for the interaction of chemical networks with the self-assembly physics
of vesicles, well before vesicles would have started to produce
important components internally. Even vesicle growth, which would seem
to require an internal lipid production, could potentially have been
achieved by other means, such as by vesicle fusion, lipid competition
(see Section 4.2.1 ) or by increased lipid uptake rate in osmotic stress
conditions Mally \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2013 ); Chen \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2004 ) . Therefore, before jumping ahead to modelling
self-producing protocell scenarios, a proper consolidation of more basic
scenarios where protocell membrane and metabolism are more indirectly
coupled is required.

The scientific contributions of this thesis, outlined in Chapter 4 to
follow, can be seen as contributions to the (wide) area of modelling
chemistry in dynamic compartments.

## Chapter 4 Overview of Scientific Contributions

This chapter summarises, in a simplified and largely non-technical way,
the main scientific contributions made by this thesis. Chapter 5 to
follow discusses in more detail how these results fit into the theme of
modelling chemistry inside dynamic lipid compartments (the research area
explained in Section 3.4 ), and into the overarching problem of
modelling the appearance of autonomy in protocells.

The published papers on which this chapter reports are included as
Appendix D . Material in Section 4.2 was published in Scientific Reports
as “Modelling Lipid Competition Dynamics in Heterogeneous Protocell
Populations” Shirt-Ediss \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2014 ) . Material in
Section 4.3 was published in Life as “Emergent Chemical Behaviour in
Variable-Volume Protocells” Shirt-Ediss \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2015 ) .
Material in Section 4.4 was published in the Proceedings of the Twelfth
European Conference of Artificial Life as “Steady state analysis of a
vesicle bioreactor with mechanosensitive channels” Shirt-Ediss \BOthers
. ( \APACyear 2013 ) .

### 4.1 Prelude: The Equilibrium Self-Assembly of Amphiphiles

As described in Chapter 1 , a protocell is a far-from-equilibrium
chemical system embodied in a supra-molecular membrane structure which
self-assembles through the action of weak forces. A good departure point
on the path toward modelling protocells, like for modelling any
phenomena, is to start simple: in this case, to develop intuition for
how protocell compartments can self-assemble in an equilibrium setting
without internal or external chemistry taking place. As \shortciteA
Sole2009 underlines, “Self-assembly is an essential component in the
path towards cellular systems.” (p283).

In this regard, as a prelude to the scientific contributions to follow,
the first scientific contribution presented below details a spatial
lattice model developed to capture the self-assembly of amphiphile
molecules, when these molecules form part of complex mixtures containing
water and/or oil. Before the lattice model results are presented,
Section 4.1.1 creates the context by recapitulating the basic principles
underlying the self-assembly of lipids into micelles and vesicles.

#### 4.1.1 Basic Principles of Micelle and Vesicle Self-Assembly

Liquid water is a vital pre-requisite for life as we know it. One of the
reasons why water is so important is due to the particular structure of
water molecules: they are polar and attract each other. ¹ ¹ 1 Polar
molecules have no overall charge, but their balance of charge throughout
space is unequal and leads to localised regions of attraction and
repulsion. Ionic molecules (ions) instead have an overall charge because
they carry a surplus or absence of electrons. In fact, water molecules
engage in a highly dynamic network where hydrogen bonds between
neighbouring molecules are continuously broken and re-established in
another arrangement. ² ² 2 A hydrogen bond is the name given to the
electrostatic attraction between polar molecules. Hydrogen bonds are
stronger than Van der Waals forces, but weaker than covalent and ionic
bonds. This dynamic network of bonds leads to an important effect called
the hydrophobic effect . In living systems, this effect drives the
folding of proteins into functional three dimensional structures and is
key to the formation of bilayer cell membranes.

So, what is the hydrophobic effect? When molecules unable to form
hydrogen bonds are put into water, like oily hydrocarbon chains for
example, they restrict the hydrogen-bonding possibilities that the
adjacent water molecules can engage in. This makes the bonding network
more ordered as a whole. The hydrophobic effect is the name given to the
water system striving to return to a more disordered (or maximal
entropy) state again. It does this by aggregating non-polar molecules
together, minimising their interface with the water hydrogen bonding
network. This is the reason why oil and water don’t mix. Figure 4.1 a
illustrates the hydrophobic effect, using black rods to represent oil
hydrocarbons and red lines to signify minimisation of the oil-water
interface.

The hydrophobic effect becomes even more interesting when amphiphiles
are added to water. Amphiphiles are molecules composed of two parts: a
polar or ionic head part that can participate in the water hydrogen
bonding network (‘water loving’ or hydrophilic ), and a non-polar
hydrocarbon tail that cannot (‘water hating’ or hydrophobic ). An
amphiphilic lipid molecule is drawn Fig. 4.1 b. In water, the dual
hydrophilic-hydrophobic personality of amphiphiles (also called
surfactants) means that they orient themselves such that the head parts
contact the water interface whilst the tail parts are sequestered away
together. This unique behaviour means that mixtures of amphiphiles,
water and oil can display a huge diversity of self-assembled
microstructures. Figure 4.1 c shows a so-called phase diagram that
systematically maps how a three-part mixture (called a ternary mixture )
of amphiphile, water and oil can transition between different regimes of
self-assembly, dependent on the proportion of each of the three
components in the mixture. ³ ³ 3 The phase diagram is drawn as an
equilateral triangle and uses a barycentric coordinate system. Each
point on the triangle surface has the same total concentration of
amphiphiles, water and oil; just their mix ratio is different. The
vertices of the triangle represent 100% concentration of amphiphile,
water or oil respectively. Only a single amphiphile type is allowed.
Cleverly, the area inside the triangle represents all the three-part
(ternary) mixtures possible and the edges of the triangle represent all
the two-part (binary) mixtures possible. Although this phase diagram is
only illustrative, it conveys well the rich variety of supramolecular
structures that are able to exist in ternary mixtures under suitable
conditions. Further, the diagram highlights that the transitions between
different self-assembly regimes are often abrupt, and the transitions
carve up the phase space in a non-trivial way. Phase diagrams can become
extremely complex when other factors affecting self-assembly (like
temperature, pH, or the presence of multiple amphiphile types) are also
taken into account.

For protocells, the most relevant supra-molecular structures that
amphiphiles self-assemble into are micelles and vesicles. As was shown
in Fig. 1.1 d of Chapter 1 , micelles are small ordered clusters of
relatively few amphiphiles, whereas vesicles represent much larger
structures formed of thousands of amphiphiles arranged in a spherical
(or quasi-spherical) bilayer. Micelles and vesicles are not static, but
very dynamic structures, constantly exchanging lipids with the
surrounding solution. As such, one of the key conditions for the
self-assembly of micelles and vesicles is the presence of a critical
concentration of free amphiphile monomer in the surrounding solution.
This concentration is termed the critical micelle concentration (CMC) or
critical vesicle concentration (CVC). Figure 4.1 d illustrates the CMC
behaviour for micelles. When amphiphiles are initially added to water
solvent (x-axis), they exist as free monomers in the solvent. However,
steady addition of amphiphiles does not lead to the free amphiphile
concentration increasing linearly. Rather, the amphiphiles start
becoming clustered into micellar aggregates, and addition of more
amphiphiles to the system results in more aggregates being formed
instead of an increase in the free monomer concentration (which stays
constant at the CMC). The same type of behaviour is observed in the case
of vesicles. Typically, the critical concentration depends on the chain
length of the amphiphiles forming the aggregates, decreasing as the
hydrophobic chain length increases. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Amphiphiles with longer
hydrophobic chains exchange more slowly between aggregates and solution
because of the higher energetic cost of exposing their hydrophobic
chain. This translates to a lower critical concentration.

An additional factor determining whether micelles or vesicles (or indeed
other supra-molecular structures) assemble is the effective shape of the
amphiphiles concerned. The packing parameter is a useful quantity
characterising how bulky an amphiphile head is with respect to its tail,
defined as the amphiphile volume v divided by the product of amphiphile
head area @xmath and amphiphile chain length @xmath (see Fig. 4.1 e).
Amphiphiles with a packing parameter smaller than @xmath are conically
shaped and are therefore prone to self-assemble into small micelle
clusters. Conversely, amphiphiles with a packing parameter close to 1
are cylindrical and form bilayers that can further fold up into
vesicles. The packing parameter is influenced by a variety of factors
including temperature and pH. ⁵ ⁵ 5 At the correct pH, adjacent pairs of
single chain lipids can develop hydrogen bonds between their head groups
and effectively swap their individual cone shapes for a joint
cylindrical shape. In this way, by changing the pH, a solution of
micelles can be transformed into a solution of vesicles.

Apart from the core principles reviewed above, many other factors like
Van der Waals forces, electrostatic forces, ionic strength, headgroup
features, and the presence of co-surfactants and co-solvents (to name
but a few) also play subtle but nevertheless important roles in the
self-assembly of amphiphiles into micelles and vesicles. In this case,
the interested reader is referred to more in-depth treatments by
\shortciteA
mouritsen2005,Pohorille2009,Mansy2009,Chen2010,DelBianco2014.

#### 4.1.2 A Lattice Monte Carlo Model of Amphiphilic Self-Assembly

To grasp amphiphilic self-assembly more intuitively, a lattice monte
carlo (LMC) model of surfactant-water-oil mixtures was developed. The
LMC model is technically described in Appendix B , and Fig. 4.2 shows
results of using the model to compute selected points on the
amphiphile-water-oil phase diagram of Fig. 4.1 c. In Fig. 4.2 ,
amphiphiles are represented as chains of molecules spanning multiple
lattice sites, with the hydrophilic head group coloured red and the
hydrophobic tail coloured black. Oil molecules and water molecules each
occupy single lattice sites, with oil coloured brown and water coloured
blue.

The LMC model was implemented in just two spatial dimensions and
amphiphilic self-assembly was represented in a highly simplified way.
Nevertheless, relevant equilibrium self-assembly phenomena could be
qualitatively reproduced. As an example, the CMC behaviour of micelles
could be observed, with micelles only appearing after a critical
surfactant concentration was reached (Fig. 4.2 b,f). Also, familiar
structures such as surfactant covered oil droplets in water (Fig. 4.2 c)
or surfactant covered water droplets in oil (Fig. 4.2 e) could be
produced, along with more complicated ‘microemulsion’ phases where
surfactants mediate a complex interface between entangled islands of oil
and water (Fig. 4.2 d).

In the literature, the LMC model implemented here has been extended into
three dimensions and has notably been used to model the formation of
vesicles Bernardes ( \APACyear 1996 ); Brindle \BBA Care ( \APACyear
1992 ) and to perform detailed calculations of critical micelle
concentration Stauffer \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1994 ); Brindle \BBA Care
( \APACyear 1992 ); Bernardes \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1994 ); Larson (
\APACyear 1992 ) , including for micelles of two amphiphile types
Zaldivar \BBA Larson ( \APACyear 2003 ) . LMC models are generally a
valuable resource for modelling the equilibrium phase behaviour of
complex mixtures because, unlike some analytical theories of complex
fluids, they don’t build in assumptions about self-assembly or restrict
the types of structures possible. Instead, self-assembly is modelled
from the bottom-up through low-level interactions between individual
oil, water and amphiphile chain molecules. Also, LMC models have the
benefit of being able to represent the self-assembly of multiple
aggregates within the same model, a feat that full-fledged molecular
dynamics models are often computationally incapable of.

However, when the intention becomes to go past self-assembly and onto
the challenge of modelling aggregates interacting with
far-from-equilibrium chemistry, the LMC model described is not the
correct formalism to pursue. This is because this formalism is concerned
with finding a probable ground state of a closed oil-water-amphiphile
mixture at equilibrium (i.e. a state whose energy fluctuations obey the
Boltzmann distribution for the final system temperature), rather than
being concerned with the kinetic far-from-equilibrium behaviour of an
open chemical system (for which no Boltzmann distribution of energy
states exists). ⁶ ⁶ 6 Some studies have tried to make initial attempts
at extending the LMC formalism to include basic metabolism alongside the
self-assembly of amphiphiles (e.g. see \shortciteNP McCaskill2007 or
\shortciteNP Ono2005), pushing the system away from equilibrium. See
\shortciteA Binder1997 Chapter 2 therein, for an advanced discussion of
how far lattice monte carlo models are able to be interpreted as
dynamical models with a timescale.

Because the main intention of this thesis is to contribute towards the
modelling of autonomous protocells, and because autonomous agents can
only operate in far-from-equilibrium conditions Kauffman ( \APACyear
2000 ) , the remaining scientific contributions of this thesis are
instead based on the semi-empirical vesicle model, as already discussed
in Section 3.3.2 . The vesicle model is formulated in terms of kinetic
rates, rather than energetic affinities, allowing far-from-equilibrium
phenomena such as protocell metabolism to be easily accommodated. The
molecular self-assembly of the lipid bilayer membrane in the kinetic
vesicle model is not modelled explicitly; modelled instead are the
changes to the membrane size and composition in time.

The second scientific contribution, coming next, consolidates the
kinetic vesicle model by deriving more realistic kinetic rate equations
- based on experimental data - describing how simple fatty acid lipids
enter and leave the vesicle membrane.

### 4.2 Grounding the Semi-Empirical Approach: An Experimentally
Validated Kinetics Model for Protocell Membranes

The original Mavelli & Ruiz-Mirazo semi-empirical vesicle model Mavelli
\BBA Ruiz-Mirazo ( \APACyear 2010 , \APACyear 2007 \APACexlab \BCnt 2 )
introduced in in Section 3.3.2 included a description of the rates at
which lipids associate and disassociate with a vesicle membrane. The
second scientific contribution, presented below, provides an improved
model of these kinetic equations, extensively validated against
experimental data on protocell competition coming from the Szostak lab.
These improved membrane lipid kinetic equations allow the semi-empirical
model to be used with greater reliability in future studies on the
co-evolution of protocell metabolism and membrane. The description of
the improved membrane kinetic model is given after the following
section, which first explains protocell competition.

#### 4.2.1 The Phenomena of Protocell Competition

Associated to the origins of life, a major experimental result over the
last 15 years has been the observation that heterogeneous populations of
lipid vesicles can compete for shared lipid resources. In a now classic
Science paper, \shortciteA Chen2004 reported on competition in a
population of oleic acid vesicles, wherein vesicles osmotically swollen
by an encapsulated cargo of RNA (or sucrose) stole lipids from their
empty, osmotically relaxed counterparts by virtue of absorbing lipid
monomers more quickly from the solution. As illustrated in Fig. 4.3 a,
this ‘osmotic competition’ resulted in the osmotically tense vesicles
growing into larger spheres (relaxing some of their tension), and the
empty vesicles shrinking.

Osmotic competition was later supplanted by research into other modes of
vesicle competition. This was because it wasn’t obvious how the
spherical vesicles ‘winning’ osmotic competition could go on to perform
the energetically unfavourable feat of division. ⁷ ⁷ 7 However, if the
environment subsequently concentrated, the larger ‘winner’ vesicles
would become flaccid (a shape more amenable to division) and the smaller
‘loser’ vesicles would become prone to disintegrate. This possibility
does not seem to have been considered. Phospholipid competition Budin
\BBA Szostak ( \APACyear 2011 ) was a different type of competition
investigated, resulting from asymmetries in vesicle membrane
composition, rather than asymmetries in vesicle membrane tension. In a
population of oleic acid vesicles, where some vesicles had a pure oleic
acid membrane and others had membranes embedding a small additional
fraction of phospholipid, it was observed that the phospholipid laden
vesicles would steal lipids and grow at the expense of the pure lipid
vesicles. This time, the ‘winning’ vesicles grew larger by following a
different pathway, elongating and becoming more prone to division into
smaller vesicles (Fig. 4.3 b).

The phospholipid competition findings corroborate earlier work by
\shortciteA Cheng2003. Looking into the final size distributions
resulting from heterogeneous mixtures of vesicles, the latter authors
reported that mixing pure phospholipid vesicles with pure fatty acid
vesicles resulted in a single peak size distribution, similar to the
initial peak of the phospholipid vesicle sizes. This result suggested
that the phospholipid vesicles rapidly ‘stole’ the free fatty acid
monomers in the solution, causing the destruction of the fatty acid
vesicle population. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Interestingly, \shortciteA Cheng2003 also
reported competition in a population of pure oleic acid vesicles. Larger
vesicles in the population could absorb available micelles faster and
thus grow faster than could the smaller vesicles.

More recently, \shortciteA Adamala2013 have reported that vesicles
containing a membrane fraction of hydrophobic peptides can produce a
nearly identical competition effect to vesicles containing a membrane
fraction of phospholipid. Therefore, ‘phospholipid’ competition may
actually be reflecting a more general effect, initially discovered with
phospholipids, but not reliant on their specific molecular properties.

#### 4.2.2 An Improved Lipid Kinetics Model for Fatty Acid Vesicle
Membranes

To arrive at a set of candidate kinetic equations for the uptake and
release rates of fatty acids from vesicles, we used experimental data
from protocell competition to set up an inverse problem . ⁹ ⁹ 9 Inverse
problems consist of identifying the probable mechanisms and causes that
underlie a given set of macroscopic observations. They are the opposite
of (easier) forward problems that involve the generation of macroscopic
observations from a known set of causes or mechanisms (e.g. running a
simulation). Solving inverse problems is important in many areas of
science. The inverse problem was as follows: given the overall change in
vesicle sizes in a competing population, to identify what lipid exchange
mechanisms are likely to take place at the micro-scale level of
individual vesicles in order to produce the overall population-level
effect. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In fact, a similar inverse problem strategy is used to
deduce the elementary reaction steps underlying a chemical reaction,
given the concentration dynamics of the reactants and products of the
overall reaction.

Figure 4.4 summarises the vesicle model and lipid kinetic rate equations
used to re-produce the experimental data on both phospholipid and
osmotic competition. In our model of a competing vesicle population,
vesicles did not have specific local interactions with other vesicles.
Rather, a ‘meanfield’ approach was taken wherein vesicles were assumed
well-mixed in solution, affecting each other by consuming or adding to a
common pool of free lipid monomer in the environment. Figure 4.5 gives a
model versus experimental comparison for selected results.

In order to best match the experimental results (discussed shortly), it
was crucial to include two additions to the original kinetic vesicle
model proposed by Mavelli & Ruiz-Mirazo Mavelli \BBA Ruiz-Mirazo (
\APACyear 2010 , \APACyear 2007 \APACexlab \BCnt 2 ) . These additions
were the uptake and release modifier functions, detailed in Fig. 4.4 c.
The release modifier function gave the ability to slow the fatty acid
release rate as the phospholipid content of the membrane increased. ¹¹
¹¹ 11 This modelled a mechanism we called the ‘direct effect’ whereby
the decreased fluidity brought to the bilayer membrane by the presence
of phospholipids slowed down the release rate of fatty acids. It is the
main mechanism that \shortciteA Budin2011 cite as being responsible for
phospholipid competition amongst vesicles. In our paper, we actually
argued for an ‘indirect effect’ being the more relevant effect in
competition. In the indirect effect, the presence of phospholipid in a
vesicle membrane drives growth simply through a geometric asymmetry (see
\shortciteNP shirtediss2014). More significantly, the uptake modifier
function was made into a conditional function that accelerated the rate
of lipid uptake only when the vesicle was in osmotically stressed
states, not in flaccid ones. ¹² ¹² 12 The conditional function means
that all flaccid vesicles uptake lipids at the same rate. Thus a
population of vesicles deflated to different degrees can all co-exist in
the same solution. This effect is also observed experimentally. This
conditional function turned out to be pivotal for reproducing the
experimental competition results – in particular, for reproducing a
‘continuous growth’ behaviour whereby vesicles with a phospholipid
fraction keep growing as more pure fatty acid vesicles are added, even
though their phospholipid fraction becomes further and further diluted –
and thus represents a valuable new addition to the Mavelli & Ruiz-Mirazo
vesicle model (already included as Equation 3.5 in Box 2 of Section
3.3.2 ).

It is worth briefly summarising how the kinetic vesicle model could
reproduce experimental results. Experimental results on phospholipid and
osmotic competition have been presented in the literature in two forms:
one form is dynamics , showing the change in the surface area of
vesicles over time from the instant they are mixed, to the time of
equilibration; the other form is stoichiometry , showing how different
mix ratios of vesicles lead to different surface area sizes at
equilibrium. Figure 4.5 demonstrates how the kinetic vesicle model
reproduces both dynamic behaviour and stoichiometric behaviour, to a
good approximation, in both phospholipid competition and osmotic
competition.

For phospholipid competition, Fig. 4.5 a shows the relative change in
the surface area of a population of pure fatty acid vesicles (oleic acid
vesicles, denoted OA), when either more pure fatty acid vesicles are
added in an equal ratio (yellow dots marked ‘+OA’) or when fatty acid
vesicles containing a membrane phospholipid fraction are added in an
equal ratio (yellow dots marked ‘+DOPA:OA’). The kinetic model
reproduces well that the fatty acid vesicles have no surface area change
when more fatty acid vesicles are added (blue line) and also quite
accurately mimics the shrinkage dynamics of the fatty acid vesicles when
vesicles containing a phospholipid fraction are added (red and green
lines). Figure 4.5 b further shows that the model predicts stoichiometry
reasonably well, i.e. how the equilibrium surface area of the fatty acid
OA vesicles decreases at equilibrium (black triangles are experimental
data) as more and more phospholipid-laden vesicles are added.

Moving onto osmotic competition, 4.5 c shows experimental data points
(yellow dots) for the growth of swelled and shrinkage of relaxed fatty
acid vesicles, when they are mixed in an equal ratio. Again, the kinetic
model quantitatively predicts, to a fair accuracy, the dynamic surface
area change trends (red and green lines). Stoichiometry for osmotic
competition is also approximately reproduced by the model. Figure 4.5 d
shows that adding more swelled vesicles to a population of initially
relaxed (non-swelled) fatty acid vesicles causes the shrinkage of the
relaxed vesicles to plateau, rather than to linearly continue.

Other experimental observations reproduced with the model include
‘winning’ vesicles finishing as spherical vesicles in osmotic
competition and as flaccid vesicles in phospholipid competition. Also,
the model demonstrated competition in mixed vesicle populations, where,
for example, all of the vesicles possessed a differing phospholipid
fraction (i.e. none were pure fatty acid vesicles). In fact, the model
was able to make predictions about vesicle competition effects in as yet
untested scenarios, such as osmotically swelled vesicles versus
phospholipid-laden vesicles.

Indeed, vesicle competition is a challenging research sub-field in its
own right, and the interested reader is encouraged to read the full
paper given in Appendix D . With regards to modelling autonomous
protocells, our foray into protocell competition served to provide a
more accurate set of lipid exchange rate equations for the membrane of
the semi-empirical vesicle model. The vesicle competition scenario was a
closed system of empty vesicles that, from a initial non-equilibrium
state (after mixing different vesicle populations), settled to a unique
equilibrium point. This scenario presented an ideal simplified system
from which to deduce membrane fatty acid exchange kinetics. ¹³ ¹³ 13 One
might ask if lipid exchanges rates could be deduced directly from
experiments. Experimentally, it is usually difficult to ascertain
microscopic rate constants directly. This is because an experiment needs
to be performed that effectively isolates a single process (e.g. lipid
release rate) and cancels out all other effects .

Technically, the use of the word ‘protocells’ in protocell competition
is incorrect, since by the definitions given in Chapter 1 , protocells
also require chemical reactions to be linked with self-assembled
compartments. In the competition work reviewed above, ‘protocells’ were
essentially empty vesicles with a fixed aqueous internal volume (but
with variable surface area). The third scientific contribution following
below turns the attention away from modelling protocell membranes toward
modelling protocell metabolism, and particularly metabolism in changing
solvent volume conditions. As a result, a new general paradigm for
framing protocell metabolism is introduced.

### 4.3 A New Paradigm for Metabolism in Early Protocells

Modelling protocell membranes has the advantage that empirical data
exists for likely prebiotic vesicles. Plausible prebiotic vesicles can
be reconstructed in the lab, usually from mixtures of simple fatty
acids, and the properties of their membranes can be rigorously
investigated. Membranes are the physical structures giving a ‘handle’
into the experimental investigation of protocells.

Modelling protocell metabolism - the other half of the equation - is
however a much more difficult feat. The types of prebiotic reactions
taking place inside protocells (or in free solution) at the origins of
life remain as an extremely speculative matter (see \shortciteNP
[Chapter 3]Dyson1999). It is known that protocells eventually developed
into full-fledged cells with a DNA-RNA-protein metabolism, but the
earlier stages leading up to this point admit many different
permutations. Some protocell models commit to replicating templates
appearing first (e.g. \shortciteNP Szostak2001), whereas other
experimental models, like \shortciteA Gardner2009, have investigated
autocatalytic chemical cycles inside vesicles (i.e. the
sugar-synthesizing formose reaction). On the other hand, theoretical
protocell models have employed various metabolic schemes inspired by the
autocatalytic reaction cycles of Gánti (e.g. \shortciteNP
Ruiz-Mirazo2008,Mavelli2007) or the collectively catalytic reaction
networks of Kauffman (e.g. \shortciteNP villani2014,hordijkSteel2015) or
Rosen (e.g. \shortciteNP Piedrafita2012,Piedrafita2013).

The third scientific contribution presented in this subsection does not
commit to, nor passes comment on any one of the specific metabolic
schemes mentioned above. Rather, the scientific contribution lies in
suggesting a new way that protocell metabolism can be regarded in
general , opening up a whole new line of investigation for modelling
metabolism-membrane couplings in future. This new paradigm for protocell
metabolism involves taking into serious consideration the possible
role(s) of osmotic water flow across the semi-permeable bilayer membrane
of a protocell.

Whereas osmotic water flow is a feature often disregarded completely in
models of protocells, its proper consideration actually leads to a
unique reactor scenario inside protocells wherein the solvent volume is
variable . As will be more fully developed in Section 4.3.2 and Section
4.4 , regarding the solvent as an active part of the chemical system,
rather than just being a passive ‘backdrop’ for the interaction of
solutes, has a number of important implications for reaction networks
inside protocells. Before that, Section 4.3.1 first explains why osmosis
(and variable volume) should be expected to be a significant feature in
early protocells.

#### 4.3.1 Cells Regulate Their Cytosol Volume, Early Protocells Could
Not

To survive, cells must keep many variables within homeostatic bounds.
One of the fundamental variables that cells require to regulate is their
cytosol volume Lang \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1998 ); Morris ( \APACyear
2002 ); Hoffmann \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2009 ) . Because all cells are
bound by a semi-permeable lipid membrane, they constantly face an
osmotic problem .

The cell cytosol contains many trapped macromolecules that carry a
charge and thereby attract counter ions into the cell interior. The
cytosol also contains numerous metabolites such as sugars, amino acids
and nucleotides that also attract further counter ions. The high number
density of molecules in the cell interior causes an osmotic water flow
across the cell membrane ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 An interesting point is how water
manages to permeate membranes. Lipid bilayer membranes have an oily
hydrophobic core (Section 4.1 ), which is actually unfavourable for
water molecules to cross. However, water is still able to permeate
bilayer membranes because: (i) the hydrophobic domain in the bilayer is
only very thin (around 4nm thick), (ii) transient defects caused by
lipid flip-flop permit the passage of some water molecules through the
bilayer and (iii) there is a huge number of water molecules present (it
is the solvent!) on each side of the membrane. Moreover, some cells
actively encourage water to flow across their membranes by producing
aquaporin channels that permit water molecules to cross the membrane in
single file Preston \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1992 ) . , to equalise the
osmotic pressure difference between inside and out. Water permeates the
lipid membrane of cells at a rate orders of magnitude faster than
solutes ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 If the opposite was true, i.e. if solutes were able to
permeate much faster than water, then solute concentration gradients
would tend to equilibrate rapidly before significant cell volume changes
could take place. Thus, the osmotic problem would be less relevant. ;
this means that variations in the total solute concentration inside or
outside the cell can induce rapid and significant changes in cellular
volume. Without volume regulation mechanisms, sooner or later, cells
would irreversibly ‘implode’ (becoming too small to support vital cell
functions leading to apoptosis through excessive crowding and DNA
damage), or ‘explode’ (losing critical components of the cytoplasm
through a burst cell envelope).

Perhaps the most striking example of cell volume regulation is provided
by the Paramecium protozoan. Paramecium is a single-celled eukaryotic
organism that prefers to dwell in stagnant pond water. Due to its high
internal concentration of macromolecules, metabolites and ions, water
constantly flows into the paramecium from the lower concentration
(hypotonic) surroundings. To prevent from bursting, the paramecium
maintains special internal membrane-bound vacuoles that have a yet
higher solute concentration than the cytosol Stock \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2002 ) . Water subsequently cascades from the surroundings,
into the cytosol and then on into the vacuoles, which swell. When full,
the vacuoles contract, mechanically expelling water (and metabolic
wastes) out of the paramecium (Fig. 4.6 a). In this way, the paramecium
is able to actively maintain a concentrated interior whilst inhabiting
dilute environments. ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The paramecium volume regulation
mechanism, because it actively pumps water, is able to control volume
and maintain the total concentration inside the cell higher than that of
the surroundings. The other volume regulation mechanisms discussed below
are also able to control volume, but they always end up with the total
concentration of osmolytes inside the cell equal to that of the
environment.

The mechanical pump of the paramecium is an advanced case of
osmoregulation, requiring coordinated attachment of the vacuole to the
cell plasma membrane and then contraction of the vacuole. More basic
mechanical forms of osmoregulation exist, such as mechano-sensitive
channels found in E. coli bacteria and plant and animal cells Kung (
\APACyear 2005 ) . Mechano-sensitive channels act as ‘emergency release
valves’ for solutes when the environment suddenly dilutes (Fig. 4.6 b).
Rather than being controlled by complex metabolic processes,
mechano-sensitive channels simply open a small water-filled pore (like a
camera iris) whenever there is sufficient membrane tension. The open
channels cause a rapid re-equilibration of solute gradients and halt the
expansion of the cell volume before the cell gets to bursting point.
Macromolecules remain safely entrapped inside the cell during the
process, due to the small channel diameters. Mechano-sensitive channels
are modelled in Section 4.4 to follow.

Other well-documented mechanisms that cells employ to reverse short term
changes in volume are regulatory volume increase (RVI) and regulatory
volume decrease (RVD) Hoffmann \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2009 ) . These two
metabolic mechanisms shown in Fig. 4.6 c involve the cell using an
energy carrier (ATP) to actively pump ions across the membrane, thereby
approximately restoring the cell volume to its set point. If the cell
has experienced a hypertonic shock (i.e. the environment has become more
concentrated than the cell interior), then RVI operates and ions are
pumped into the shrinking cell to enlarge the water volume. Likewise, if
the cell has experienced a hypotonic shock (i.e. the environment has
become more dilute with respect to the cell interior), then RVD switches
on and ions are pumped out to curb the volume increase of the cell.

One problem with RVI in particular is that, over prolonged time periods,
surplus ions pumped into the cell can start to interfere with the
essential functions of enzymes and macromolecules. A longer-term
adaptation that cells can make to survive in high concentration
environments (such as cells in the kidney, that are continually exposed
to high external concentrations of NaCl and Urea) is to start the
internal metabolic synthesis of osmo-protectants Burg \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2007 ) . Such molecules, also called ‘compatible solutes’,
increase the total solute concentration inside the cell without
interfering with metabolic functions, even when they are present at high
concentrations (Fig. 4.6 d).

Finally, some cells employ rudimentary physical strategies - not
regulation mechanisms as such - to cope with osmotic challenges. Plants
cells and bacteria, for example, possess an inflexible cell wall which
means that cell water volume is only able to expand up until a certain
limit, after which water entering the cell instead contributes to
internal turgor pressure (Fig. 4.6 e). With a cell wall, a cell is able
to use energy resources that would have been spent on volume regulation
for other means, such as movement. Still other cells, like oocyte cells
produced in the ovaries of adult female frogs manage to remain agnostic
about osmosis simply by being extremely impermeable to water Preston
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 1992 ) .

In reality, cell volume regulation is an involved topic and cellular
hydration state is closely intertwined with the correct function of
cellular metabolism on many levels Häussinger ( \APACyear 1996 ) . ¹⁷ ¹⁷
17 For example, see \shortciteA Klipp2005 (summarised by \shortciteNP
Dhaeseleer2005) for a systems biology model that captures some aspects
of the response that yeast cells have to a hypertonic shock (a sudden
concentration of the environment). This model is notable because it
integrates biophysics (i.e. a model of membrane water flow), in addition
to standard biochemistry. Cells may employ one or more of the mechanisms
listed above (and others not listed) in order to cope with transient
osmotic challenges originating both inside and outside of the cell. The
aim here is not to comprehensively review cell volume regulation, but
just to give a sense of the relatively advanced mechanisms that cells
use for averting immediate osmotic threats and for adapting to
persistent environmental changes in the longer term.

After this brief tour, the essential point to make is this: early
protocells could not have possibly possessed such elaborate volume
regulation mechanisms. Early protocells were likely to have been
instantiated at a much reduced complexity, lacking cell walls and
elaborate protein membrane channels able to actively pump ions or act as
mechano-sensitive helices. Highly organised water cascading and pumping
systems, such as that employed by the paramecium, would have certainly
been out of the question. Instead, early protocells were likely to be
composed of simple fatty acid based membranes that would have had a
significant permeability to water and most solutes Deamer ( \APACyear
2008 ) . Hence, it can be reasoned that early protocells were very
susceptible to osmotic water flow and volume change.

In fact, many experimental studies have confirmed that lipid vesicles
undergo volume changes readily. As discussed before, Chen \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2004 ) reported that fatty acid vesicles became osmotically
swelled by an internal cargo of sucrose or RNA, and this lead to them
stealing lipids from relaxed vesicles. \shortciteA Sacerdote2005 have
used the shrink-swell volume dynamics of vesicles to calculate membrane
permeability to various sugars. \shortciteA oglecka2012 have shown that
complex shape changes can be induced in giant unilamellar vesicles
following concentration of the environment, and that vesicles exhibit
swell-burst cycles if the environment is instead diluted Oglecka
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2014 ) . Finally, in an extreme example of volume
change, \shortciteA Zhu2011 have documented that multilamellar vesicles
literally ‘explode’ when intensely illuminated by a metal halide lamp.
The lamp light oxides buffer molecules inside the vesicle, quickly
making more internal molecules that in turn escalate the internal
osmotic pressure to a critical level.

#### 4.3.2 Variable Solvent Volume And Emergent Chemical Dynamics in
Early Protocells

The aqueous interior of simple lipid vesicles actually represents a
unique chemical reaction environment. Not only is the solvent volume
inside the vesicle variable, but the volume varies as a function of the
chemical reactions happening inside the vesicle itself. ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 and as
a function of concentration fluctuations in the environment. This
provides a very interesting and under-explored scenario for chemical
kinetics in early protocells, at a stage before volume regulation
mechanisms could have been developed.

For this third scientific contribution, chemical reactions in a variable
volume vesicle were modelled by the minimal mathematical formalism given
in Fig. 4.7 a. This is to be contrasted against the (comparatively
simple) mathematical formalism for chemical reactions in a fixed volume
vesicle given in Fig. 4.7 b. In both cases, the concentration dynamics
for a particular species @xmath is determined by the reactions
chemically producing that species (function r ) and the diffusion of
that species into and out of the vesicle (function d ). Additionally, in
the variable volume formalism, the vesicle volume @xmath is determined
by the species concentrations (rather than being a constant), and there
is a further ‘dilution term’ that accounts for the effect of volume
variation on species concentrations Pawłowski \BBA Zielenkiewicz (
\APACyear 2004 ) . The negative sign of the dilution term encodes that
if the volume increases, chemical concentrations decrease and vice
versa. ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 Note: Variable volume solvent inside the vesicle does
not affect the reaction mechanism of the internal chemical reactions.
The kinetic rate of each reaction remains the same function of the
reactant concentrations. However, variable volume does affect the
reactant concentrations. Rates of bi-molecular reactions steps (2
reactants turn into @xmath products) are directly affected by volume
changes whereas rates of unimolecular reaction steps (1 reactant turns
into @xmath products) are not. Figure 4.7 gives an example of two
unimolecular reactions @xmath and @xmath operating in variable and fixed
volumes, and lists their respective dynamic equations.

Beyond the technicalities, the most essential points to take away from
Fig. 4.7 are the following. When the solvent volume inside the protocell
is variable, (i) the dynamic equations for the species concentrations
contain more non-linear terms, and (ii) the concentration dynamics of
each chemical species is dependent on the concentrations of all chemical
species inside the vesicle. The very interesting implication is that
chemically independent reaction systems (i.e. that use exclusive sets of
chemical species) become indirectly coupled together via water osmosis
in a variable volume vesicle, forming a larger chemical system with
potentially very complicated dynamics. We coined this phenomenon
‘osmotic coupling’. ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 This is to be distinguished from
‘chemiosmotic coupling’, as discussed by \shortciteA
Harold1991,Mitchell1991. Chemiosmotic coupling instead refers to the
linking of chemical reactions and membrane transporter proteins
(‘osmotic’ in this latter case refers to the membrane itself, rather
than water flow through the membrane). It is an important phenomena, but
has received no attention so far in the theoretical or experimental
protocell literature.

For a simple example of osmotic coupling, refer again back to Fig. 4.7
When the vesicle volume is fixed (Fig. 4.7 b), the dynamics of the
unimolecular @xmath reaction system are independent from the dynamics of
the unimolecular @xmath reaction system. Removing either of the reaction
systems has no effect on the dynamical behaviour of the other. However,
in the variable volume case (Fig. 4.7 a), the two reaction systems do
mutually influence each other. Their dynamical coupling, rather than
being a direct chemical link, instead comes about indirectly by virtue
of the fact that both reaction systems are situated in a variable volume
solvent (space for molecular collisions) that they jointly determine the
size of. In fact, in variable volume solvent, the two unimolecular
reactions can produce a unconventional bistable switch, permitting
(under the correct parameter regime) two distinct volumes at which flow
rates are stable through the vesicle. Conversely, when the vesicle
volume is set at a static value (Fig. 4.7 b), the unimolecular reaction
systems @xmath and @xmath become dynamically independent and are
incapable of bistable behaviour.

The new paradigm for protocell metabolism brought about by osmotic
coupling is illustrated in Fig. 4.8 and can be summarised as follows.
Traditional protocell models (e.g. Gánti’s Chemoton, or the Ribocell)
blindly follow the assumption of a ‘one piece’ chemical network inside a
protocell whereby all chemical species are ‘stoichiometrically’
connected (Fig. 4.8 a). That is to say, a finite sequence of reactions
can be traced between one chemical species and another. The dynamical
complexity of such a chemical network is tied to the number and
organisation of reactions. However, a new possibility presents itself
when the physical phenomenon of water osmosis is rigorously considered.
In variable volume, a complex chemical network can be created inside a
protocell from multiple chemically independent reaction systems that
mutually influence each other indirectly through osmotic coupling (Fig.
4.8 b). In this latter case, complex non-linear dynamics can result ‘for
free’ from the variable volume coupling of reaction systems.

This work has by no means classified all of the possible dynamic
behaviours stemming from osmotically coupled reaction sets; rather, it
has opened up a ‘pandora’s box’ to be pursued in future works.

### 4.4 Indirect Coupling of Protocell Metabolism and Membrane

Variable solvent volume inside a protocell, as described in the previous
contribution, could have had further significance beyond the osmotic
coupling of independent aqueous-based reaction systems. Variable volume,
through causing effects like internal osmotic pressure, may have
additionally served to indirectly couple metabolic (chemical) with
membrane (physical/mechanical) processes, promoting further complex
protocell dynamics.

One interesting example in this direction involves rudimentary peptide
channels which could have embedded into the membranes of early
protocells. Osmotic pressure inside a vesicle would act as a
chemical-to-mechanical transducer, converting total osmolyte
concentration inside the vesicle into membrane tension. Conversely,
membrane tension could align and activate the membrane channels, which
would increase the passive diffusion rate of solutes and ions across the
protocell membrane. Therefore, in the opposite way, the channels would
thus work as mechanical-to-chemical signal transducers. Thus, under
osmotic stress, a vesicle with membrane channels contains an indirect
feedback loop between metabolism and membrane that has potentially
interesting consequences for overall protocell dynamics.

Another function cited for rudimentary peptide channels in early
protocells has been in the more extreme role as ‘emergency release
valves’, guarding against the possibility of the environment suddenly
becoming diluted Morris ( \APACyear 2002 ) . ²¹ ²¹ 21 Or, the protocell
interior more concentrated. In fact, to achieve a certain osmotic
pressure inside a vesicle, an elementary proof can show that the
environment requires to be diluted less than the interior of the vesicle
requires to be concentrated. This primitive volume regulation mechanism
is suggestive of how early protocells became more robust to
environmental change. ²² ²² 22 But, channels are only effective against
hypotonic shocks in the environment (dilutions). An interesting question
is how early protocells countered hypertonic shocks.

The final scientific contribution presented in this subsection
investigates, using a minimal model, how tension-sensitive membrane
channels could improve the robustness of a simple protocell ‘reactor’.
This contribution is directly related to investigating channels in their
emergency release role, but can also been seen as generally relevant to
the area of how metabolism could have become indirectly coupled, via
changing solvent volume, to membrane processes in early protocells. A
minimal model of a vesicle was designed, featuring variable volume,
fixed surface area, channels that opened progressively with increasing
membrane tension (like mechano-sensitive channels) and a simple
metabolism (Fig. 4.9 ). In order to derive full analytical solutions to
the model, the metabolism necessarily consisted of a single irreversible
reaction converting nutrient @xmath into waste @xmath .

Bifurcation analysis of the model confirmed the expected behaviour that
mechano-sensitive channels could significantly extend the range of
external @xmath nutrient concentrations at which the protocell could
maintain a far-from-equilibrium steady state (Fig. 4.9 c). ²³ ²³ 23 When
the membrane diffusion constant for nutrient @xmath , was greater than
the diffusion constant for waste @xmath , leading to an accumulation of
waste inside the vesicle and an internal osmotic pressure. The analysis
also revealed some other interesting effects, such as the potential of
the protocell reactor to prematurely burst before reaching critical
membrane tension, and the possibility of bistable behaviour (and
hysteresis) for certain parameters. Additionally, the simplicity of the
model allowed an exhaustive search of parameter space. This search
revealed that the efficacy of membrane channels, as compared to a
vesicle reactor with no channels, was greatest when the metabolism was
neither too fast, nor too slow. If the metabolic reaction was too fast,
waste would accumulate inside the reactor at a rapid rate, leading to a
burst whether the reactor had channels or not. Conversely if the
reaction was too slow, @xmath and @xmath inside the vesicle would
approximately equilibrate to their external concentrations, and little
(if any) membrane tension would be exerted. In this latter case, there
was again no stability advantage to be had with channels. For
intermediate metabolism speed, however, the vesicle reactor had a wider
stability region when channels were present.

## Chapter 5 Discussion

Throughout this thesis, the biological autonomy view of living systems
has been brought to the fore, and it has been argued how this
perspective translates into a very important systems-oriented research
program for protocells on the way to full-fledged living cells.

The discussion opens in Section 5.1 by briefly recapitulating how the
autonomous systems perspective – currently heavily marginalised in
prebiotic chemistry research in favour of a pure evolutionary view –
demands a radical shake-up of the origins of cellular life problem. A
series of major transitions of protocell development in light of an
autonomous systems view are suggested, and it is discussed how autonomy
represents a general heuristic principle, rather than a well-defined
sub-problem for protocell research. Also highlighted is how the
investigation and ultimate implementation of autonomous protocells needs
to take into account realistic physical and chemical conditions and
couplings.

Then, Section 5.2 summarises scientific contributions made by this
thesis and where they fit into the reformulation of the major protocell
transitions discussed in Section 5.1 . This section also discusses
future challenges in advancing a semi-empirical research program toward
basic autonomous protocells.

Finally, Section 5.3 concludes by suggesting future directions,
including immediate research directions stemming from the scientific
contributions made in this thesis, and also longer term research
directions beneficial for an autonomous protocells research program.

### 5.1 The Autonomy Perspective: Recapitulation and Implications

Earthly life is not embodied as complex chemical networks dispersed in
solvents; nor does it take the form of competitive soups of replicating
macromolecules. Rather, all known earthly life manifests itself at the
cellular level . Taking seriously this observation, the field of
protocells (reviewed in Chapter 1 ) works on the general assumption that
compartmentalisation of chemical systems was essential from an early
stage in the origins of life.

The requirement for compartmentalisation narrows down possibilities for
the origins of life, but it does not set a definitive direction for
protocell research. With no directive, the main trend in protocell
research to date has been to follow a default option: to carry over the
evolutionary perspective that existed before in prebiotic chemistry
research – i.e. evolving molecular populations such as the RNA world –
into a compartmentalised setting. Under an evolutionary interpretation,
protocells are regarded as a vehicle to assist in the chemical evolution
of molecular networks. Compartmentalisation in a protocell permits the
segregation of molecule populations and gives rise to the heritable
transfer of adaptations from parent to offspring chemical networks when
the compartment divides. Various chemical evolution scenarios involving
protocells have been proposed, including the evolution of template
replicators in protocells (e.g. \shortciteNP
Bianconi2013,Szathmary1987,Szostak2001), the evolution of autocatalytic
networks with multiple ‘cores’ in protocells Vasas \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2012 ); Hordijk \BBA Steel ( \APACyear 2015 ) ¹ ¹ 1 In this
approach, self-catalysing ‘cores’ in autocatalytic networks – and not
nucleic acids – are the units envisaged to replicate, propagate and
mutate in protocells potentially evolving more complex autocatalytic
networks which the authors argue could later be taken over or controlled
by template replicators. , and the evolution of composite protocell
aggregates consisting of multiple lipid types Segre \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2000 ) .

From the evolutionary perspective, the origins of cellular life problem
is reduced to finding the minimal compartmentalised chemical networks
(based on template replicators, or otherwise) that could have – via
division and mutation – started a process of competition, selection and
open-ended evolution, to finally culminate in compartmentalised
metabolic networks based on informational polymers and protein catalysts
(“cells”).

The autonomous systems perspective of protocell development, argued for
throughout this thesis, differs quite radically from the above
evolutionary view.

As reviewed at length in Section 2.2 , the autonomy view articulates a
much more rigorous, systems-oriented notion of cellularity than the
evolutionary view commits to. Autonomy emphasises that cells are systems
that can robustly exist far-from-equilibrium because they consist of an
integrated network of processes and constraints, and this network is
organised such that it can collectively re-fabricate over time the
majority of the diverse components of which it is made (by making use of
nutrients and utilising energy sources in the surrounding medium). This
is the basic idea of organisational closure, or functional integration ,
as explained in Section 2.2.2 . Furthermore, under the autonomy view,
the cell membrane is not simply a convenient segregator of molecules;
rather it serves as an active interface that the cellular system
produces and can modify (by adding and modulating various membrane
nano-machineries) to control matter and energy flows through itself.
Overall, the autonomy view stresses the fundamental organisational
scheme of biological cellular systems. The evolutionary approach, on the
other hand, simply adopts that cells are reducible to metabolic network
diagrams: DNA-RNA-protein metabolism in convenient lipid bags. This
latter view is much weaker on the notion of cellular organisation. ² ² 2
Proteins, for example, under the evolutionary view, are typically seen
only in a role as reaction catalysts . But in cells, proteins play
numerous important structural and signalling roles too: they are
integral in the cytoskeletal matrix, they can act as motors for internal
vesicular transport, and they are vital in the cell membrane as channels
and receptors. Cells have an important physical aspect, they are not
just an aqueous-based metabolism.

These diverging views of ‘cellularity’ create diverging protocell
research agendas. All include compartmentalisation one way or another,
but with differing degrees of rigour. The evolutionary approach sees the
grand challenge of protocell research as resolving the problem of how
the chemical evolution of molecular networks in compartments – largely
passive and idealised compartments – was accomplished. Under this
approach, metabolism and compartment are quite disjointed and the
compartment plays a secondary role, relevant only for the purpose of
containment and division. Conversely, the autonomous systems approach
sees the challenge of protocell research as much broader: the problem is
not just to solve how cyclic reaction networks arose, but how integrated
autopoietic cellular systems arose (Section 2.3 ). Autonomy brings to
the fore that we need to deal with cellular organisation/integration in
origins of life from an early stage . It highlights that it is not
enough to assume that the membrane, metabolic and template systems of
cells developed independently and then came together almost ‘by chance’
to form functional living units Ruiz-Mirazo \BBA Mavelli ( \APACyear
2008 ); de la Escosura \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2015 ) . Rather, the
autonomy view highlights that the membrane and metabolism systems of
protocells likely co-evolved to become tightly integrated (Section 3.3.1
). This integration allowed protocells to develop increasingly complex
chemical networks and overcome the basic problems of cellularity at each
stage of their ongoing development, such as the regulation of osmotic
pressure and the accessibility of nutrients, and provided a base from
which protocells could further increase their levels of
molecular/organisational complexity. ³ ³ 3 In fact, \shortciteA
DelaEscosura2015 have recently argued that integration of diverse
components and processes occurred from almost the beginning in protocell
development. They wrote: “a certain number of different ‘chemical tasks’
(not just catalysis, but also transduction mechanisms, spatial
confinement, mediated diffusion or template activity) may need to be
jointly performed in order to ensure a minimal level of dynamic
stability or robustness, even in the simplest infrabiological systems.”
(p18). The integration problem stressed by the autonomy approach has
severe implications for an evolutionary view of origins, which for
example assumes that replicator populations became ‘functional’
protocells simply by synthesising membrane lipids Scheuring \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2003 ); Czárán \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2015 ) .

It is worth mentioning that the problem of integration of components and
processes is actually the main hurdle that synthetic biology approaches
are facing in the ongoing challenge to create an artificial cell.
Reviewing the state of the art, \shortciteA Caschera2014 comment “the
integration and the coordination of self-organization, metabolism and
information into cell-sized compartments have failed so far.” (p85). The
metabolic, template and compartment subsystems of cells have to be
interfaced and coupled together in an effective way. A cell is much more
than just a metabolic network diagram, it is a highly organised and
interconnected physico -chemical system. Simply transplanting
transcription/translation machinery from extant cells like E. coli into
lipid vesicles (i.e. how the evolutionary approach conceptualises a
“cell”) does not lead to functional artificial cell systems that are
able to self-maintain far-from-equilibrium, reproduce, and exhibit
autonomous behaviour. For example, the bioreactor of \shortciteA
Noireaux2004 demonstrated that an E. coli transcription/translation
system will collapse inside a lipid vesicle after 5 hours. However,
these authors found that if the E.Coli machinery could synthesise
protein pores for the membrane – forming a partial integration between
compartment and metabolism – then nutrient permeability restrictions
could be overcome, and the internal transcription/translation system
could remain active for over 4 days (as evidenced by the expression of
green fluorescence protein, see Fig. 1.2 d).

The synthetic protocell study of \shortciteA Hardy2015 discussed in
Section 3.2.2 presents a different example illustrating the necessity of
integration. The latter authors embedded a non-trivial phospholipid
synthesising metabolism on-board phospholipid vesicles, and they could
achieve the growth and division of phospholipid vesicles into functional
daughters (also able to grow and divide). However, this was accomplished
only by carefully considering how the entire reaction system
(proto-metabolism) was to reproduce itself and transfer to the newly
formed daughter vesicles. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Nevertheless, the cellular integration
problem was only partially solved in this case again. Although the
vesicles could continuously grow and divide, they did so as flaccid
structures. The problem of how the protocells could maintain a minimum
aqueous volume across generations was not addressed.

Therefore, how the metabolic and membrane systems in protocells became
integrated together is a very important problem. This problem, congruent
with a true systems chemistry approach to the origins of cellular life
(Section 1.4 ), requires the autonomy perspective in order to be fully
recognised and properly treated. The following section proposes a set of
protocell transitions in the origins of life, as an example of what
could be suggested by an autonomy-led approach to the problem.

#### 5.1.1 Reformulation of Major Prebiotic Transitions

Chemical competition and diversification is considered to happen over
segregated molecular populations under the evolutionary view. In the
autonomous systems view of protocell development, chemical evolution is
an equally important driving force, but selection is instead regarded to
act over populations of integrated dissipative protocell systems. It
could be hypothesised that these protocell systems underwent the
following major transitions:

-    T1: Self-assembly in heterogenous conditions. Supramolecular
    structures with a diverse composition (mixture of lipids and other
    small hydrophobic molecules anchored in the membrane), but not yet
    hosting chemical reactions. In this context, vesicles would have
    been dynamic but largely passive objects, even if they could have
    still competed for lipid. In particular, vesicles with mixed lipid
    membranes would have been able to survive across diverse
    environments with low lipid monomer concentrations.

-    T2: Far-from-equilibrium vesicle reactors. Vesicles self-assembled
    from free lipids and other hydrophobic components in the external
    medium, hosting chemical reactions in their aqueous interior,
    membrane inner/outer surface or membrane interior (Section 3.4 ).
    The molecular complexity of such systems would be comparable to that
    of the surrounding medium, but complex chemical and morphological
    dynamics could still be present in such systems, including adaptive
    behaviours and directed movement.

-    T3: First self-producing protocells. Protocells hosting chemical
    reactions that fabricated new molecular species not present in the
    external medium. These protocells would begin to sequester
    themselves from the medium, showing a molecular complexity greater
    than the environment. This would mark the start of an important
    transition, from self-assembly to self-production .

-    T4: Intermediate self-producing protocells. Protocells able to
    fabricate complex molecular species, such as lipids, peptides,
    catalysts, possibly nucleotides. Appearance of endergonic-exergonic
    couplings and energy currencies to enable such syntheses. These
    protocells would directly control their membrane composition from
    the inside, thus granting wider possibilities to regulate their
    coupling with environmental energy/matter flows, increasing their
    viability range. Catalysts would enable controllable and specific
    reaction pathways.

-    T5: Advanced self-producing protocells with features such as
    reliable division and heredity. Self-producing protocells which
    integrated template biomolecules into metabolism to expand synthetic
    and catalytic possibilities, together with division coordinated with
    reliable, heritable transfer of information to offspring. Also,
    advanced behavioural possibilities such as complex adaptation
    strategies to diverse environments, and anticipation of future
    conditions.

-    T6: First full-fledged biological cells. Genetically instructed
    cellular metabolism. Genotype-phenotype relationship mediated via a
    code. Open-ended evolution.

The above hypothetical transitions have been biased toward lipid
vesicles in search of continuity with extant living phenomenon, but it
is reasonable to assume that the early stages of protocell development
(T1 and T2) could have been based on, or aided by, other types of
compartment media, like micelles or coacervates Monnard \BBA Walde (
\APACyear 2015 ) .

A first significant transition in the above list is that of
self-production. At this point, between T2 and T3, protocells started
turning from an “outside-in”, to an “inside-out” organisation. That is,
protocells went from acquiring their necessary materials from the
surrounding medium, to being able to fabricate internally their own
components (e.g. energy rich compounds, lipids, and catalysts),
successively replacing the less efficient materials available in the
environment.

For a protocell, the capacity for self-production is intuitively linked
with autonomy: a self-producing protocell individuates itself from the
environment in a strong sense, for its embodiment is a result of its own
metabolic organisation, not just of self-assembly of previously
available compounds. Due to an internally synthesised embodiment, a
self-producing protocell also has more independence over which
environmental regions it can inhabit, i.e. the system can maintain
itself even in environments with a low level of molecular
diversity/complexity. Last but not least, a protocell with internal
component synthesis has a direct and precise control over its membrane
properties, and thus can better manage energy and matter flows to and
from the environment in order to remain viable.

A second significant transition in the above list involves the stage at
which protocells started using molecular template mechanisms and
sequences in order to record (and at the same time, promote) the
organised complexity of the protocell system, and pass on this
information in a reliable way to offspring (T5). This has a strong
evolutionary implication, but this will not be covered in detail in this
thesis.

#### 5.1.2 Basic Autonomy as a Multidimensional, Heuristic Concept

In trying to formulate a simplified toy model for the origins of
metabolism, Freeman Dyson commented that “The essential difficulty
arises because metabolism is a vague and ill-defined concept. There is
no such difficulty with the concept of replication. Replication means
exactly what it says….[but] we run immediately into the problem of
defining what we mean by metabolism.” (Dyson, \APACyear 1999 , p48) .
The same type of problem arises for investigations into the origins of
autonomy in protocells. ‘Autonomy’ is a multi-faceted and intuitive
concept, whose formal expression is not straightforward.

Historically, the approaches to origins of life attracting the most
attention have been those which map the grand, unwieldy problem onto
some smaller, well-defined sub-problem. Well-defined sub-problems have
the advantage of representing a concrete goal to focus investigations,
and some even admit analytical formulation and solution. For example, a
few popular sub-problems in origins have been as follows: How did
replicator molecules manage to replicate rapidly and with high fidelity?
How did disordered molecular populations suddenly jump into a state of
order? How did compartment division become synchronised with template
replication?

The autonomy approach also poses a problem for origins of life: How did
protocellular systems become integrated cellular systems, ultimately
with a self-producing and self-reproducing autopoietic organisation?
However, this is not reducible to a single easy to handle sub-problem,
but rather it involves a set of problems, each consisting of many
potential strands. A valid general question is posed, but not at the
level where a formal or experimental model could be immediately
suggested to resolve it. Therefore, basic autonomy acts more like a
heuristic tool in origins of life protocell research (similar to an
“intuition pump” in the terminology of \shortciteNP Dennett1984). It has
value in providing an overall conceptual direction for protocell
research to follow, like a ‘main trunk’ for research activities, useful
for pointing out what are the kind of relevant problems that should be
addressed by more concrete protocell studies.

Globally speaking, as discussed in Section 2.2.1 , biological autonomy
comprises two dimensions: a behavioural dimension concerned with how a
cellular system interacts as an agent with its environment, and a
constitutive dimension, concerned with how a cellular system is
organised to self-fabricate its embodiment. These dimensions set up
multiple sub-problems and questions for the development of protocells,
which are typically highly interwoven. These questions include: How did
protocells increase in behavioural diversity (dynamical regimes
possible)? How did protocells start to show a history dependence and
basic learning toward external stimuli? How did protocells start
implementing basic mechanisms of motility? How did protocells start to
capture and manage energy resources to accomplish endergonic reactions
(like nucleotide/peptide polymerisation) and active transport processes?
How did protocells develop hypotonic and hypertonic volume regulation
mechanisms? How did protocells develop selective membranes to control
molecular diffusion? How did supra-molecular structures and/or a
heterogeneity of phases start participating in reaction chemistry?

#### 5.1.3 Matter Matters: The Value of Semi-Empirical Modelling

The set of example sub-problems above, all stemming from an autonomous
systems approach to protocells, cannot be properly tackled without
paying attention to the intrinsic activity and constraints inherent in
real material systems. Even in a general, universalised conception of
the problem of biological organisation, “matter matters” Moreno \BOthers
. ( \APACyear 1994 ); Moreno \BBA Ruiz-Mirazo ( \APACyear 1999 );
Ruiz-Mirazo \BBA Moreno ( \APACyear 2004 ) . Therefore, modelling the
appearance of autonomy in protocells inherently demands that protocells
be represented realistically , as physicochemical systems, where the way
in which chemistry interacts with self-assembly processes is properly
captured. For protocell models, it is ultimately not enough to
concentrate merely on abstract models of metabolism, nor is it
sufficient to construct only toy models of cellular systems (like the
computational autopoiesis “protocell” models of Fig. 3.1 ). In order to
get a faithful picture of protocell system dynamics and properties, all
of the biophysical effects and consequences of encapsulating chemical
processes in dynamic micro-compartments have to be taken into account.

Because of these requirements, a ‘semi-empirical’ approach to modelling
becomes essential to pursue Mavelli \BBA Ruiz-Mirazo ( \APACyear 2007
\APACexlab \BCnt 1 ); Piedrafita \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2012 ) . The
semi-empirical approach, discussed in Section 3.3.2 , seeks to
capitalise on the advantages of both theoretical in-silico and
experimental in-vitro approaches to protocells – namely controllability
and proximity to the real world – by proposing a hybrid approach
situated roughly in the middle of the two. The semi-empirical approach
is itself a theoretical approach, but it proceeds with the explicit aim
of constructing protocell models that embed realistic physical
processes, empirical parameter values, sizes, molecule numbers and
timescales, such that the gap to real in-vitro protocell implementations
is closed. Semi-empirical models and protocell experiments work in
tandem, bootstrapping each others progress. Semi-empirical models can
help to clarify underlying molecular mechanisms and often suggest where
new experiments should be focussed. Protocell experiments, on the other
hand, provide the hard physical data highlighting where inaccuracies in
a semi-empirical model could reside. As mentioned in Section 3.3.2 ,
semi-empirical models also allows for extrapolation: once a base
protocell model has been validated, more complex protocell scenarios can
be investigated which are hard to realise with current experimental
techniques.

Bridging the gap to in-vitro systems is vital for creating a grounded
protocell modelling approach able to accurately capture the general
properties and dynamical behaviour of whole physicochemical protocell
systems. The scientific contributions of this thesis, discussed in the
next section, follow precisely this semi-empirical approach and are
concerned with modelling autonomous protocells at an early stage of
development.

### 5.2 Toward Modelling Autonomous Protocells: Contributions and
Challenges

#### 5.2.1 Relevance of Scientific Results

The scientific contributions of this thesis are applicable to modelling
far-from-equilibrium chemistry in dynamic lipid compartments in a
physically realistic way. The contributions have particular value in
providing a realistic grounding principles for vesicle models that aim
to investigate protocellular development. On the list of major prebiotic
transitions toward autonomous cellular systems detailed above, the
contributions are specifically related to protocell transition T2, the
scenario of ‘vesicle reactor’ (described in Section 3.4 ).

The first main contribution of this thesis has been to improve the
kinetic model of the bilayer lipid membrane in the Mavelli & Ruiz-Mirazo
semi-empirical vesicle model. This was achieved by validating and
refining the membrane lipid exchange equations to match experimental
data from two studies on protocell competition. In additional, this work
provides a first theoretical approach to the phenomena of protocell
competition from a well-grounded account of its basic dynamics.

A research program into the co-evolution of protocell metabolism and
membrane (Section 3.3 ) relies heavily on accurate theoretical models
for the dynamic behaviour of lipid membranes. There is a general lack of
coarse-grain kinetic models for bilayer membranes in the literature,
i.e. bilayer models detailing the average rates at which lipids enter,
relocate, flip-flop and leave a bilayer, and the corresponding factors
affecting these rates. This is mainly because lipid membranes are soft
supramolecular structures whose size and shape dynamics are complex,
diverse, and influenced by a wide range of competing factors that,
unlike chemical reactions, are not trivial to characterise at a
coarse-grain level. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Chemical reactions in solvents lend themselves
easily to a kinetic description because they are single chemical
transformations whose rates are largely determined by the collision
frequency of reactants. Indeed, the Law of Mass Action describing
reaction kinetics has existed for 150 years now (see \shortciteNP
Voit2015). Nevertheless, the kinetic membrane model developed in Section
4.2 seeks to provide an improved coarse-grain description of a dynamic
fatty acid membrane, with the aim of establishing a solid base ‘chassis’
on which to construct future semi-empirical vesicle models that also
include metabolism. This first contribution is thus broadly relevant to
modelling the development of autonomous protocells.

The second main contribution of this thesis has been to highlight the
possible implications that osmotic water flow effects have for the
internal chemistries of early protocells. One implicit assumption shared
by virtually all current protocell models (theoretical and experimental)
is that water solvent in protocells is largely passive . In general,
water has been viewed as a necessary medium for hosting chemical
reactions, but as playing no role in protocell dynamics itself. The
contribution of this thesis is to challenge this core assumption. It is
generally argued that the aqueous volume of early vesicle protocells,
through constantly changing in size to equilibrate nett osmotic
gradients across the semi-permeable protocell membrane, is likely to
have played much more of an active role in protocell dynamics.

As explained in Section 4.3.2 , one interesting consequence of changing
volume would have been osmotic coupling , i.e. the indirect coupling,
via water osmosis, of independent reaction systems (sharing no chemical
species) inside the aqueous phase of protocells. Osmotic coupling
considerably widens the current view of protocell metabolism — which
implicitly assumes ‘one chemically connected metabolism per protocell’ —
to a scenario where protocell metabolism can be more fragmented, i.e.
consisting of clusters of reaction systems that do not communicate
chemically, yet still indirectly couple their dynamics. Osmotic coupling
additionally implies that entirely entrapped reaction networks and inert
diffusing solutes (i.e. solutes which diffuse across the protocell
membrane but don’t react further) can damp the dynamical response of a
vesicle protocell to environmental perturbations. From a prebiotic
chemistry perspective, protocells containing multiple reaction systems
each working with a mutually exclusive set of chemical species does not
seem unreasonable, given that prebiotic vesicles would have
self-assembled in chemical mixtures (possibly including template
reactions building ‘informational’ polymers, combined with other
non-associated chemical reactions). ⁶ ⁶ 6 It could be argued that some
chemical reaction systems not sharing species may still be weakly
coupled by e.g. local pH changes. In this case, osmotic coupling would
greatly enhance their degree of coupling.

As regards to autonomy in protocells, osmotic coupling is a relevant
phenomenon because it changes the perception of what could constitute
‘metabolism’ in the membrane-metabolism co-evolution research program.
Also, osmotic coupling is one potential route by which protocells could
have started developing complex non-linear behaviour without necessarily
harbouring complex internal metabolisms (as the bistable example
illustrated in Fig. 4.7 ). The principle of osmotic coupling should be
applicable from the earliest protocells up until the (relatively
advanced) stage when protocells developed regulation mechanisms to
actively control water volume, or, alternatively, proto-cell walls to
physically resist volume changes. In fact, osmotic coupling is
particularly applicable to small vesicle systems with nano-litre water
volumes, for it is within this context that small copy numbers of
species can lead to large osmolyte concentration changes.

Osmotic coupling and other osmotic effects may be general ‘systems
principles’ very relevant to the origins of cellular life. However, it
should be noted that osmotic coupling does not apply in all cases. For
example, osmotic coupling would cease to operate in vesicles with a high
number of entrapped impermeable species (as these molecules would act as
a buffer to diminish water volume fluctuations), or in cases where the
speed of metabolic processes far exceeded the membrane permeation rate
of water. Also, osmotic effects would only be applicable to protocell
architectures based on a semi-permeable membrane separating two aqueous
phases, or on gel-based systems able to resize their volume (i.e. only
protocell architectures a, g and h of Fig. 1.1 in Chapter 1 ). Finally,
it should be highlighted that osmotic coupling is not a general
substitute for stoichiometric coupling: a protocell would still require
individual reaction systems that have the appropriate connected chemical
transformations to synthesise certain components, or to organise
exergonic reactions such that endergonic transformations can take place
(as discussed in Section 2.2.3 ).

The final contribution of this thesis, the protocell ‘bioreactor’ of
Section 4.4 hinted that, apart from coupling chemical reactions in the
internal aqueous phase of a protocell, changing water volume could also
provide an indirect coupling between metabolic and membrane processes of
a simple protocell. In this case, osmotic pressure inside the vesicle
caused membrane tension which opened tension-sensitive membrane
channels, but other cases could be imagined whereby osmotic pressure
affects membrane properties which then feeds back on metabolic dynamics.

#### 5.2.2 Limitations

In order to foster further advances, more important than discussing the
value of our contributions, one should highlight several limitations of
the scientific results presented in this thesis. With regards to the
improved kinetic model for fatty acid membranes, it should be emphasised
that this theoretical model was validated against outcomes from an
artificial laboratory system of vesicle competition. The original
vesicle competition experiments for both osmotic and phospholipid
competition were carried out under controlled general conditions (pH and
temperature) and also employed controlled populations of vesicles
(vesicles were uniform in size and had pure unilamellar bilayers of
oleic acid, or oleic acid plus a fraction of a single phospholipid
type). Therefore, the lipid kinetics model has been validated, but it
has been validated in the context of a constrained experimental system.
Whether the model holds general validity across other scenarios is an
open question. For instance, if multiple lipid types were present in a
protocell membrane then their combination may change bilayer properties
in such a way that the kinetic uptake and release rates of simple fatty
acids became substantially altered. Also, the developed lipid kinetics
model only strictly gives information about the exchange dynamics of
fatty acids from a membrane. Phospholipids were considered as static
amphiphiles in the vesicle membranes and their exchange dynamics were
not taken into account. ⁷ ⁷ 7 It could be considered that phospholipids
absorb and desorb from a bilayer membrane with rate equations similar to
those of fatty acids (at a much slower rate), but this would be an
unverified assumption.

Our coarse-grain membrane lipid kinetics model also assumed that fatty
acid ‘flip-flop’ between the inner and outer leaflet of a vesicle
bilayer was very fast, such that any asymmetry in surface area or
composition of the two monolayer leaflets could would be instantly
equalised. Vesicle shape in our model was solely represented as the
ratio between surface area (equal for both leaflets) and volume.
However, as already mentioned in Section 3.4 , surface area asymmetries
between membrane leaflets do exist and have been demonstrated as a
significant factor in determining vesicle geometry Mui \BOthers . (
\APACyear 1995 ) .

Moving onto the minimal formalism used to explore changing solvent
volume in protocells, at the heart of this model is the assumption that
the aqueous core of a vesicle protocell is a well-mixed water volume,
with no localised variations in solute concentrations permitted. This
simplification allows to formulate the model in mass action kinetics
terms, and means that volume variations are global, affecting the
concentrations of all solutes in the protocell core. However, it is
sometimes debated whether the well-stirred assumption holds for the
aqueous interior of protocells (see below). Additionally, this minimal
model of changing volume assumed that the diffusion constants of solutes
across the vesicle bilayer membrane were constant and not affected by
factors such as osmotic tension, shape, curvature or absolute size of
the membrane, amongst others. Moreover, the simple model can be expected
to become invalid for vesicles with a gel-like as opposed to watery
core, as volume variation dynamics in this former context can assume a
very different character Viallat \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2004 ) .

Finally, the vesicle reactor model with mechano-sensitive channels, in
addition to being built on the the same the assumptions of the last
paragraph, further considered that osmotic pressure was always exerted
uniformly across the surface of the protocell membrane. Indeed, the
well-stirred and uniform osmotic pressure simplifications made possible
an algebraic analysis of the model, but it should be noted that such
simplifications may not always hold. Indeed, spatially explicit
theoretical protocell models have arrived at relevant results by
assuming just the opposite: that internal vesicle chemistry is not well
mixed, and that non-uniform osmotic pressures can exert themselves along
the membrane leading to e.g. vesicle division Macía \BBA Solé (
\APACyear 2007 ); de Anna \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2010 ) . The use of
mechano-sensitive channels in the reactor model could also be questioned
from a prebiotic perspective, as early protocells would not have been
likely to possess advanced channels that function through a highly
coordinated – and likely evolved – arrangement of protein helices.
However, the qualitative outcome of the model analysis is not contingent
on the channels specifically being of a mechano-sensitive type: the
channels could have been more rudimentary, so long as they permitted
some type of solute transport whenever there existed membrane tension.

#### 5.2.3 Challenges in Advancing Semi-Empirical Protocell Research

This section documents some modelling challenges that need to be tackled
as the semi-empirical research program towards basic autonomous
protocells outlined in Section 3.3 is advanced to more complex protocell
schemes.

##### Analysis of Protocell Models with Many Free Parameters

A first challenge faced by the semi-empirical protocell research program
is that, as protocell models become more complex, a large free parameter
space makes a rigorous analysis less forthcoming. It should be
emphasised that this is a broad challenge faced by all complex dynamical
systems models.

It is straightforward to specify a semi-empirical protocell model of
arbitrary complexity. Once all the parameters have been defined, it is
also rather straightforward to numerically integrate the dynamical
equations of a particular protocell scheme deterministically or
stochastically, and observe how the system behaves. These aspects are
not so problematic. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Apart from standard problems arising in
numerical simulation, like long simulation times for stochastic
simulation when there exists a separation of timescales, or the
inaccuracy or instability of deterministic simulation if unsuitable
numerical integration algorithms are employed. Rather, the main
challenge comes when trying to draw insightful and general conclusions
about the real dynamical behaviour of the protocell system.

Non-linear (and, worse, high-dimensional) dynamical systems tend not to
admit analytical solutions. Often, the only route available to gain
information about their behaviour is numerical integration of the
equations. However, it is important to note that numerical integration
only has leverage as a method of analysis when applied to certain
problems. In models where parameters have been fixed beforehand (to
values derived experimentally or cited in the literature), numerical
integration may be effectively applied to predict outcomes.
Alternatively, numerical integration can be used as part of the reverse
process of estimating/optimising multiple a set of free parameters in a
model, given a target output that the model must reproduce (used in
Systems Biology for example, to develop predictive biochemical models,
see e.g. \shortciteNP Ashyraliyev2009). Numerical integration can also
deliver insight when used as a method to compute harder variants of an
existing model for which analytical solutions are available. In this
case, general solutions from the solvable model can be used as a
reference point and compared with computed solutions to the analytically
intractable one. Also, for some complex dynamical systems with very
small parameter spaces, numerical integration can be used alone as a
‘brute force’ strategy to build a picture of the system bifurcation
diagram and exhaustively classify all dynamical possibilities.

The challenge with semi-empirical protocell models like the
lipid-peptide or lipid-producing scenario (or even more elaborate
models), is that they are complex dynamical systems with a large number
of free parameters. Moreover, these models are intended for exploratory
research into the origins of life and so no target behaviour can be
defined to estimate free parameters. Indeed, the opposite is required:
to characterise all potential behaviours under different parameter
settings. These two features mean that numerical integration can be used
to solve a protocell model, but that typically, only weak conclusions
about model behaviour can be reached.

For an example, consider a theoretical protocell scheme with an
autocatalytic metabolism that synthesises a new lipid type. Assume that
sustained oscillations are observed in the internal metabolite
concentrations, membrane size and membrane composition of the protocell
when the new lipid type embeds in the membrane, causing a sharp decrease
in membrane permeability. This model forms an interesting existence
proof that sustained oscillations are possible with some
parameterisation of this metabolic scheme. However, more penetrating
questions would be useful to answer in this context, such as: how does
the existence of oscillations depend on the shape of the membrane
permeability function? How do oscillations depend on the stoichiometry
of the internal metabolism used? In general, what formal requirements
must be satisfied by the protocell metabolism and protocell membrane
permeability function, for oscillations to result? Decisive answers to
these more valuable questions are generally more difficult to produce.

To start addressing this challenge, one tactic could be to interface
theoretical models as closely as possible with in-vitro protocell
realisations, in order to fix as many of the parameters as possible.
Another answer could be to construct more simple ‘mean field’ protocell
models of a given protocell scheme which can be analysed, and then use
this analysis to shed light on the behaviour of the more complex model
(as performed in our protocell competition paper, \shortciteNP
shirtediss2014 , for example). A third option, explained in Section
5.3.2 , could be to start constructing an equivalent of Chemical
Reaction Network Theory for protocell systems. Rather than just
simulating detailed individual models, this approach would instead seek
to identify general constraints on protocell organisation. These
constraints could be useful in ruling out certain dynamical behaviours
by inspection of a protocell scheme, without the need for simulation.

##### Transient Protocell Behaviours are Relevant, in Addition to
Long-Term Dynamics

A second issue that needs to be carefully considered when modelling
protocells is how the protocell-environment coupling is represented. In
particular, protocell models should not only be tested in the context of
invariant environments , for this strategy does not investigate
transient system responses to stimuli, which may be very relevant.

Both the lipid-peptide and lipid-producing scenarios of Section 3.3.3
considered that the protocell existed in a large expansive ‘reservoir’
environment where all chemical concentrations remained constant for all
time. This assumption, also present in all existing kinetic models of
the Chemoton, allows bifurcation analysis to be performed on a protocell
model, i.e. the investigation into how changing model parameters impacts
on properties of some stable long-term state. However, while these
studies are undoubtedly valuable, bifurcation analysis does not address
the equally (if not more) important transient aspect of protocell
behaviour. Transient aspects are those which are time critical, and
depend on the flow features of the system phase space -- not just the
attractors. They include aspects such as how a protocell can temporally
manage to avert threatening perturbations in its environment (i.e. by
employing regulatory mechanisms to return it to a stable operating
regime), how a protocell can show history dependence to a series of
environmental stimuli (i.e. to demonstrate a form of primitive learning)
or how a protocell can adapt to longer term environmental changes. The
conclusion is that, in order to be able to evaluate these equally
important transient behaviours, the environment in which the protocell
is located is required to be varied and perturbed. ⁹ ⁹ 9 Incidentally,
models of Gánti’s Chemoton have not been studied in the context of
response to environmental stimuli. All studies so far have focussed on
how factors, like the length of the genetic template, affect the final
division regime of the system in a stable environment.

A simple example of the difference between the bifurcation and transient
perspectives can be given by revisiting the protocell reactor with
mechano-sensitive channels in Section 4.4 . A bifurcation analysis was
performed on this model. This revealed how membrane channels helped the
reactor survive in higher external nutrient concentrations. However,
this analysis did not characterise the time-response of the channels
when there occurred sudden dilutions of the environment (the main
‘guarding’ function of the channels), nor what intensity/frequency of
dilution shock the channels could cope with, nor what effects on
protocell metabolic dynamics repeated dilutions would lead to.

In summary, the lipid-peptide and lipid-producing protocell schemes do
indeed get closer to the idea of self-production, and controlling of the
system-environment interface (i.e. constitutive autonomy). However, in
order to start exploring the relevant dimension of adaptive behaviour
(i.e. behavioural autonomy), a systemic study and characterisation of
the response of such systems to environmental perturbations should be
undertaken as well. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Incidentally, modelling the environment as
invariant also rules out other phenomena. For example, protocell
competition as described in Section 4.2.1 cannot be modelled in an
invariant environment, because it requires localised lipid ‘stealing’
amongst vesicles. In an invariant environment, protocell competition can
only be tackled in a non-spatial way, for example by stating “protocells
which reproduce faster are fitter”. However, this strategy cannot handle
the issues of eventual resource limitation and crowding in a rigorous
manner.

It should be noted that introducing environmental changes comes with
technical modelling implications. If the protocell environment has
constant concentrations, then the protocell model can be simulated
stochastically, since the number of reaction and diffusion events are
manageable (the only events are lipid fluxes solute fluxes to/from a
small vesicle object, and a manageable number of reaction events inside
the attolitre vesicle volume). However, if a varying environment is
introduced, then the outside concentration dynamics must be modelled
deterministically, for there are far too many reaction events in the
environment to perform a reaction-by-reaction stochastic computation.
Also, in order to properly handle sharp perturbations in environmental
concentrations, water flow across the protocell membrane needs to be
taken into account explicitly and modelled deterministically (Equation
3.8 of Box 2, Chapter 3 ). Thus, the whole model requires to become
deterministic, unless accurate hybrid stochastic-deterministic
simulations could be developed.

Another point is relevant. When the protocell environment is regarded as
a well-stirred reservoir, even imposing environmental changes and
perturbations still does not permit an evaluation of the whole spectrum
of protocell behaviour. When environmental conditions are externally
imposed, be they fixed or varying concentrations, a model protocell has
no causal powers over its environment. The environment affects the
protocell, but the protocell cannot directly affect its local
environment in return. For example, a protocell cannot excrete local
chemicals or change its environmental conditions by movement. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11
Modelled in a small closed volume, protocells can influence their
environment, but the final long term outcome is always an equilibrium
condition (like in protocell competition). When a protocell cannot
change its surrounding environment, the only strategies that a protocell
can use to exert control over its viability conditions are to change
internal state, or to modify membrane composition, altering the coupling
with the environment. The protocell cannot, however, create useful
chemical feedback loops via the environment (i.e. secreting chemicals
that are later used to cue behaviour), or exhibit taxis toward
resources. For these latter behaviours to become possible, a future
extension to the semi-empirical protocell model would be required. This
extension would perhaps consider the protocell to exist as a point
particle in a spatially heterogeneous reaction system, like a
reaction-diffusion system, rather than in a well-stirred tank. ¹² ¹² 12
The position of the protocell point particle would determine local
external concentrations that it experienced. The protocell could
influence local external concentrations, and could also move (buoyancy
being likely the simplest mechanism of movement). This extension would
also allow reactions to happen both inside and around the protocell.
Indeed, one recurring problem with assuming a fixed, reservoir
environment is explaining why chemical reactions can happen inside , but
not outside of a protocell.

##### Biological Cells are Constructive Dynamical Systems

Finally, a very important challenge arising as protocell models become
more complex toward the complexity level of biological cells, is the
issue of constructive dynamical systems .

As outlined at the end of Section 2.2.3 , biological cells are
incredibly complex chemical nano-machines, able to fabricate their own
components. Therefore, cells possess the special aptitude of being able
to fundamentally reconfigure their own material structure in response to
perturbations and stimuli. As such, at a coarse-grain level of
abstraction, the state of a cell does not simply evolve on a fixed
@xmath -dimensional phase space, but rather the set of relevant
variables that describe the cell state also change over time, as do the
corresponding set of dynamical equations which couple these relevant
variables together. In fact, the relevant variables characterising cell
state will move up and down different levels of abstraction as the cell
reconfigures its material structure. Hence, for a cell, it is very
difficult -- perhaps impossible -- to reach a fixed coarse-grain
dynamical description which is valid in all circumstances. ¹³ ¹³ 13 A
cell could be modelled at a molecular level. But, molecule-level models
don’t give any intuition into what are the relevant macro variables
influencing the future evolution direction of the whole system (and
molecular-level models also suffer from severe computational
restrictions). This is a deep point and relates back to the discussion
of Systems Biology in Section 3.1.2 .

The constructive dynamics problem is still far from being an issue for
protocell models like the lipid-peptide scenario. These protocell
systems can indeed change their structure, altering their coupling to
the environment in order to remain viable (i.e. change their boundary
conditions), but these structural changes (like changing membrane
composition, permeability, elasticity) are always relatively simple. As
such, simple boundary condition changes can be accommodated by adding
more state variables to the model, and keeping the description of the
overall dynamical system static . However, as the physicochemical
complexity of the cell is approached, it becomes increasingly hard to
have a static dynamical system describing its operation: the cell can
re-construct itself into very different dynamical systems in its efforts
to stay viable. This is an open problem, whose solution or partial
solution would bring great benefits, to Systems Biology also.

### 5.3 Future Directions

#### 5.3.1 Immediate Research Pathways

##### Osmotic Coupling of Reaction Sets

The new principle of osmotic coupling of reaction systems inside
protocells, introduced in this thesis, gives rise to a number of
immediate theoretical research questions. So far in this work, only
bistability has been demonstrated in model reaction systems coupled by
osmosis. An immediate task would be to find examples of reaction set
combinations able to produce other more complex chemical behaviours:
e.g. multistability (beyond bistability), oscillations, chaos etc.
Multistability is a particularly interesting theme from the point of
view of adaptive behaviour, since it would open the possibility for a
protocell system to respond in different ways (dependent on its past
history), given the same stimulus.

Generally, it could be valuable to investigate motifs in the context of
ensembles of osmotically coupled reaction systems. In standard
biochemical circuits, a small number of different reaction motifs have
been identified that are abstracted arrangements of positive and
negative feedback loops known to be capable of distinct dynamical
behaviours, like switching or oscillation (e.g. see \shortciteNP
Tyson2010). However, these motifs apply to single reaction networks in
reservoir volume conditions. Can motifs be found in the same way in sets
of reaction systems that exist in variable volume, coupled by osmosis?
It would be very useful to have a set of rules determining which
reaction systems needed to be present together in a variable volume in
order for some dynamic regime to be possible, and what were the minimal
combinations. Another valuable theoretical contribution would be to
calculate an upper limit number of distinct steady states that a set of
osmotically coupled reaction systems could have. When dealing with
simple individual reaction mechanisms, the limit number of steady states
can often be derived algebraically, but this is not an option when sets
of multivariate polynomial equations are involved (e.g. as in Fig. 4.7
a). ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Conceivably, it could even be the case that osmotic
coupling instead places a hard ceiling on the number of steady states
that a variable volume system is able to possess.

Furthermore, it would be interesting to conduct further analysis on
reaction systems that are entirely entrapped in a vesicle. Reaction
systems whose species are all membrane impermeable represent a curious
case because, although they always inevitably return to an equilibrium,
the total number of species that they contain at equilibrium can vary
depending on the volume of the protocell when this equilibrium occurs.
This feature could potentially change the number of steady states of a
variable volume protocell system, although more analysis is needed to
confirm this. Another insightful study would be to compare the effect on
the stability of steady states when water permeability across the
vesicle membrane was considered finite, as opposed to considering water
flow as instantaneous. If water permeability was considered finite,
additional effects could also be investigated, such as the diffusion
rate of water increasing as the absolute external solute concentration
increases (reported by \shortciteNP Sacerdote2005).

Another development would be to model osmotically coupled reaction
systems inside a dynamic lipid membrane – merging the two main
scientific contributions of this thesis – to see how having a dynamic
surface area affects reaction dynamics. Also, reactions directly
consuming or producing water could also be interesting to investigate.

The feasibility of osmotic coupling is also open to be – and should be –
tested experimentally. A simple experimental scenario to provide a basic
proof of the principle, at a more manageable size scale and not
employing vesicles, could be the following. Firstly, two chemical
reaction systems @xmath and @xmath would be demonstrated to be species
independent and non-interfering by an initial experiment. Secondly, an
apparatus consisting of two micro-sized water columns connected by a
semi-permeable membrane could be introduced. The semi-permeable membrane
would facilitate water flow between the columns. Reaction system @xmath
(plus some inert buffer) would be added to one of the micro-sized
columns, and the water volume of this column would change as equilibrium
was attained. Some or all species in @xmath may permeate the membrane
into the second water column. Concentration profiles for the species in
@xmath on the way to equilibrium in the first water column would be
recorded. The same procedure would take place for @xmath . These two
experiments would act as the control experiments. Then, the main
experiment would introduce reaction systems @xmath and @xmath together
into one of the micro-sized water columns (without any buffer). The
water volume changes promoted by the reaction combination should alter
the individual approaches to equilibrium shown by @xmath and @xmath in
the control experiments.

Finally, it would be valuable to develop knowledge and models of how
osmotic effects manifest themselves in vesicles composed of multiple
nested compartments.

##### Exploring Other Indirect Coupling Mechanisms

Osmotic coupling can, in fact, be seen as just one of a number of ways
in which reaction systems with mutually exclusive species sets could
indirectly couple their dynamics inside protocells. Figure 5.1 depicts
some other possible scenarios. Of these scenarios, osmotic coupling is
likely to be the simplest, because in order to become indirectly linked
via osmosis, reaction systems are only trivially required to produce
osmolytes (species affecting water flow): they are not required to
produce specific components, such as membrane amphiphiles, other
hydrophobic membrane components, or catalysts. Nevertheless, other
scenarios indirectly coupling reactions, like the ones described in the
caption of Fig. 5.1 , would still be interesting to pursue.

##### Incorporation of Statistical Data into Semi-Empirical Vesicle
Model

Vesicle shape transformations, as discussed in Section 3.4 , are
important to consider as part of investigations on the interaction
between chemical reactions and vesicle compartments.

One very interesting start in the direction of quantifying the shape
transformations of vesicles has recently been performed by \shortciteA
Tsuda2014. These authors systematically detected and characterised the
shapes that vesicles assumed in environments of different osmolarities.
Then, from this data, they computed a two dimensional free energy
landscape of vesicle shapes. Moreover, they found that the energy
landscape was able to accurately predict the shape transformations that
vesicles would undergo whilst dynamically deforming: the transient
shapes a vesicle would pass through tended to follow the low energy
valleys across the energy landscape. In future, the semi-empirical model
would benefit from integrating this type of statistical and
empirically-derived data on vesicle shape transformations.

A particularly important transformation is budding and division Svetina
( \APACyear 2009 ) . In the current semi-empirical vesicle model,
division is deterministic and always occurs as perfect fission. When the
vesicle reaches a sufficiently deflated prolate shape such that the
surface area is able to perfectly wrap two equal sized spheres made of
the aqueous volume, then the vesicle divides into two identical,
spherical daughters.

This division condition (occurring at a certain surface-volume ratio)
takes into account vesicle shape and can be considered more realistic
than other theoretical protocell models that ignore the vesicle aqueous
volume and impose division either when the surface area has doubled from
the initial condition (e.g. as in most of the Chemoton models) or when
some absolute membrane surface area is achieved (e.g. as in \shortciteNP
villani2014). However, even though other aspects of the model (like the
reaction kinetics or the sharing of metabolic contents between daughter
vesicles on division) were considered stochastic, the division condition
in the semi-empirical vesicle model has remained deterministic. Namely,
the protocell is stable with certainty (probability 1) at any shape,
until reaching the surface-volume ratio required for fission into equal
daughters; then, division happens, again, with certainty. This
deterministic division condition has particularly significant
implications for the dynamics of the protocell model across generations.
Observed behaviour, like the frequency of a division cycle, is highly
contingent on the division condition occurring only at one precise
surface-volume ratio, and nowhere else.

One initial way to start relaxing the deterministic assumption could be
to give deflated states that are less deflated than the division
condition some small probability of division into two unequal spherical
daughters. When the vesicle model reached the ‘perfect fission’
condition, division would still happen with certainty, but before that,
there would also be some small probability of division. Close to
spherical states could be given only a very small chance of division (in
this case, one daughter would be a large sphere, and the other a small
sphere, as in vesicle budding). It would be interesting to investigate
how stochastic division affected population phenomena with the model,
and e.g. the conditions necessary to achieve a stationary division cycle
(as analysed by \shortciteNP Mavelli2013) in this new context. Also, it
is a further assumption that vesicle division or budding always leads to
identical daughter vesicles outside of a parent vesicle: another avenue
to pursue could be to allow a probability of internal vesicle budding
and/or asymmetric division.

The idea of stochastic division could be taken further. The assumption
of division into two daughters could also be relaxed, and division
permitted into multiple approximately spherical progeny (as is observed
when filamentous protocells break up into many daughters, see
\shortciteNP Zhu2009). ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 There are theoretical restrictions on
how many spheres a certain vesicle shape can divide into. For example,
deflated vesicle shapes where @xmath have too much excessive surface
area to become two spheres, no matter what sizes these spheres are. They
can become 3 spheres, but again, there is a @xmath limit for dividing
into 3 spheres, and so on. In this case, statistical data of vesicle
division distributions under different conditions would have to be
derived experimentally and added into the model.

#### 5.3.2 Longer Term Research Pathways

##### Identifying General Constraints on Protocell Organisation

In the 1970’s, Chemical Reaction Network Theory (CRNT) was born as a
response to the difficulties in analysing the dynamical behaviour of
complex non-linear chemical systems. Instead of trying to analyse
chemical systems on a disparate case-by-case basis, CRNT instead aimed
to find general unifying principles in chemical networks of arbitrary
complexity. The theory dealt with the static structure of reaction
networks, and from mere inspection of structural properties alone, aimed
to prove conclusively that certain dynamical regimes could or could not
be present in a given chemical network – sometimes independently of
parameter values. An early result was the ‘Zero Deficiency Theorem’
Feinberg \BBA Horn ( \APACyear 1974 ) which stated that a chemical
network with structural properties called ‘zero deficiency’ and ‘weak
reversibility’, regardless of its complexity or parameter values, could
only ever have a single stable state (see \shortciteNP
craciun2011,Soule2003,Bailey2001 for developments).

Similarly, protocell models could also benefit from more general results
in this style. In prebiotic protocells, as stated earlier, it is
extremely speculative as to what metabolisms would have been operating
(their stoichiometry, if autocatalytic cycles, autocatalytic sets or
templates were present etc.). Also speculative is how these metabolisms
coupled to, and interacted with, protocell membranes. Therefore, instead
of documenting the operation of isolated hypothetical protocell cases,
future theoretical studies could be more fruitfully directed toward
identifying more general requirements and constraints associated with
protocells.

One line of research could be to build a database of “if, then” type of
system constraints; if a protocell scheme has a certain feature, then
these implications (or limitations) necessarily follow. Some examples of
if-then system constraints might be the following:

1.   If a protocell metabolism produces products in the internal aqueous
    core that are either impermeable, or have very low permeability,
    then for the protocell to be capable of a homeostatic steady state
    regime, these products must be broken down by another reaction
    pathway. If not, the protocell must also synthesise membrane
    surfactants, to mitigate the accumulation effects by entering into a
    growth and division regime.

2.   If molecules are present within the protocell core that are not
    metabolically synthesised from nutrients, or which do not copy
    themselves (like template replicators), then these will be diluted
    upon protocell division, to eventually disappear. As such, division
    into functional daughters has as a necessary condition that all
    required molecular components not available in the nutrient medium
    must be synthesised by the protocell.

3.   If a protocell is to possess far from equilibrium dynamical
    behaviour in general, then metabolic reaction rates must be
    compatible with membrane permeabilities Piedrafita \BOthers . (
    \APACyear 2012 ); Piedrafita ( \APACyear 2013 ) . A relatively
    impermeable membrane will force a fast internal metabolism to
    equilibrate (and infrequent molecular diffusions across the membrane
    will just perturb this equilibrium). Alternatively, if metabolism is
    very slow with respect to membrane diffusions, then internal
    metabolites will equilibrate to external concentrations (and
    infrequent reaction events will perturb this equilibrium). Far from
    equilibrium function is only assured between these equilibrium
    extremes.

4.   If there exists a reversible reaction sequence inside a protocell
    fed by a single nutrient species across the membrane, then there
    exists no chemical gradient to maintain this reaction sequence
    far-from-equilibrium, and therefore it will always settle to an
    equilibrium state. It follows that such reaction sets cannot change
    the number of steady states already inherent in the protocell
    system, but they can modify the transient response of the protocell
    to perturbations.

5.   If a protocell does not possess active transport mechanisms (which
    pump solutes and ions across the membrane against their
    concentration gradients), then at steady state, all nutrient species
    inside a protocell cannot exceed their external concentrations. This
    is because the only process delivering nutrients to the protocell
    core is a concentration driven, passive diffusion process. During
    transient dynamics, nutrients may exceed their external
    concentration, if the protocell volume transiently decreases.

6.   If a protocell does not possess water pumping mechanisms, nor hard
    non-expansive proto-cell walls, then at steady states, the protocell
    water volume will resize such that the total concentration of
    solutes and ions inside the protocell will always be equal to the
    total concentration outside the protocell (isotonic condition).
    Active pumping mechanisms, or cell walls allowing turgor pressure,
    are needed to sustain a disequilibrium between total osmolyte
    concentration inside and outside of a protocell.

Many more constraints (some much more subtle) could be added to this
list. Each constraint could be accompanied by a proof (some proofs would
be elementary, others more involved). Used in combination, such
constraints could help narrow the space of acceptable chemical
architectures for protocells. These system-level constraints could also
help deduce if certain dynamical behaviours were impossible in
principle, prior to simulation of a protocell scheme.

Two recent theoretical studies serve as examples of more complex
constraints that could be added to the above list. These studies tried
to formally identify the general type of chemical organisation a
protocell must have to solve a key problem. \shortciteA Mavelli2013,
already mentioned in Section 2.1.1 , focussed on the bottleneck problem
of how protocells can grow and divide whilst avoiding the problem of
progressive size decrease at each generation, i.e. the general
organisational requirement a protocell must have to engage in a
‘stationary’ division regime where daughter protocells were
approximately the same size as the original parent. They derived an
“osmotic synchronisation condition” that described the necessary (but
not sufficient) general kinetic relationships that must hold in a
protocell system if that protocell was able to engage in a stationary
division cycle (neither decreasing nor increasing in size on each
division). Their constraint formula, although relying on the
deterministic assumption, was broadly applicable to any internal
metabolic scheme. In a second study, \shortciteA Bigan2015b instead
targeted protocell growth. They derived the general conditions that must
be necessarily satisfied if an out of equilibrium protocell should be
capable of growth while maintaining elevated internal concentrations
with respect to its environment. Again, the analysis was broadly
applicable to any internal metabolic scheme. An example of a much higher
level constraint, also to be included on the list, would be the general
protocell organisation required for open-ended evolution von Neumann (
\APACyear 1966 ) : if the organisation does not have these features
(i.e. biopolymers able to ‘fix’ and reliably transmit metabolic
complexity), then an open-ended increase in complexity cannot take
place.

##### Metabolic Architectures Suitable for Synthesis of Long and/or
High-Energy Molecules

Another promising longer-term line of research could be to investigate
which types of metabolic reaction network motifs are suitable for
certain overall tasks, like the fabrication of long and/or high energy
molecules. For example, it would be very interesting to devise general
constraints on the type of metabolic network architecture that must have
been in place in self-producing protocells, allowing them to synthesise
macromolecules and energy currency molecules. This work would also start
to link to the topic of exergonic-endergonic reaction couplings in
protocells.

Prebiotic uncertainty means that reaction networks in protocell models
are usually specified in terms of an abstract artificial chemistry.
Appendix C provides two tests to help decide whether a set of abstract
chemical reactions complies with mass conservation and free energy
considerations. These tests prevent physically unrealistic metabolisms
from being implemented, but they don’t just stop there: they can also be
employed in a much more interesting way too.

If the molecular species participating in an abstract protocell
metabolism not only have concentration, but also atom number and free
energy of formation attributes associated with them, then a metabolism
can be checked for additional requirements . ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Going further,
molecular species could also be attributed with how many of each atom
type they contained. These additional requirements may be statements
like “species @xmath must have higher free energy of formation than
species @xmath ”, or “species @xmath must be a molecule larger than 75%
of the molecules in the system, with an free energy of formation
exceeding that of @xmath and @xmath put together”. In this way,
protocell reaction schemes can be tested not only for being physically
valid, but also for having extra characteristics e.g. the ability to
synthesise high energy and/or long macromolecules as mentioned above.
For an example, consider Gánti’s autocatalytic reaction cycle. This
cycle is certainly valid on physical grounds (i.e. passes the two tests
in Appendix C ), but when faced with the extra requirement that the
nutrient precursor driving the cycle must have lower free energy than
all of the other species involved, it would fail. Gánti’s cycle requires
a high energy precursor molecule in order to run. Hence, Gánti’s
autocatalytic cycle would not be an acceptable candidate for a protocell
that requires to synthesise molecules with higher energy than the
nutrient species.

The inverse problem to reaction set validation would also be interesting
to pursue. Instead of a specific abstract reaction mechanism being
validated to obey a set of constraints, the aim would be instead to
develop algorithms capable of returning all minimal reaction schemes
that satisfy a given set of constraints. These constraints might involve
the specification of a set of nutrient species to be consumed; a set of
species that are required to be produced; a wider pool of total species
available for use and the energetic and mass relations that must hold
between all the chemical species. Also, the presence or absence of
catalytic and autocatalytic loops could be specified. Ideally, such
algorithms could be instructed to find, for example, all the minimal
(abstract) ‘autotrophic’ metabolisms that converted small lower energy
nutrients into a set of higher energy polymers and which contained
exactly @xmath autocatalytic cycles.

##### Uniting Self-Production with Self-Reproduction

To conclude this discussion on a more general note, it should be
emphasised that a long term goal of a research program into autonomous
protocells should also be to investigate how protocells started dividing
in a reliable way (e.g. see \shortciteNP Mavelli2013).

To be clear, this thesis has argued for an autonomy perspective on
living systems and protocell development, but this has not been for the
purpose of replacing evolutionary concepts. Rather, the intent has been
to place the evolutionary perspective into a wider context, bringing to
the table essential synchronic problems of cellular systems organisation
that a pure diachronic evolutionary perspective has been blind to. Under
the view of protocell development being argued for here, even though the
chemical logic of individual protocells has been focussed on, still
concepts like protocell division, proliferation, population dynamics
(e.g. competition) and chemical evolution remain as extremely relevant
to the overall picture of origins.

In autonomous protocells, it is important to understand how diverse
components and processes became integrated for robust self-maintenance
of single protocells, but also the question of how system-level self- re
production started is of paramount importance. Division represents a
huge organisational challenge for any complex protocell system, as many
different components need to be precisely coordinated such that two
copies of the original organisational structure can be produced.
Moreover, division would have been an inherent property of protocell
systems that internally fabricated their own components: not only would
these components have granted the ability to precisely control energy
and matter flow through the protocell structure, but they would have
also likely prompted its growth. Therefore, a research program into
autonomous protocells should also aim to investigate, in parallel to the
co-evolution of metabolism and membrane, the co-evolution of
self-production with self-reproduction.

## Conclusions

The main conclusions of this thesis are the following:

1.   Prebiotic research cannot do without conceptual discussion and
    clarification. Origins of life is a field of enquiry that benefits
    from a joint scientific and conceptual/philosophical approach.
    Attempts to synthesise life from the bottom up are inevitably
    immersed in a background conception of what constitutes ‘life’.
    Different conceptions of life lead to diverging research agendas in
    protocell research and in prebiotic chemistry in general. It is
    important to explicitly recognise and question the general
    conception of life underlying any research program into origins of
    life.

2.   The autonomy perspective brings to the fore system-level challenges
    related to the emergence of cellular organisation. A radical
    reformulation of the origins of cellular life program presents
    itself when the implications of an autonomous systems view of life
    are properly developed. In particular, autonomy emphasises that a
    necessary condition for functional protocells at each stage of their
    development would have been a high level of integration between
    components and processes. Pure evolutionary approaches to protocells
    miss this necessary condition, for they do not include (nor find
    important) a rigorously developed concept of cellular organisation.
    Basic autonomous protocells able to robustly self-maintain
    far-from-equilibrium would only have been achievable if the chemical
    metabolism and protocell membrane co-evolved together, integrating
    their functionality.

3.   Autonomy is a heuristic concept which can be transformed into a set
    of concrete research questions able to be pursued through
    semi-empirical protocell modelling. A semi-empirical modelling
    approach can be used to rigorously investigate the co-evolution of
    metabolism and membrane in protocells. A semi-empirical approach
    allows the construction and exploration of grounded theoretical
    protocell models which can be directly related back to in-vitro
    protocell experiments, and which can be extrapolated to test more
    complicated hypothetical scenarios. It is possible to develop
    realistic coarse-grain kinetic models of protocells that embed
    realistic parameters and reproduce various experimental results.

4.   The synthesis of membrane by metabolism, as advocated in the theory
    of autopoiesis, is not strictly necessary for protocells to start
    exhibiting biologically relevant non-linear behaviours.
    Self-producing compartmentalised chemical systems with the ability
    to internally fabricate their own components like membrane lipids,
    catalysts and peptides, could be considered as a relatively late
    stage in the evolution of protocellular organisation. Before that,
    protocells with weaker, more indirect couplings between internal
    chemistry and compartmentation could have demonstrated emergent
    dynamical behaviours (as demonstrated by the semi-empirical
    modelling work of this thesis). A topic of future protocell research
    should be to rigorously investigate not just the encapsulation of
    nucleic acids in compartments, but the general indirect coupling
    effects resulting between basic chemical reactions and dynamic lipid
    membranes.

5.   Osmotic coupling is a new and relevant systems principle for
    protocell metabolism that has received no attention in the origins
    of life literature. Early vesicle protocells would have been
    susceptible to osmosis and, at the same time, poor regulators of
    internal water volume. Solutes would diffuse across protocell
    membranes, and so would water solvent . As such, variable water
    volume inside early protocells could have been a significant factor
    in promoting non-linear dynamics in protocell reaction chemistries.
    In particular, variable water volume can allow effects like osmotic
    coupling , where independent reaction systems inside a vesicle
    couple their dynamics to produce very complicated system-level
    behaviours.

6.   Identification of general constraints on the organisation of
    protocell systems should be given more attention in the field of
    origins. As part of the semi-empirical modelling approach, a
    constraints-based approach to protocell models would be promising to
    pursue in the future. This approach would involve identifying
    general constraints on protocell organisation that must be met in
    order for protocells to pass through certain bottlenecks, or to
    possess certain attributes. Such constraints could help “close the
    net” around the problem of how protocells developed into
    full-fledged autonomous cells.

## Appendix A Petri Net Framework for Modelling Constructive Dynamical
Systems

Numerically modelling protocells presents a special challenge.
Protocells are fluid machines which can undergo various morphological
transformations. For lipid vesicles, these transformations can include
growth, fusion, budding, division, creation of nested internal vesicles
(via e.g. invagination), and emission of internal vesicles through the
membrane, to name but a few. If protocells are modelled at the level of
well-stirred compartments, most of the listed morphological changes
present problems for traditional dynamical systems modelling. Excepting
growth, mere changes in dynamical state variables are not enough to
capture such transformations: they also require modifications to the
actual equation structure of the dynamical system. For example, a
protocell division event (or the creation of an internal vesicle)
requires creating an extra vesicle structure, increasing the degrees of
freedom of the system. A protocell burst event conversely requires
removing a protocell or turning it into a flat bilayer without an
internal aqueous domain, decreasing the degrees of freedom. In an event
where two initially separated vesicles coalesce and become enveloped,
one inside the other, the degrees of freedom stay constant, but the
structure and coupling of the existing evolution equations will change.
Therefore, comprehensive protocell modelling demands a constructive
dynamical systems approach (already discussed in Section 2.2.3 ).

Specialised software has been developed to perform such protocell
simulations Mavelli \BBA Ruiz-Mirazo ( \APACyear 2010 ) , but the
purpose of this appendix is to outline a general and flexible
architecture, developed as part of this thesis, which can be used for
simulating any stochastic system that has changing degrees of freedom
and/or boundary conditions ¹ ¹ 1 see also the work by \shortciteA
giavitto2003. . Protocells are just one specific application. The
architecture is based on the formal object of petri nets.

### A Whistle-Stop Tour of Petri Nets

Petri nets were originally conceived as a simple yet powerful way to
formalise concurrent systems and to decisively prove properties about
their operational characteristics (a popular first review is
\shortciteNP Murata1989). One key feature of petri nets is that they are
visually intuitive ² ² 2 In fact, they were created by Carl Adam Petri
at just 13 years of age. . In their simplest form, petri nets are called
‘place/transition nets’ and are drawn as directed graphs consisting of
two types of node. Place nodes (circles) are connected to transition
nodes (squares), and transition nodes are connected to place nodes. Each
place node is a state variable of the system and holds a certain amount
of tokens. As the different transition nodes ‘fire’, the tokens move
around the network between the place nodes, updating the system state or
‘marking’. Tokens are not necessarily conserved and may be spontaneously
created or destroyed by the transitions. In order to ‘fire’, a
transition must first be enabled, which means that a required number of
tokens must exist on each of its input arcs (given by the weighting of
those arcs). When enabled, a transition may fire immediately, or may
wait for some extra external condition to become true. On firing, a
transition takes tokens from all places with arcs coming into it, and
gives tokens to all places it has arcs pointing to. The number of tokens
transferred depends on the weightings on the individual arcs (by
default, they are 1). In place/transition nets, there is no explicit
concept of time, only of events which take place in sequences.

Once a system has been converted to a place/transition net
representation, a well-developed set of theorems and algorithms can be
applied to decide general behavioural possibilities of the network (e.g.
see \shortciteNP heiner2008). For example, it can be decided whether the
network is live (all transitions are able to contribute to the net
behaviour, forever), reversible (any state can always be returned to)
and how the places are bounded (the maximum number of tokens that each
place will hold during execution of the net). Also, invariant features
of the network can be identified from its static structure, such as sets
of places which tend to conserve total tokens (‘P-Invariants’) and sets
of transitions whose firing does not change the marking
(‘T-Invariants’). These invariants often have interpretations relevant
for the system understudy. For example when metabolic networks are
rendered as place/transition nets, P-invariants correspond to pools of
conserved substrates, and T-invariants can give insight into steady
state behaviour.

### Petri Nets as Structured Descriptions of Model Equations

Since their conception as basic place/transition nets, petri nets have
diversified into a ‘zoo’ of many different petri net classes, where
extra elements and arcs have been added to increase their modelling
power for various different applications. Rather than being applied as a
theoretical tool to give insight into network behaviour, one popular
application of petri nets is simply as a visual structured description
of a dynamical model. A model can be mocked-up by drawing a petri net
and then easily converted into either a continuous or stochastic
description ready for numerical execution ³ ³ 3 The dynamical model
usually needs to be expressible as a set of first order derivatives.
Heiner \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2008 ) .

In particular, a special class of stochastic petri nets (called XSPN)
has been developed for turning vague notions of biochemical pathways
into exact models, which can then be simulated and investigated
quantitatively, allowing comparison to wet lab data Heiner \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2009 ) . Indeed, this class of petri net can be used to
specify the protocell model used in this thesis (see Section 3.3.2 ).
Then, the protocell model can be executed on a publicly available
simulation platform called Snoopy Rohr \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2010 );
Heiner \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2012 ) . However, the latter simulation
platform is not capable of modelling any of the protocell morphological
transformations that require modification of the model equation
structure (e.g. division) because the petri net simulated is static.
Throughout a simulation, the network topology is fixed and the boundary
parameters are fixed.

### Extending Petri Nets to Handle Structural Change in Dynamical
Systems

Petri nets are actually good candidates for modelling constructive
dynamical systems with changing equations and/or boundary conditions.
Even though a petri net representation of a dynamical model contains the
same amount of information as the differential equations of that model,
the visual format of the petri net makes the relationships between
processes and state variables much more obvious ⁴ ⁴ 4 In the same way, a
nested LISP program and its tree representation have the same
information content, but the tree structure is easier to work with when
modifying the program e.g. when combining programs in genetic
programming. . As such, petri nets provide a convenient vehicle for
altering the structure of a dynamical model, and then for consistently
carrying these changes through to formulate new overall evolution
equations.

Figure A.1 shows how the conventional petri net paradigm can be combined
with an unconventional part, in order to obtain a model which can change
not only in state, but also in structure, as it executes. The idea of
this architecture is that a petri net is simulated in a ‘running’ phase
(Fig. A.1 a) where the token marking changes and the structure is fixed,
but additionally the petri net may pass transiently into a ‘remodelling’
phase (Fig. A.1 b). In the remodelling phase, four types of more drastic
modifications can be made to the network, alone or in combinations: (i)
large, discontinuous jumps in the state space, (ii) changes to the
boundary parameters of the system, (iii) changes to the connectivity of
the system (leaving the degrees of freedom unchanged) or (iv) expansion
or contraction of the degrees of freedom of the system.

In order to pass between the running and remodelling phases, a new type
of transition can be introduced into a petri net, called a ‘remodel’
transition (not shown in Fig. A.1 ). This type of transition fires
immediately on becoming enabled, representing that the current state
variables have fallen into some critical range or ratios, and the
current model structure no longer reflects the underlying system being
modelled. Rather than moving tokens, a remodel transition instead
executes a sequence of instructions which describe how the petri net
network should be remodelled. Then, the modified network is returned to
the running phase. Many such remodelling events may happen during the
course of a simulation.

Crucially, the instructions executed by the remodel transitions hold
information about the underlying objects the dynamical system is
describing (see the discussion of the work of Fontana and Buss in
Section 2.2.3 ). When the state of the system gets to the existence
limit of the current objects the dynamical system is describing, the
remodel transitions fire to modify the underlying objects in the
appropriate way, creating a new dynamical system.

### Worked Example: Petri Net Model for Growing and Dividing Protocells

As part of this thesis, the novel two phase petri net architecture
described above was implemented in C and subsequently used to perform a
diversity of numerical protocell simulations. This program (called Flow
) accepts stochastic petri nets in the XSPN format referred to above.
Additionally, the petri nets can be specified as modules and connected
together, allowing initially complicated or repetitive network designs
to be achieved (i.e. grids of connected systems).

For a brief overview, Fig. A.2 shows an example petri net capable of
modelling a basic vesicle division cycle. The vesicle grows by
internally synthesising membrane lipid from a precursor that diffuses
through the membrane (Fig. A.2 a). The petri net consists of five
modules, four of which are connected together to make the vesicle (Fig.
A.2 c, blue lines). Table A.1 details the initial token marking for the
petri net, and the rate formula for each of the transitions. The petri
net has three types of transition: ‘normal’ transitions (open squares),
‘immediate’ transitions (black rectangles) and remodel transitions (red
rectangles), a special type of immediate transition. Normal transitions
have a stochastic propensity (rate) and are fired with the standard
Gillespie algorithm. Immediate transitions fire as soon as they become
enabled ⁵ ⁵ 5 If many immediate transitions are simultaneously enabled,
they are fired at random. , and they are useful for updating
meta-information about the network when certain conditions hold. For
example, the immediate transitions IT1 and IT2 are responsible for
monitoring the direction of the concentration gradient of precursor S ;
similarly, immediate transitions IT3 - IT6 are responsible for
monitoring the surface area to volume ratio of the vesicle. The remodel
transitions (red rectangles) execute instructions to make more drastic
changes to the petri network. Dotted lines in Fig. A.2 , drawn from
places to transitions in the petri net, are ‘modifier’ edges denoting
that a place influences the rate of a transition, but the place has no
tokens consumed when that transition fires.

In this division example, it does not make sense to follow both daughter
vesicles after a fission event because the surrounding environment is a
reservoir, and the daughter vesicles will not be able to interact with
each other. Therefore, only one daughter is followed, and this means
that the degrees of freedom of the system remain the same. The remodel
transition handling division RT_DIVIDE executes the following
instructions when enabled by a token in the DIVIDE place:

1.  [label= 0 )]

2.  Calculate how many buffer molecules B are in the vesicle. B = I - S
    - L

3.  Make a discontinuous state change :

    Half the vesicle contents: tokens on S = S / 2; B = B / 2; L = L / 2

    Half the membrane surface area: tokens on @xmath = @xmath / 2 (some
    randomness could be added to the division process if desired)

4.  Set the total number of solute molecules ⁶ ⁶ 6 State variable I is
    not actually a true state variable of the vesicle. It is included
    however, because it allows the easy addition of processes
    influencing (and influenced by) the volume of the vesicle. Without
    this pseudo-state variable, building a protocell from petri net
    modules would be much more brittle. inside the vesicle I = S + L + B

5.  Calculate @xmath for the new daughter vesicle, and put a token in
    the TENSION place if @xmath , or in the DEFLATED place if @xmath .

6.  Run the modified petri network (which now represents the followed
    daughter vesicle).

In other words, RT_DIVIDE resets the state of the parent vesicle to that
of the first daughter, and then recommences the simulation. Figure A.2 b
shows that a decreasing vesicle division cycle will result from this
system, because the surface area of the vesicle membrane grows, but the
vesicle volume does not.

Module 5 does not form part of the vesicle petri net, but rather
triggers a perturbation to the environment of the vesicle after an
approximate time has elapsed. In this case, this perturbation is
envisaged to be a decrease in the external buffer concentration @xmath ,
such that the vesicle experiences an influx of water, growing in volume.
After a specific number of tokens have accumulated on place TICK , the
remodel transition RT_PERTURB fires, executing the following
instructions:

1.  [label= 0 )]

2.  Make a boundary conditions change :

    Set the parameter @xmath , representing the buffer concentration in
    the environment, to a lower value.

3.  Make a discontinuous state change :

    Reset the tokens on TICK to 0.

    Remove the token from TIMERON, to disable any further perturbations
    to the environment.

4.  Run the modified petri network.

The effect of this event is shown as the green bar on Fig. A.2 b: the
vesicle instantly increases in volume. Finally, remodel transition
RT_BURST will just contain the instruction to stop the simulation if the
vesicle bursts. If the scenario were different, e.g. a population of
vesicles existed in a finite environment, this transition could be used
to remove the modules of the vesicle that burst, and add a new module
representing a flat bilayer, in their place.

In summary, representing a model protocell system as a flat petri net
structure is advantageous for a number of reasons. Firstly, the model is
a transparent white box: all of its workings are clear. It is
straightforward to publish the precise model used to produce simulation
data, so that others can reproduce findings exactly. Secondly, new model
features can be added by the user by changing the petri net, and are not
dependent on (bug prone) modifications to the underlying software.
Finally, a small and efficient algorithm can be developed for simulating
a two phase petri net architecture; an algorithm that will be robust and
bug-free regardless of simulating small systems or large, complicated
networks.

## Appendix B Lattice Model of Self-Assembly in Surfactant-Water-Oil
Mixtures

This appendix contains more technical details on the lattice model of
amphiphilic self-assembly reported in Section 4.1.2 . The lattice model
was a ‘spin’ model of the Larson type ( \shortciteNP larson1985; see
\shortciteNP liverpool1996 for a review) and implemented in two
dimensions on a 100x100 lattice.

### Spin Models to Capture Universal Properties of Complex Phenomena

Lattice spin models are a class of model typically used in statistical
physics to investigate the equilibrium properties of solids and liquids.
A famous example of a spin model is the Ising model ( \shortciteNP
sole2011; \shortciteNP Binder1997). In this model, a solid piece of
magnetic material, say iron, is represented as a regular lattice of
spins. Each spin represents an iron atom pointing either upwards (spin
of +1) or downwards (spin of -1) and locally adjacent spins have the
tendency to align with each other. The lattice is connected to a heat
bath which provides a thermal noise, counteracting the alignment of
spins. Even though the Ising model is an extremely simplified model of
real piece of iron, it is nevertheless able to reproduce the phase
transition in the magnetisation of an iron solid when it is heated
through a critical temperature (and to quite remarkable accuracy, see
\shortciteNP back1995). In the Ising model, at low temperatures, there
is a global alignment of spins (i.e. the solid is magnetised) up to a
critical temperature. At the critical temperature there is the sudden
onset of wide fluctuations in the spin alignments, and past the critical
temperature all spins are essentially randomised due to excessive
thermal noise (i.e. the solid becomes de-magnetised). Therefore,
although the Ising model is a brutal abstraction of the atomic structure
and interactions of a particular magnetic solid, there is a sense in
which the model has captured something universal about the way
magnetisation in general works.

Spin models of amphiphilic fluids follow a similar formalisation to the
Ising model and are also are intended to capture universal features –
this time about the way self-assembly works in ternary fluid mixtures of
amphiphiles, water and oil.

### General Description of Larson Model Evolution

The Larson model of amphiphilic fluids is based on a square lattice of
binary spins which have only nearest neighbour and diagonally nearest
neighbour interactions. ¹ ¹ 1 That is, the Moore neighbourhood. The four
diagonally nearest neighbours are treated as being at the same
interaction distance as the four nearest neighbours. The lattice is
typically of two or three dimensions with periodic boundary conditions
in all directions. The Larson model uses spin to denote hydrophobicity.
In the basic model, a +1 spin signifies the presence of a hydrophilic
‘water-loving’ moiety, and a -1 spin the presence of a hydrophobic
‘oil-loving’ moiety. The lattice is completely filled, with up to three
type of molecules: water molecules @xmath are represented as single +1
spins, oil hydrocarbons @xmath as single -1 spins, and amphiphiles,
denoted @xmath , are connected chains of @xmath hydrophilic head @xmath
spins (+1) followed by @xmath hydrophobic tail @xmath spins (-1).
Amphiphile chains move as self-avoiding walks with the constraint that
they cannot be broken, nor cross themselves or other neighbouring
chains. Being part of a still liquid, the molecules and amphiphile
chains on the lattice are free to move around into new configurations,
but the number of molecules of each type is always conserved. ² ² 2
Conversely in the Ising model (reviewed next), the atoms are fixed in
place, and the total number of up and down spins is not conserved.

The lattice has a total energy in any particular configuration,
depending on what spins are next to each other. As \shortciteA
dawson1992 writes, ‘the lattice model really is simply a way of
describing an ensemble of surfaces that can break and tear but that
possess an energy of deformation.’ (p1592). The hydrophobic effect is
modelled by giving all pairs of adjacent spins an appropriate local
interaction energy: like spins (hydrophobic-hydrophobic pairs, or
hydrophilic-hydrophilic pairs) decrease the lattice energy, whereas
unlike spins (hydrophobic-hydrophilic pairs) increase the lattice
energy. At equilibrium, closed physical systems always seek their lowest
energy configuration: in the case of the lattice, total energy is
minimised when there exists a minimal number of unlike spins in contact.

The lattice is started with a random distribution of oil, water and
amphiphiles, which represents a high energy non-equilibrium
configuration. This initial condition must be transformed into a series
of lattice configurations likely at equilibrium. From statistical
physics, it is known that when the lattice has equilibrated to some
temperature @xmath , the fluctuations in the total energy of the
configurations appearing should be distributed according to the
Boltzmann distribution. A special monte carlo algorithm called the
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm (see \shortciteNP richey2010 for an
excellent pedagogical review) is used to re-arrange the oil, water and
amphiphilic chains on the lattice to accomplish this goal. The M-H
algorithm drives the system into the region of lattice configuration
space where successive lattice configurations have energy distributed
according to the Boltzmann distribution for temperature @xmath . ³ ³ 3
Technically, the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm constructs a markov chain
of configurations which is stable on the Boltzmann distribution. The M-H
algorithm belongs to the class of Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms.
Generally, these algorithms are able to find and return samples (termed
‘important’ samples) from regions of multidimensional probability
distributions where there is the most ‘mass’ (probability). When in this
region, the M-H algorithm is producing important samples of likely
lattice configurations for temperature @xmath . These monte carlo
samples can be subsequently used to compute reliable equilibrium
averages for certain properties of the amphiphilic fluid on the lattice
(e.g. if micelles are formed, their number and size distributions can be
calculated).

In practice, to ensure proper lattice equilibration, the lattice
temperature should be gradually decreased from a high value to the final
temperature @xmath . This process is called simulated annealing
Kirkpatrick \BOthers . ( \APACyear 1983 ) and ensures that the system
does not stray too far-from-equilibrium. If the system is not gradually
cooled but, rather, is ‘quenched’ to a low temperature rapidly,
non-optimal lattice configurations can sometimes become frozen into the
system.

### Lattice Energies

Interaction energies for different pairs of adjacent molecules are given
as a matrix and specified in terms of a dimensionless parameter @xmath .
⁴ ⁴ 4 Simply put, @xmath represents both the temperature and interaction
energies of the system. Defined as @xmath it corresponds to the lowest
common denominator of the interaction energies in Joules, divided by
(the Boltzmann constant multiplied by the absolute Kelvin temperature of
the system). @xmath is used in place of using absolute interaction
energies in Joules and absolute temperatures in Kelvin, because it is
only the dimensionless ratio of energy to temperature that is important
in the evolution of the model. For the simple Larson model:

The matrix is symmetric about the diagonal because the order of the
adjacent molecules does not matter (WO always has the same energy as
OW). The total energy of the lattice is described by the so-called
Hamiltonian equation, simply

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the interaction energy between molecules of type @xmath
and @xmath (drawn from the matrix above), and @xmath is the number of
times that a pair of @xmath and @xmath type molecules are adjacent to
each other on the lattice.

### Algorithm for Larson Model Evolution

1.  [label= 0 )]

2.  Initialise a random lattice configuration, completely filling the
    lattice with water and oil molecules, and amphiphile chains. The
    concentration of each ‘species’ is defined as the amount of lattice
    area occupied by that species.

3.  Start the system at a high temperature, i.e. with @xmath close to 0.

4.  Update the lattice to the next configuration:

    (i) Propose a move. Randomly choose to move either a single oil or
    water molecule, or a whole amphiphile chain. Oil and water molecules
    move by exchanging with adjacent molecules. Amphiphile chains move
    through a series a transformations. A common chain movement is a
    snake-like movement whereby the entire chain slithers one unit along
    its own path ⁵ ⁵ 5 Chain transformations generally just need to be
    able to move chains into varied conformations whilst keeping the
    system ergodic. .

    (ii) Calculate the energy change associated with the move @xmath
    from the Hamiltonian B.1 .

    (iii) Accept the proposed move with probability :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (B.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Therefore, all moves which lower the lattice energy are
    automatically accepted, whereas moves which raise the energy are
    accepted with a probability that exponentially decreases with the
    increase in energy.

5.  Repeat from step 3 until the total lattice energy has stopped
    changing, signifying that the ‘burn-in’ period is over.

6.  Start the next annealing phase. Cool the system temperature a small
    amount by increasing @xmath a small amount toward its target value,
    and repeat again from step 3. Generally, as the temperature lowers,
    the more time the lattice needs to equilibrate, and the longer the
    annealing phase required.

7.  When the target temperature is reached, lattice configurations
    generated by the M-H algorithm can be used for the purposes of
    estimating desired expected values.

In the model as implemented, the Step 3 above was performed @xmath times
and the lattice temperature was decreased to @xmath from @xmath over 7
annealing phases. Each annealing phase was twice the length of the
previous one.

#### A Note on Moving Amphiphile Chains

The problem of moving an arbitrary length amphiphile chain on the
lattice without breaking the chain, or crossing other chains, presented
a particular challenge (even in two dimensions). In this regard, two
checks were helpful to employ:

1.  [label= 0 )]

2.   Moore consistency. After a move, all adjacent beads of a chain must
    be one Moore distance apart. If not, the chain is broken (illegal).

3.   Cross consistency. After a move, all diagonal sections of a chain
    must be tested and found not to cross another chain segment. This is
    because on a square lattice, chains can potentially cross each other
    (or even themselves) when moving diagonally.

## Appendix C Two Validity Tests for Abstract Elementary Reaction Sets

Theoretical protocell models often include a proto-metabolic network
specified in abstract terms, with chemical transformations symbolised as
letters, e.g. @xmath . A useful exercise is to develop validity tests
for such abstracted reaction sets, to ensure that they do not negate
basic physical laws. Such validity tests also permit the automatic
generation of random metabolisms.

This appendix proposes two validity tests which can be applied to
abstract sets of elementary reactions, one based on atom number
conservation and another on free energy changes. A reaction set passing
both tests can be said to be valid on basic conservative mass and energy
grounds. The primary use of the tests is to give a way to rule out
implausible reaction mechanisms. The two tests are dependent only on the
stoichiometry of the reactions (i.e. the reaction rates are not
involved) and are applicable regardless of whether the individual
reactions in a reaction set are considered reversible or irreversible,
or a combination of both. Table C.1 gives examples of elementary
reaction sets passing zero, one or both tests.

Related work. Test 1 presented here seems to accomplish the same as,
albeit in a different way, the test for conservative chemical reaction
networks presented by \shortciteA Schuster1991. Test 2 has also been
performed in the literature indirectly by e.g. \shortciteA Bigan2015b,
but in the latter case, not in the form of an explicit validity test.
Moving towards more realistic chemistry, the work of \shortciteA
Nemeth2002 is relevant, as they describe a computer algorithm that
generates all the possible multi-step elementary reaction sequences that
could underlie a particular overall reaction, given the list of
reactants, intermediate and product molecules/ions to be involved in the
reaction. Working with real chemistry, these authors are able to use
more constraints. The work in this appendix is generally related to the
stoichiometric checking of chemical kinetic models, the interested
reader is directed to \shortciteA Wei1962.

### Validity Test 1: Possibility for Atom Number Conservation

During the course of a chemical reaction, the law of conservation of
mass states that the quantity of each atomic element does not change;
the atoms only become re-arranged into new molecules. In the case of
real chemical equations, simple elemental balancing or ‘atom counting’
can be used to ensure that no reaction creates nor destroys mass.

In the case of abstracted chemical equations, similar balancing can
still be employed if the chemical species have labels which reflect the
atomic groups they consist of, e.g. binary polymers @xmath . Here, it is
clear how the atom groups have re-arranged in each reaction.

However, if the abstracted chemical equations do not make explicit the
atomic constituents of each species, e.g. @xmath , then group balancing
cannot be performed. Nevertheless, conservation of the total atom number
in the system can still be verified (a weaker condition) by rewriting
the set of reactions as a set of linear simultaneous equations. To do
this, every reaction arrow (regardless if irreversible, or
bi-directional) is re-written as an equals sign, and the species letters
become variables signifying the number of atoms in a molecule of that
type. Each linear equation stipulates that the total number of atoms on
the left and right hand sides has to be equal.

If at least one positive non-zero solution can be found to the
simultaneous equations, then this indicates that all species can be
assigned a positive atom number, such that no sequence of reactions will
neither create nor destroy atoms. The abstract reaction set has a
possibility of being implemented in real chemistry. On the other hand,
if a set of elementary reactions fails atom number conservation, then
the set is certainly invalid : somewhere in the chemical transformations
is hidden the destruction or spontaneous creation of atoms.

Usefully, the solutions to the simultaneous equations indicate which are
the largest and smallest molecules in the system.

{tcolorbox}

[colback=mybrown!50!white,colframe=mybrown!75!black,title=Box C1:
Validating conservation of atoms]

  Reaction set H in Table C.1   Solve simultaneous equations
  ----------------------------- -----------------------------------------
  @xmath                        @xmath
  @xmath                        @xmath
  @xmath                        @xmath
  @xmath                        @xmath
                                where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

### Validity Test 2: Possibility for All Free Energy Changes as Negative

Without having to perform experiments, the standard Gibbs free energy
change of a reaction @xmath is a good predictor of whether or not that
reaction will take place spontaneously. @xmath is defined as the total
standard Gibbs free energy of formation of the products, minus the total
standard Gibbs free energy of formation of the reactants:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If negative ¹ ¹ 1 i.e. the total standard Gibbs free energy of formation
of the products is more negative than that of the reactants , then the
reaction process is spontaneous under standard conditions (1 atm
pressure, 298K temperature, 1 M solute concentration). Standard Gibbs
free energy of formation is typically listed in tables for many
substances.

The standard Gibbs free energy change can be used as an approximate
assessment as to whether a set of abstract elementary reactions is
viable from an energetics perspective. The assessment is only
approximate, because (i) thermodynamic spontaneity is only assessed
relative to standard conditions (whereas reaction conditions could be
non-standard, for example), and because (ii) even if a reaction is
spontaneous, which in thermodynamic terminology means that it can occur,
this does not mean that the reaction necessarily does occur at a
kinetically appreciable rate. Nevertheless, a basic energetics test is
useful to apply to abstract elementary reaction sets, since it rules out
perpetual motion cycles like @xmath , which have no problems passing
validity test 1.

To test for free energy adherence, an elementary reaction set is be
transformed into a set of linear inequalities, with each reaction arrow
pointing in the spontaneous direction, re-written as a greater-than
@xmath symbol, and with each species letter representing the zero or
negative standard Gibbs free energy of formation for that species.

If a set of solutions exists to this set of inequalities (i.e., a
solution simplex is defined in the negative orthant of N-dimensional
space, where N is the number of species), then this indicates that all
species can be assigned a zero or negative standard Gibbs free energy of
formation, such that all reactions can proceed spontaneously under
standard conditions. The reaction set has a possibility of being
implemented in real chemistry.

The solutions to the inequalities, for valid reaction systems, dictate a
general energy ordering of molecules in the reaction network, but this
ordering is generally flexible and there are many energy combinations
which are possible.

@xmath

{tcolorbox}

[colback=mybrown!50!white,colframe=mybrown!75!black,title=Box C2:
Validating standard free energy change]

  Reaction set H in Table C.1   Solve inequalities
  ----------------------------- --------------------
  @xmath                        @xmath
  @xmath                        @xmath
  @xmath                        @xmath
  @xmath                        @xmath
                                @xmath
                                @xmath
                                @xmath
                                @xmath

### Validity Tests are Not Additive

In general, the validity tests proposed above are not additive. This
means that if two sets of elementary reactions - both involving some of
the same species - each pass both tests individually, then there is no
guarantee that the larger chemical system formed by bringing them
together will also pass both tests.

For example, Reaction Set A in Table C.1 can be separated into two
elementary reaction sets: one composed of reactions (1),(3) and (4), and
the other composed of reaction (2). Individually, each of these sets
passes validity tests 1 and 2, but brought together, the four reaction
system fails both tests.

### Reaction Sets with Non-Elementary Steps

Abstract reaction sets found in the literature often contain
non-elementary reactions. These are reactions which actually proceed as
two or more elementary steps but are written for convenience, or for
lack of knowledge, as a single ‘black box’ reaction representing the
overall chemical change ² ² 2 Non-elementary reactions often have
kinetics different from the mass action kinetics of their overall
chemical equation (e.g. see \shortciteNP rabai1987). Reactions catalysed
by enzymes are often written in one step e.g. @xmath , but actually
considered to proceed in two elementary steps involving formation of an
enzyme-substrate complex. For this reason, catalysed reactions usually
have their rate determined by the Michaelis-Menten approximation (see
\shortciteNP Chen2010), rather than by mass action kinetics. . In order
to properly apply the two validity measures above, reaction sets with
non-elementary steps need to have all such steps expanded to their
elementary reactions. Then, the measures should be applied to the entire
set of elementary reactions.

Nevertheless, having said the above, abstract reaction systems such as
the oscillating Lotka-Volterra model Lotka ( \APACyear 1920 ) , or
minimal bistable systems like Schlogl’s \APACyear 1972 or Wilhelm’s
\APACyear 1972 model, often have their kinetics specified as mass action
kinetics, despite containing steps which are questionably elementary.
This implies that these reactions are treated as if elementary. If the
reactions are assumed to be elementary on these grounds, then the
validity tests can be applied, and the three examples just cited each
pass both tests. The Oregonator (the version presented in \shortciteNP
gillespie1977) also passes both tests.

### Reservoir Analysis of Reaction Networks Limits Stoichiometric
Possibilities

Perhaps for mathematical simplicity, chemical reactions are
traditionally analysed in ‘reservoir conditions’. A set of species is
designated as nutrient species, a set of species is designated as waste
species, and these species sets are given constant reservoir
concentrations. ³ ³ 3 The additive free energy of the nutrient species
is greater than the additive free energy of the waste species, although
individual waste species can have higher free energy than individual
nutrient species. The dynamic behaviour of the remaining intermediate
species is recorded: these are species that are both produced and
consumed in reactions.

However, other reaction sets not suitable for reservoir conditions, but
valid nevertheless, can and do exist. Reaction sets G and H in Table C.1
, for example, pass validity tests 1 and 2 but are not suitable for
reservoir conditions because each one of the species @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath is both consumed and produced. Here, designating a
species as a constant concentration nutrient has the effect of generally
breaking up the reaction set into trivial parts. Instead, the behaviour
of reaction sets like G and H can be investigated by also modelling an
explicit reactor context in which the reactions take place. Rather than
the chemical reaction being sustained by nutrient and waste species at
fixed concentrations, it is instead sustained by chemical flows into and
out of the reactor. It follows that a greater diversity of reaction
mechanisms can be modelled in explicit reactor contexts (including in
compartments), than in reservoir conditions.

## Appendix D Published Manuscripts

Manuscripts published as part of this thesis are linked to in this
Appendix for reference. All manuscripts were published as open access.

### Journal Papers

1.  [label= 0 )]

2.  Shirt-Ediss, B., Ruiz-Mirazo, K., Mavelli, F. and Solé, R.V. (2014).
    Modelling Lipid Competition Dynamics in Heterogeneous Protocell
    Populations. Scientific Reports , 4, 5675. doi: 10.1038/srep05675 .

    14 pages of supplementary material is available online ( doi:
    10.13140/2.1.2170.1448 ).

3.  Shirt-Ediss, B., Solé, R.V. and Ruiz-Mirazo, K. (2015). Emergent
    Chemical Behavior in Variable-Volume Protocells. Life (Basel) , 5,
    181-211. doi: 10.3390/life5010181 .

    16 pages of supplementary material is available online ( doi:
    10.13140/2.1.4242.7206 ).

### Conference Paper

1.  [label= 0 )]

2.  Shirt-Ediss, B., Solé, R. and Ruiz-Mirazo, K. (2013). Steady state
    analysis of a vesicle bioreactor with mechanosensitive channels.
    In P. Liò, O. Miglino, G. Nicosia, S. Nolfi, and M. Pavone (Eds.),
    Advances in Artificial Life, ECAL 2013: Proceedings of the Twelfth
    European Conference on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living
    Systems. 1162-1169, MIT Press. doi: 10.7551/978-0-262-31709-2-ch178
    .

## Copyright Permissions for Reproduced Figures

Box 1, Figure (a). Reproduced from Pohorille, A. and Deamer, D.,
Research in Microbiology, 160(7), 449-456, 2009 Pohorille \BBA Deamer (
\APACyear 2009 ) . Copyright ©2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights
reserved.

@xmath

Figure 1.2 (b). Reproduced from Ichihashi et al., Nature Communications,
4, 2494, 2013 Ichihashi \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2013 ) . Reprinted by
permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Communications,
Copyright 2013.

Figure 1.2 (c). Reproduced from Kurihara et al., Nature Chemistry,
3(10), 775-781, 2011 Kurihara \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2011 ) . Reprinted
by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Chemistry, Copyright
2011.

Figure 1.2 (d). Reproduced from Noireaux, V. and Libchaber, A.,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 101(51), 17669-17674, 2004 Noireaux \BBA Libchaber ( \APACyear
2004 ) . Copyright 2004 National Academy of Sciences, USA.

Figure 1.2 (e). From Krishna Kumar et al., Angewandte Chemie, 50(40),
9343-9347, 2011 Krishna Kumar \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2011 ) . Copyright
©2011 by John Wiley Sons, Inc. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.

Figure 1.2 (f). Copyright ©Hardy et al., Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112(27) 8187-8192,
2015 Hardy \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2015 ) . (The National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, the publisher of this article,
does not require permission to be obtained for reproduction in
non-commercial and educational use.)

Figure 1.2 (g). From Luigi Luisi et al., ChemBioChem, 11(14), 1989-1992,
2010 Luisi \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2010 ) . Copyright ©2010 by John Wiley
Sons, Inc. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Figure 1.2 (h). Reprinted figure with permission from Fallah-Araghi et
al., Physical Review Letters, 112, 028301, 2014 Fallah-Araghi \BOthers .
( \APACyear 2014 ) . Copyright 2014 by the American Physical Society.

Figure 1.2 (i). Copyright ©Budin, I. and Szostak, J., Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(13)
5249-5254, 2011 Budin \BBA Szostak ( \APACyear 2011 ) . (The National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, the publisher of
this article, does not require permission to be obtained for
reproduction in non-commercial and educational use.)

Figure 1.2 (k). Reprinted (adapted) with permission from Takakura et
al., Journal of the American Chemical Society, 125(27), 8134-8140, 2003
Takakura \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2003 ) . Copyright (2003) American
Chemical Society.

Figure 1.2 (l). Copyright ©Zhu et al., Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109(25), 9828-9832,
2012 Zhu \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2012 ) . (The National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, the publisher of this article,
does not require permission to be obtained for reproduction in
non-commercial and educational use.)

Figure 1.2 (m). Copyright ©Terasawa et al., Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 109(16), 5942-5947,
2012 Terasawa \BOthers . ( \APACyear 2012 ) . (The National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, the publisher of this article,
does not require permission to be obtained for reproduction in
non-commercial and educational use.)

Figure 1.2 (o). Reprinted with permission from Szymanski et al., The
Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 117, 13080-13086, 2013 Szymanski
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2013 ) . Copyright (2013) American Chemical
Society.

Figure 1.2 (p). Reprinted with permission from Maselko, J. and Strizhak,
P., The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 108(16), 4937-4939, 2004
Maselko \BBA Strizhak ( \APACyear 2004 ) . Copyright (2004) American
Chemical Society.

@xmath

Figure 2.6 . Artwork Copyright © @xmath and TM Rube Goldberg Inc. All
Rights Reserved. RUBE GOLDBERG ® @xmath is a registered trademark of
Rube Goldberg Inc. All materials used with permission. rubegoldberg.com.

@xmath

Figure 2.7 . Reprinted from Tibor Ganti, Journal of Theoretical Biology,
187(4), 583-593, 1997 Gánti ( \APACyear 1997 ) . Copyright 1997, with
permission from Elsevier.

@xmath

Figure 3.1 (b). Reproduced from McMullin, B. and Varela, F.J., SFI
Working Paper 97-02-012 McMullin \BBA Varela ( \APACyear 1997 ) with
permission from Barry McMullin.

Figure 3.1 (f). Reprinted from Ono, N., BioSystems, 81(3), 223-233, 2005
Ono ( \APACyear 2005 ) . Copyright 2005, with permission from Elsevier.

@xmath

Figure 3.3 (a). Reprinted from Ruiz-Mirazo, K. and Mavelli, F.,
BioSystems, 91(2), 374-387, 2008 Ruiz-Mirazo \BBA Mavelli ( \APACyear
2008 ) , Copyright 2008, with permission from Elsevier.

Figure 3.3 (b). Reprinted from Wilson et al., Origins of Life and
Evolution of the Biosphere, 44(4), 357-361, 2015 Wilson \BOthers . (
\APACyear 2015 ) , with permission from Springer.

Figure 3.3 (c). Reprinted from Ruiz-Mirazo et al., Software Tools and
Algorithms for Biological Systems, Chapter 70, 689-696, 2011 Ruiz-Mirazo
\BOthers . ( \APACyear 2011 ) , with permission from Springer.

@xmath

Figure 4.1 (c). Reprinted from Dawson, K. A., Pure and Applied
Chemistry, 64(11), 1589-1602, 1992 Dawson ( \APACyear 1992 ) , with
permission from Springer.