This dissertation is motivated by an encouraging discovery made in the
field of power systems during the first decade of the twenty-first
century. Numerical experiments on several benchmark transmission
networks showed that it is possible to find global solutions to the
optimal power flow problem using semidefinite optimization. The optimal
power flow problem seeks to find a steady-state operating point of an
alternating-current transmission network that is optimal under some
criteria such as power loss or generation costs. After five decades of
research on this highly nonconvex problem, a method for finding global
solutions was thought to be out of reach. The concept used was to omit
nonconvexities and solve a convex problem instead. This is known as the
Shor relaxation, in reference to the Ukrainian mathematician Naum
Zuselevich Shor. However, the Shor relaxation does not provide global
solutions to many networks of interest. Bridging this gap is the
starting point of this dissertation.

The first step that was achieved (cf. Chapter 2 ) was to show that low
orders of the Lasserre hierarchy find the global solution to small-scale
networks that the Shor relaxation cannot solve. To do so, we realized
that the optimal power flow problem is a particular instance of
polynomial optimization. Thankfully, any polynomial optimization problem
with a bounded feasible set can be approximated as close as desired by a
sequence of semidefinite optimization problems. This sequence is called
the Lasserre hierarchy, in reference to the French mathematician Jean
Bernard Lasserre. This is remarkable because polynomial optimization
problems encompass many non-deterministic polynomial-time hard problems
such as quadratically-constrainted quadratic programming, mixed-integer
linear programming, and in particular the traveling salesman problem.

To further prove the numerical applicability of the Lasserre hierarchy,
we proved that there is zero duality gap in each semidefinite
optimization problem in the hierarchy in the case of the optimal power
flow problem (cf. Chapter 3 ). This property is essential for efficient
solvers to work. More generally, we proved that for any polynomial
optimization problem containing a ball constraint, there is no duality
gap. Adding a redundant ball constraint to a problem with a bounded
feasible set guarantees the global convergence of the Lasserre
hierarchy, hence the relevance of our result.

Having shown the applicability of the Lasserre hierarchy to small
instances, the next task was to be able to tackle large-scale problems.
However, there were few large-scale benchmark networks on which to test
new approaches. Network are considered large-scale if they contain
several thousand buses. We filled this gap by providing data for the
entire European synchronous grid, with a little over 9,000 buses. To
make it possible to work progressively on the data, we provided four
instances corresponding to larger and larger parts of the European
network (cf. Chapter 4 ). The data stems from a European project
involving many transmission system operators whose purpose was to
develop new tools for the pan-European grid.

Since it had been discovered in 2000, the Lasserre hierarchy had never
been able to solve practical problems with more than several dozens of
variables. This changed when Daniel K. Molzahn and Ian A. Hiskens at the
University of Michigan developed an algorithm to exploit sparsity in the
Lasserre hierarchy for the optimal power flow problem. This enabled them
to solve networks with several hundred buses. At around the same time,
Ramtin Madani, Morteza Ashraphijuo and Javad Lavaei at the University of
Columbia showed that the Shor relaxation succeeded on some large-scale
networks provided two penalty terms were added to the objective
function. We proposed to combine both approaches to systematically
provide nearly global solutions to large-scale networks (cf. Chapter 5
). This work was carried out in collaboration with the University of
Michigan. In the combined approach, only one penalty parameter has to be
specified, instead of two. In the case of active power loss
minimization, the objective function is convex (in function of the
voltage variables) and we observed that no penalization term is needed.
This means that the approach finds the global solution. In the case of
generation cost minimization, the objective is not a convex function and
a penalty parameter must be specified, yielding a nearly global
solution.

Specifying a penalization parameter is problematic because there is no
general method for doing so. To overcome this, we realized that
successful penalizations of the optimal power flow were related to the
Laplacian matrix of the graph of the power network. We thus proposed a
Laplacian-based Shor relaxation to obtain nearly global solutions
without the need to specify any parameter (cf. Chapter 6 ). An issue
that emerged while trying to solve large-scale optimal power flow
problems is that the data are ill-conditionned. Some power lines have
very low impedance, i.e., opposition to current, while others have up to
one thousand times larger impedance. As a result, in all large-scale
numerical experiments in this dissertation, the data is preprocessed to
have more homogenous line characteristics.

Having shown the applicability of the Lasserre hierarchy to large-scale
networks, we next enhanced its tractability by transposing it from real
to complex numbers (cf. Chapter 7 ). What prompt us to do so is that the
optimal power flow problem is written using complex numbers. They are
used to model an oscillatory phenomena, namely alternating-current. We
realized that omitting nonconvexities and converting from complex to
real numbers are two non-commutative operations. This lead us to propose
a general approach for finding global solutions to polynomial
optimization problems with bounded feasible sets where variables and
data are complex numbers. It is based on recent results in algebraic
geometry concerning positive polynomials with complex indeterminates. By
exploiting sparsity, it succeeds in finding global solutions to problems
with several thousand complex variables. In addition to the operation
and planning of future power systems, the complex moment/sum-of-squares
hierarchy we developed can be applied to signal processing, imaging
science, automatic control, and quantum mechanics.
The dissertation is organized as follows.
Chapter 1 describes the optimal power flow problem and the underlying
mathematical concepts.
Chapter 2 numerically illustrates that low orders of the Lasserre
hierarchy find the global solution to small-scale networks. Associated
publication: C. Josz, J. Maeght, P. Panciatici, and J.C. Gilbert ,
Application of the Moment-SOS Approach to Global Optimization of the OPF
Problem , Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
Transactions on Power Systems, 30, pp. 463–470, May 2014. [doi]
[preprint]
Chapter 3 proves that there is no duality gap between the primal and
dual versions of an instance of the Lasserre hierarchy in the presence
of a ball constraint in the original polynomial problem. Associated
publication: C. Josz and D. Henrion , Strong Duality in Lasserre’s
Hierarchy for Polynomial Optimization , Springer Optimization Letters,
February 2015. [doi] [preprint]
Chapter 4 provides data of large-scale networks representing the
European high-voltage transmission network. Associated public data: C.
Josz, S. Fliscounakis, J. Maeght, and P. Panciatici , Power Flow Data of
the European High-Voltage Transmission Network: 89, 1354, 2869, and
9241-bus PEGASE Systems , MATPOWER 5.1, March 2015. [link]
Chapter 5 computes nearly global solutions to large-scale networks using
the Lasserre hierarchy and a penalization parameter. Associated
publication: D.K. Molzahn, C. Josz, I.A. Hiskens, and P. Panciatici ,
Solution of Optimal Power Flow Problems using Moment Relaxations
Augmented with Objective Function Penalization , 54th Annual Conference
on Decision and Control, Osaka, December 2015. [preprint]
Chapter 6 computes nearly global solutions to large-scale networks using
Laplacian matrices instead of a penalization parameter. Associated
preprint: D.K. Molzahn, C. Josz, I.A. Hiskens, and P. Panciatici , A
Laplacian-Based Approach for Finding Near Globally Optimal Solutions to
OPF Problems , submitted to Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, Transactions on Power Systems. [preprint]
Chapter 7 transposes the Lasserre hierarchy to complex numbers to
enhance its tractability when dealing with complex variables instead of
real ones. Associated preprint: C. Josz, D. K. Molzahn ,
Moment/Sum-of-Squares Hierarchy for Complex Polynomial Optimization ,
submitted to Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Journal on
Optimization. [preprint]
Chapter 8 suggests future research directions and is followed by
references.
