### Preface

The Standard Model of Particle Physics is one of the greatest scientific
triumphs of the @xmath century. Since its conception more than @xmath
years ago, experiments have consolidated all of its numerous
predictions, and with the discovery of the Higgs Boson in @xmath ,
Nature finally revealed to us the last particle which makes up the
Standard Model.

One of the striking features of the Particle Physics program of the last
several decades was its guarantee to succeed. We knew that new physics
had to be found around the scale which we now associate with the weak
vector bosons. We knew that the top quark had to exist in order for the
Standard Model to be anomaly free. And we knew that the Higgs Boson, or
something else, had to show up around the @xmath -scale to save the
Standard Model from breaking the fundamental principle of unitarity.
However, this guarantee has expired with the discovery of the
aforementioned Higgs Boson, as this last piece of the puzzle has
rendered the Standard Model self-consistent up to very large energy
scales. Hence, Particle Physics has transitioned from a phase of success
into a phase of unknowns.

We know that there are phenomena the Standard Model cannot explain, like
Dark Matter, Dark Energy, neutrino masses, and Gravity, but for which we
have strong experimental evidence. We don’t know which of the
innumerable theories and models extending the Standard Model, if any,
will prove to be the correct answer(s). Until we either get direct
experimental evidence of the nature of Physics Beyond the Standard Model
or stumble upon the correct model, we may still learn much from studying
the Standard Model in detail. Such studies are currently under way at
the Large Hadron Collider. Here protons are being collided at a total
centre-of-mass energy of @xmath and the outcome of these collisions
measured by one of the four experiments ALICE, ATLAS, CMS, and LHCb.

On their own these measurements can tell us a lot about Nature, but they
become extremely powerful when compared with theoretical predictions. By
looking for deviations of data from Standard Model predictions, we may
ultimately learn how the Standard Model breaks down and what has to
replace it. If the deviations are small, the uncertainties on our
theoretical predictions necessarily have to be smaller.

When I started my DPhil-studies in @xmath precision QCD was at the end
of a revolution. For a long time it had been impossible to carry out
loop-calculations for more than the simplest processes and even
tree-level calculations with more than a few external legs were
unfeasible. However, a few unexpected developments quickly changed that,
and within a few years most of the processes the experimental community
had requested computed to next-to-leading order (NLO) were available,
and leading order (LO) calculations had become completely automated. In
addition to that, methods for matching NLO calculations with parton
showers had been developed and would also be fully automated within a
few years. Beyond NLO only very few processes had been computed and even
fewer so fully differentially.

Today, we are in a similar situation to the one experienced before the
NLO-revolution. Next-to-next-to-leading order (NNLO) calculations are
more than often needed to meet the experimental precision, but currently
only @xmath scattering processes can be computed at two-loops,
effectively providing the bottleneck for computing higher multiplicity
processes at NNLO. However, more than @xmath processes have been
computed differentially to NNLO and first steps have been taken towards
breaking the “ @xmath ”-wall. The simplest of these NNLO processes have
been matched to a parton shower and two processes have been computed
inclusively to next-to-next-to-next-to-leading order (N @xmath LO).

Here I describe some of these recent results in precision QCD and the
methods used to obtain them. In particular I discuss in Chapter 1
inclusive vector boson fusion Higgs production at N @xmath LO and in
Chapter 2 I discuss fully differential vector boson fusion Higgs
production at NNLO. This work was first presented in References [ 1 , 2
] and was done in collaboration with Matteo Cacciari, Frédéric Dreyer,
Gavin Salam, and Giulia Zanderighi, but has been significantly expanded
here due to the letter format of the two original publications. In
particular I discuss the structure function approach in some detail and
develop the “projection-to-Born” method. Chapter 2 also includes results
reported in References [ 3 , 4 ] .

In Chapter 3 I give a brief introduction to the POWHEG method for
matching NLO calculations and parton showers, and apply it to
electroweak @xmath production. The latter work was done in collaboration
with Barbara Jäger and Giulia Zanderighi and was first published in
Reference [ 5 ] .

Following that, I introduce the MiNLO method in Chapter 4 and discuss
how a MiNLO -improved Vj POWHEG generator can be upgraded to an NNLO
accurate @xmath generator through a reweighting procedure. This work was
done in collaboration with Emanuele Re and Giulia Zanderighi and was
first presented in Reference [ 6 ] . Contributions were subsequently
made to Reference [ 7 ] but have not been included here. In Chapter 5 I
sum up the research presented in this thesis, and provide some final
remarks.

Alexander Karlberg

Oxford, 2016

## Part I Vector Boson Fusion Higgs Production

### Chapter 1 Inclusive Vector Boson Fusion Higgs Production

There have been few discoveries in high energy physics as greatly
anticipated as that of the Higgs boson in 2012 [ 8 , 9 ] . It has been
known since before the commissioning of the LHC that it was guaranteed
to discover either the Higgs boson, or something else in its place, to
save the Standard Model from violating unitarity. As the LHC has now
entered the phase of Run II, we hope to precisely determine the boson’s
properties [ 10 ] and thereby discover the true nature of electroweak
symmetry breaking.

The most relevant production channels for the Higgs boson at the LHC are
gluon fusion (ggH), vector boson fusion (VBF), production in association
with a vector boson (VH) and with a top-quark pair (ttH) [ 11 ] .

Of these channels the cleanest one for studying the properties of the
Higgs Boson is the vector boson fusion channel [ 12 ] , shown in Figure
1.1 .

VBF is special for a number of reasons [ 13 , 14 , 4 ] :

-   it has the largest cross section of the processes that involves
    tree-level production of the Higgs boson (and is second largest
    among all processes);

-   it has a distinctive signature of two forward jets, which makes it
    possible to tag the events and so identify Higgs decays that
    normally have large backgrounds, e.g. @xmath ;

-   the Higgs transverse momentum is non-zero even at lowest order,
    which facilitates searches for invisible decay modes [ 15 , 16 ] ;

-   and it also brings particular sensitivity to the charge-parity
    properties of the Higgs boson, and non-standard Higgs interactions,
    through the angular correlations of the forward jets [ 17 ] .

The forward jets are due to the t-channel topology of the process. The
overall energy of each jet is governed by the centre-of-mass energy of
the collider whereas the transverse momentum of the jets are set by the
mass of the weak vector bosons. For this reason VBF events also tend to
have a large dijet invariant mass. These features make it possible to
separate the VBF signal from the very large QCD background production
through a set of cuts, which are usually referred to as VBF cuts . The
VBF process therefore provides ideal access for the intricate
measurements of the Higgs couplings [ 18 ] .

Currently the VBF production signal strength has been measured with a
precision of about 24% [ 19 ] , though significant improvements can be
expected during Run II and with the high luminosity LHC.

The unique topology of the VBF process makes it not just experimentally
very accessible but also theoretically simple. One can view the VBF
process as a double Deep Inelastic Scattering (DIS) process, where a
vector boson is radiated independently from each proton after which the
two vector bosons fuse into a Higgs boson. In this picture the matrix
element factorises into the contraction of the two proton structure
functions with the @xmath vertex, which is why it is known as the
structure function approach [ 20 ] . The structure function approach is
exact to NLO in the strong coupling constant and receives only tiny
corrections from non-factorisable contributions beyond this order, which
are both kinematically and colour suppressed. In fact, this approach is
exact in the limit in which one considers that there are two identical
copies of QCD associated with each of the two protons (shown orange and
blue in Figure 1.1 ), whose interaction is mediated by the weak force.

Given the key role of VBF production at the LHC, it is of paramount
importance to have a precise prediction for its production. The total
VBF rate in the structure function approach was computed to NNLO some
years ago [ 21 , 22 , 23 ] . This calculation found NNLO corrections of
about @xmath and renormalisation and factorisation scale uncertainties
at the @xmath level.

In this chapter we will first develop the structure function approach in
some detail and then proceed to compute the N @xmath LO QCD corrections
to the total VBF cross section in this approximation. The calculation
provides only the second N @xmath LO calculation for processes of
relevance to the LHC physics program, after a similar accuracy was
recently achieved in the ggH channel [ 24 ] . However, unlike the ggH
calculation, our calculation is fully differential in the Higgs
kinematics. Since the NNLO corrections to VBF were already very small,
the N @xmath LO calculation is more of theoretical interest than of
phenomenological. As we will see, the N @xmath LO corrections are tiny
and well within the scale uncertainty bands of the NNLO calculation.
Hence our calculation shows very good convergence of perturbation theory
for the VBF process.

Since our calculation gives access to the N @xmath LO structure
functions we also estimate missing higher order corrections to parton
distribution functions, which are currently only know to NNLO. These
corrections have not been studied in much detail yet, but are likely to
become interesting as more processes become known at N @xmath LO [ 25 ,
26 ] .

#### 1.1 The Structure Function Approach

In the structure function approach, as discussed above, the VBF Higgs
production cross section is calculated as a double DIS process. Thus, it
can be factorised as the product of the hadronic tensors @xmath and the
matrix element for @xmath , @xmath . The cross section can be expressed
by [ 20 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is Fermi’s constant, @xmath is the mass of the vector boson,
@xmath is the collider centre-of-mass energy, @xmath is the squared
vector boson propagator, @xmath and @xmath are the usual DIS variables,
and @xmath is the three-particle VBF phase space given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the incoming proton (not parton) momenta, @xmath is the
momentum of the Higgs, @xmath are the outgoing proton remnant momenta,
and @xmath are the invariant masses of the proton remnants. From the
knowledge of the vector boson momenta @xmath , it is straightforward to
reconstruct the Higgs momentum. As such, the cross section obtained
using Equation 1.1 is differential in the Higgs kinematics. In the
Standard Model, the @xmath matrix element is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The hadronic tensor @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have defined @xmath , and the @xmath functions are the standard
DIS structure functions with @xmath and @xmath [ 27 ] .

Since the matrix element in Equation 1.3 is proportional to the flat
metric, it is obvious that the cross section must be proportional to the
hadronic tensor contracted with itself. This contraction is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have dropped the argument @xmath from the structure functions
to ease notation.

In order to compute the N @xmath LO cross section, we require the
structure functions @xmath up to order @xmath in the strong coupling
constant. Using the QCD factorisation theorem, we may express the
structure functions as convolutions of the parton distribution functions
(PDFs), @xmath , with the short distance Wilson coefficient functions,
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

All the necessary coefficient functions are known up to third order in
the strong coupling constant ¹ ¹ 1 The even-odd differences between
charged-current coefficient functions were only known approximately when
this work was carried out [ 28 ] . However, the uncertainty associated
with this approximation is less than @xmath of the N @xmath LO
correction, and therefore completely negligible. Since then the exact
result has been published [ 29 ] along with some approximate
fourth-order results [ 30 ] . . To compute the N @xmath LO VBF Higgs
production cross section, we therefore evaluate the convolution of the
PDF with the appropriate coefficient functions in Equation 1.6 . At N
@xmath LO, additional care is required due to the appearance of new
flavour topologies [ 31 ] , see Figure 1.2 . Therefore, contributions
corresponding to interference of diagrams where the vector boson
attaches on different quark lines are to be set explicitly to zero for
charged boson exchanges.

To that end, it is useful to decompose the quark and anti-quark
distributions, @xmath and @xmath , into their pure-singlet contributions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

non-singlet valence contributions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

the flavour asymmetries ² ² 2 Note that this definition is different
from what is being used in [ 22 , 23 ] . It leads to a slightly more
intuitive definition of @xmath and @xmath and a slightly less intuitive
definition of @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the asymmetry @xmath , which parametrises the isotriplet component
of the proton

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We keep the gluon PDF, @xmath , as is.

This requires us to decompose the quark coefficient functions in a
similar manner ³ ³ 3 This decomposition is completely analogous to what
is typically done for splitting matrices.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and define the valence coefficient functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the superscript @xmath denotes the “sea” contribution to the
valence coefficient function. As it turns out, it is non-zero starting
from third order, and the pure-singlet piece of Equation 1.12 is
non-zero starting from second order [ 22 ] .

With these definitions the neutral current structure functions take the
form [ 22 , 23 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath are the vector and axial-vector couplings
respectively. The needed combinations are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the charged current case the structure functions are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In this case the vector and axial-vector couplings are simply given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations complete all the ingredients needed to evaluate the
cross section in Equation 1.1 . As previously noted, all coefficient
functions are know to the precision of N @xmath LO, whereas the PDFs
themselves have only been determined to NNLO.

##### 1.1.1 Scale Variation

The coefficient functions appearing above are in the literature
expressed in terms of the vector boson momentum, @xmath . In general we
are interested in computing the cross section for a range of different
factorisation and renormalisation scales to asses the convergence of the
perturbative series. In order to compute the dependence of the cross
section on the values of the factorisation and renormalisation scales,
we use renormalisation group methods [ 32 , 33 , 34 ] on the structure
functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This requires us to compute the scale dependence to third order in the
coefficient functions as well as in the PDFs.

We start by evaluating the running coupling for @xmath as an expansion
in @xmath . This is done by iteratively solving the renormalisation
group equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating yields

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we introduced the shorthand notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as ⁴ ⁴ 4 Here defined in the @xmath scheme. [ 35 , 36 , 37 , 38
, 39 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of active flavours. We use the above to
express the coefficient functions as an expansion in @xmath

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

To evaluate the dependence of the PDFs on the factorisation scale,
@xmath , we integrate the DGLAP [ 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 ] equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here both @xmath and @xmath are understood to be matrices expressed in
terms of the singlet and non-singlet parts as above. The splitting
kernels, @xmath , can be expressed in terms of an expansion in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where terms up to @xmath are known [ 44 , 45 ] .

It is then straightforward to express the PDF evaluated at @xmath in
terms of an expansion in @xmath . Evaluating, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where all the products are understood to be Mellin transforms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Sections 1.1.1 and 1.1.1 allow us to evaluate the convolution in
Equation 1.21 up to N @xmath LO in perturbative QCD for any choice of
the renormalisation and factorisation scales.

#### 1.2 Impact of Higher Order PDFs

There is one source of formally N @xmath LO QCD corrections appearing in
Equation 1.6 which is currently unknown, namely missing higher order
terms in the determination of the PDF. Indeed, in order to truly claim N
@xmath LO accuracy of the cross section we must use N @xmath LO parton
densities. However, only NNLO PDF sets are available at this time. These
will be missing contributions from two main sources: from the higher
order corrections to the coefficient functions that relate physical
observables to PDFs; and from the higher order splitting functions in
the evolution of the PDFs.

To evaluate the impact of future N @xmath LO PDF sets on the total cross
section, we consider two different approaches. A first, more
conservative estimate, is to derive the uncertainty related to higher
order PDF sets from the difference at lower orders, as described in [ 25
] (see also [ 26 ] ). We compute the NNLO cross section using both the
NLO and the NNLO PDF set, and use their difference to extract the N
@xmath LO PDF uncertainty. We find in this way that at @xmath the
uncertainty from missing higher orders in the extractions of PDFs is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because the convergence is greatly improved going from NNLO to N @xmath
LO compared to one order lower, one might expect this to be rather
conservative even with the factor half in Equation 1.33 . Therefore, we
also provide an alternative estimate of the impact of higher orders
PDFs, using the known N @xmath LO @xmath structure function.

We start by rescaling all the parton distributions using the @xmath
structure function evaluated at a low scale @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

In practice, we will use the @xmath structure function. We then
re-evaluate the structure functions in Equation 1.6 using the
approximate higher order PDF given by Equation 1.34 . This yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the last step, we used @xmath and considered @xmath proton
collisions.

By calculating a rescaled NLO PDF and evaluating the NNLO cross section
in this way, we can evaluate the ability of this method to predict the
corrections from NNLO PDFs. We find that with @xmath , the uncertainty
estimate obtained in this way captures relatively well the impact of
NNLO PDF sets.

The rescaled PDF sets obtained using Equation 1.34 will be missing N
@xmath LO corrections from the evolution of the PDFs in energy. We have
checked the impact of these terms by varying the renormalisation scale
up and down by a factor two around the factorisation scale in the
splitting functions used for the PDF evolution. We find that the
theoretical uncertainty associated with missing higher order splitting
functions is less than one permille of the total cross section.
Comparing this with Equation 1.35 , it is clear that these effects are
numerically subleading, suggesting that a practical alternative to full
N @xmath LO PDF sets could be obtained by carrying out a fit of DIS data
using the hard N @xmath LO matrix element.

The uncertainty estimates obtained with the two different methods
described by Equations 1.35 and 1.33 are shown in Figure 1.3 as a
function of centre-of-mass energy, and for a range of @xmath values.

One should note that the uncertainty estimates given in Equations 1.35
and 1.33 do not include what is usually referred to as PDF
uncertainties. While we are here calculating missing higher order
uncertainties to NNLO PDF sets, typical PDF uncertainties correspond to
uncertainties due to errors on the experimental data and limitations of
the fitting procedure. These can be evaluated for example with the
PDF4LHC15 prescription [ 46 ] , and are of about @xmath at @xmath ,
which is larger than the corrections discussed above. One can also
combine them with @xmath uncertainties, which for VBF are at the @xmath
level. More detailed results on PDF and @xmath uncertainties are given
in Chapter 2 .

#### 1.3 Phenomenological Results

Let us now discuss in detail the phenomenological consequences of the N
@xmath LO corrections to VBF Higgs production. We present results for a
wide range of energies in proton-proton collisions. The central
factorisation and renormalisation scales appearing in the structure
functions are set to the squared momentum of the corresponding vector
boson. To estimate missing higher-order uncertainties, we use a
seven-point scale variation, varying the scales by a factor two up and
down while keeping @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath corresponds to the upper and lower
hadronic sectors.

Our implementation uses the phase space from POWHEG ’s two-jet VBF Higgs
calculation [ 47 ] . The matrix element is derived from structure
functions obtained with the parametrised DIS coefficient functions [ 48
, 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 33 , 53 , 31 , 54 , 28 ] , evaluated using HOPPET
v1.2.0-devel [ 55 ] . We have tested our NNLO implementation against the
results of one of the codes used in References [ 21 , 22 ] and found
agreement, both for the structure functions and the final cross
sections. We have also checked that switching to the exact DIS
coefficient functions has a negligible impact on both structure
functions and total cross sections. A further successful comparison of
the evaluation of NNLO structure functions was made against APFEL
v.2.4.1 [ 56 ] .

For our computational setup, we use a diagonal CKM matrix with five
light flavours ignoring top-quarks in the internal lines and final
states. Full Breit-Wigner propagators for the @xmath , @xmath and the
narrow-width approximation for the Higgs boson are applied. We use the
PDF4LHC15_nnlo_mc PDF [ 46 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] and four-loop evolution of
the strong coupling [ 60 ] , taking as our initial condition @xmath . We
set the Higgs mass to @xmath , in accordance with the experimentally
measured value [ 61 ] . Electroweak parameters are obtained from their
PDG [ 62 ] values and tree-level electroweak relations. As inputs we use
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For the widths of the vector bosons we use
@xmath and @xmath .

To study the convergence of the perturbative series, we show in Figure
1.4 the inclusive cross section obtained at @xmath with @xmath for
@xmath . Here we observe that at N @xmath LO the scale dependence
becomes extremely flat over the full range of renormalisation and
factorisation scales. We note that similarly to the results obtained in
the ggH channel [ 24 ] , the convergence improves significantly at N
@xmath LO, with the N @xmath LO prediction being well inside of the NNLO
uncertainty band, while at lower orders there is a pattern of limited
overlap of theoretical uncertainties.

In Figure 1.5 (left), we give the cross section as a function of
centre-of-mass energy. We see that at N @xmath LO the convergence of the
perturbative series is very stable, with corrections of about @xmath on
the NNLO result. The scale uncertainty is dramatically reduced, going
from @xmath at NNLO to @xmath at N @xmath LO at @xmath . A detailed
breakdown of the cross section and scale uncertainty obtained at each
order in QCD is given in Table 1.1 for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

The centre and right plots of Figure 1.5 show the Higgs transverse
momentum and rapidity distributions at each order in QCD, where we
observe again a large reduction of the theoretical uncertainty at N
@xmath LO. The N @xmath LO corrections are flat everywhere in phase
space, except for at very high values of the Higgs rapidity.

A comment is due on non-factorisable QCD corrections. Indeed, for the
results presented in this chapter, we have considered VBF in the usual
DIS picture, ignoring diagrams that are not of the type shown in Figure
1.1 . These effects neglected by the structure function approximation
are known to contribute less than @xmath to the total cross section at
NNLO [ 22 ] . The effects and their relative corrections are as follows:

-   gluon exchanges between the upper and lower hadronic sectors, which
    appear at NNLO, but are kinematically and colour suppressed; These
    contributions along with the heavy-quark loop induced contributions
    have been estimated to contribute at the permille level [ 22 ] ;

-   t-/u-channel interference which are known to contribute @xmath at
    the fully inclusive level and @xmath after VBF cuts have been
    applied [ 63 ] ;

-   contributions from s-channel production, which have been calculated
    up to NLO [ 63 ] . At the inclusive level these contributions are
    sizeable but they are reduced to @xmath after VBF cuts. The
    s-channel production is of course just associated Higgs production
    where the massive vector boson decays to a quark pair and hence it
    is usually considered a background process rather than an actual
    contribution to VBF;

-   single-quark line contributions, which contribute to the VBF cross
    section at NNLO. At the fully inclusive level these amount to
    corrections of @xmath but are reduced to the permille level after
    VBF cuts have been applied [ 64 ] ;

-   loop induced interference between VBF and ggH production. These
    contributions have been shown to be much below the permille level [
    65 ] .

Furthermore, for phenomenological applications, one also needs to
consider NLO electroweak effects [ 63 ] , which amount to @xmath of the
total cross section. In Chapter 2 we will study the impact of these
electroweak corrections in some detail, and also investigate how big of
an impact PDF uncertainties have on the total cross section.

#### 1.4 Conclusions

In this chapter, we have presented the first N @xmath LO calculation of
a @xmath hadron-collider process, made possible by the DIS-like
factorisation of the VBF process. This brings the precision of VBF Higgs
production to the same formal accuracy as was recently achieved in the
ggH channel in the heavy top mass approximation [ 24 ] . The N @xmath LO
corrections were found to be tiny, @xmath , and well within previous
theoretical uncertainties, but they provide a large reduction of scale
uncertainties, by a factor 5. Thus, although the corrections are
sub-leading to many known effects omitted in the structure function
approach, the calculation shows incredibly good convergence of
perturbative QCD.

We also studied the impact of missing higher order corrections to the
PDFs. We estimate that these corrections are at the @xmath -level or
below and that they are dominated by the hard process coefficient
functions rather than unknown contributions to the splitting functions.
Hence one could conceivably obtain approximate N @xmath LO PDFs from DIS
data and the known N @xmath LO DIS coefficient functions. Our
calculation also provides the first element towards a differential N
@xmath LO calculation for VBF Higgs production, which could be achieved
through the projection-to-Born method (see Chapter 2 ) using an NNLO DIS
2+1 jet calculation [ 66 , 67 ] .

### Chapter 2 Fully differential NNLO Vector Boson Fusion
Higgs Production

In the previous chapter we saw how the total cross section for VBF Higgs
production could be computed to N @xmath LO using the structure function
approach. The calculation has the obvious disadvantage of not being
differential in the jet kinematics. The reason that the structure
function approach does not provide a fully differential cross section,
is related to the fact that the DIS coefficient functions used in the
calculation implicitly integrate over hadronic final states. Whereas the
Higgs boson momentum can be reconstructed from the knowledge of the
momenta of the vector bosons emitted from the protons, only the momenta
of the outgoing proton remnants are known and not those of the
individual partons. In general it is therefore not possible to
reconstruct the full final state momenta ¹ ¹ 1 The structure function
approach does reproduce the correct final state momenta at LO where
there can never be more than two jets in an event. In jet clustering
algorithms with large clustering radii it will also be the case that the
structure function approach often reproduces the correct final state
momenta beyond LO when there are only two jets present. .

Given the smallness of the inclusive NNLO and N @xmath LO corrections we
may ask whether or not it is even relevant to study the differential
corrections. In addition to that, the differential NLO corrections and
their associated scale uncertainties have been known for a long time to
be small [ 68 ] . However, because of the use of transverse-momentum
cuts on the forward tagging jets, one might imagine that there are
important NNLO corrections, associated with those jet cuts, that would
not be seen in a fully inclusive calculation. As we shall see later,
that is indeed the case.

In this chapter we eliminate the limitation of the structure function
approach and present a fully differential NNLO calculation for VBF Higgs
production. In order to do so, we will introduce the
“projection-to-Born” method. An advantage of this approach is that it
can be extended to any perturbative order and that it therefore opens up
for a fully differential N @xmath LO calculation as well. We proceed to
present results relevant for the LHC and discuss the inclusion of
electroweak corrections. At the end of the chapter, we discuss the
prospects of studying VBF production at a @xmath proton-proton collider.

#### 2.1 The “Projection-to-Born” Method

Let us start by recalling that the cross section in the structure
function approach is expressed as a sum of terms involving products of
structure functions, e.g. @xmath , where @xmath is given in terms of the
4-momentum @xmath of the (outgoing) exchanged vector boson @xmath (cf.
Equations 1.5 and 1.1 ). The @xmath values are fixed by the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the momentum of proton @xmath . To obtain the total
cross section, one integrates over all @xmath , @xmath that can lead to
the production of a Higgs boson. If the underlying upper (lower)
scattering is Born-like, @xmath , then it is straightforward to show
that knowledge of the vector boson momentum @xmath ( @xmath ) uniquely
determines the momenta of both the incoming and outgoing (on-shell)
quarks,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We exploit this feature in order to assemble a full calculation from two
separate ingredients. For the first one, the “inclusive” ingredient, we
remain within the structure function approach, and for each set of
@xmath and @xmath use Equation 2.2 to assign VBF Born-like kinematics to
the upper and lower sectors.

This is represented in Figure 2.1 b (showing just the upper sector): for
the two-loop contribution, the Born kinematics that we assign
corresponds to that of the actual diagrams; for the tree-level
double-real and one-loop single-real diagrams, it corresponds to a
projection from the true kinematics ( @xmath for @xmath ) down to the
Born kinematics ( @xmath ). The projected momenta are used to obtain the
“inclusive” contribution to differential cross sections. It is important
to understand that in the structure function approach we are forced to
construct the projected momenta rather than the full real and
double-real momenta. As previously mentioned, this is due to the fact
that the DIS coefficient functions are integrated over hadronic final
state momenta.

Here we aim to replace the projected real and double-real contributions
with their non-projected ones. We do so by adding a second, “exclusive”,
ingredient to the “inclusive” one obtained from the structure function
approach. This ingredient will contain the full real and double-real
contributions plus a set of counterevents with projected kinematics. Let
us first describe how to perform the projection starting from the full
kinematics. For simplicity we will assume an event with only one real
emission, see Figure 2.2 . Such an event will have six external momenta,
described by the vector

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath ( @xmath ) refers to the upper (lower) VBF line and @xmath
is the radiated gluon. We define the projected momenta by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us now assume that the radiated particle is attached to the upper
line of the VBF diagram. In order to ease notation we therefore drop the
@xmath -subscript in the following. We then proceed to express the five
momenta @xmath in lightcone coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and hence

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By momentum conservation we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to find @xmath we impose that the projected outgoing parton be
massless

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which fixes all the momenta. In order to find the projection when the
radiated parton is on the lower line, we simply make the substitution
@xmath everywhere. At NNLO we will of course also have events with two
radiated partons. In this case they can either both be attached to the
same line or one on each line. In the former case we simply apply the
projection above with @xmath as the sum of the the two radiated parton
momenta. In the latter case we apply one projection to the upper line
and one to the lower. Note that the Higgs momentum is unaffected by the
projection under all circumstances.

The “exclusive” ingredient starts from the NLO fully differential
calculation of vector boson fusion Higgs production with three jets [ 69
, 70 ] , as obtained in a factorised approximation, i.e. where there is
no cross-talk between upper and lower sectors. ² ² 2 The NLO calculation
without this approximation is given in Reference [ 71 ] . Thus each
parton can be uniquely assigned to one of the upper or lower sectors and
the two vector boson momenta can be unambiguously determined. For each
event in a Monte Carlo integration over phase space, with weight @xmath
, we add a counterevent, with weight @xmath , to which we assign
projected Born VBF kinematics as given in Equations 2.13 and 2.12 and
illustrated in Figures 2.2 and 2.1 . From the original events, we thus
obtain the full momentum structure for tree-level double-real and
one-loop single-real contributions. Meanwhile, after integration over
phase space, the counterevents exactly cancel the projected tree-level
double-real and one-loop single-real contributions from the inclusive
part of the calculation. Thus the sum of the “inclusive” and “exclusive”
parts gives the complete differential NNLO VBF result.

#### 2.2 Technical Implementation

For the implementation of the “inclusive” part of the calculation we use
the implementation already described in Chapter 1 . as a starting point
for the “exclusive” part of the calculation, we took the NLO
(i.e. fixed-order, but not parton-shower) part of the POWHEG @xmath
+3-jet VBF code [ 70 ] , itself based on the calculation of Reference [
69 ] , with tree-level matrix elements from MadGraph 4 [ 72 ] . This
code already uses a factorised approximation for the matrix element,
however for a given phase-space point it sums over matrix-element
weights for the assignments of partons to upper and lower sectors. We
therefore re-engineered the code so that for each set of 4-momenta,
weights are decomposed into the contributions for each of the four
different possible sets of assignments of partons to the two sectors.
For every element of this decomposition it is then possible to
unambiguously obtain the vector boson momenta and so correctly generate
a counterevent. The POWHEG-BOX ’s [ 73 , 74 ] “tagging” facility was
particularly useful in this respect, notably for the NLO subtraction
terms.

To check the correctness of the assignment to sectors, we verified that
as the rapidity separation between the two leading jets increases, there
was a decreasing relative fraction of the cross section for which
partons assigned to the upper (lower) sector were found in the rapidity
region associated with the lower (upper) leading jet, see Figure 2.3 .

This figure also shows a similar plot, after a small bug was introduced
in the program. The bug consisted of a random reassignment of tags, such
that partons belonging to the upper (lower) sector was identified with
the lower (upper) sector. We found that this bug gave visible results in
the aforementioned distribution even when only a few percent of the
partons were given the wrong tag. Furthermore, bugs of this type would
ruin the internal POWHEG check of soft and collinear limits. We also
tested that the sum of inclusive and exclusive contributions at NLO
agrees with the POWHEG NLO implementation of the VBF @xmath +2-jet
process.

#### 2.3 Phenomenological Results

To investigate the phenomenological consequences of the NNLO
corrections, we study @xmath proton-proton collisions. We use a diagonal
CKM matrix, full Breit-Wigners for the @xmath , @xmath and the
narrow-width approximation for the Higgs boson. We take NNPDF 3.0 parton
distribution functions at NNLO with @xmath ( NNPDF30_nnlo_as_0118 ) [ 59
] , also for our LO and NLO results. We have five light flavours and
ignore contributions with top-quarks in the final state or internal
lines. We set the Higgs mass to @xmath , compatible with the
experimentally measured value [ 61 ] . Electroweak parameters are set
according to known experimental values and tree-level electroweak
relations. As inputs we use @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For the widths
of the vector bosons we use @xmath and @xmath .

Some care is needed with the renormalisation and factorisation scale
choice. A natural option would be to use @xmath and @xmath as our
central values for the upper and lower sectors, as in Chapter 1 . While
this is straightforward in the inclusive code, in the exclusive code we
had the limitation that the underlying POWHEG-BOX code can presently
only easily assign a single scale (or set of scales) to a given event.
However, for each POWHEG phase-space point, we have multiple upper/lower
classifications of the partons, leading to several @xmath pairs for each
event. Thus the use of @xmath and @xmath would require some further
degree of modification of the POWHEG-BOX . We instead choose a central
scale that depends on the Higgs transverse momentum @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This choice of @xmath is usually close to @xmath as is seen in Figure
2.4 .

It represents a good compromise between satisfying the requirement of a
single scale for each event, while dynamically adapting to the structure
of the event. In order to estimate missing higher-order uncertainties,
we vary the renormalisation and factorisation scales symmetrically (i.e.
keeping @xmath ) by a factor @xmath up and down around @xmath . We
verified that an expanded scale variation, allowing @xmath with @xmath ,
led only to very small changes in the NNLO scale uncertainties for the
VBF-cut cross section and the @xmath distribution, see Figure 2.5

To pass our VBF selection cuts, events should have at least two jets
with transverse momentum @xmath ; the two hardest (i.e. highest @xmath )
jets should have absolute rapidity @xmath , be separated by a rapidity
@xmath , have a dijet invariant mass @xmath and be in opposite
hemispheres ( @xmath ). Jets are defined using the anti- @xmath
algorithm [ 75 ] , as implemented in FastJet v3.1.2 [ 76 ] , with radius
parameter @xmath .

Results are shown in Table 2.1 for the fully inclusive cross section and
with our VBF cuts. One sees that the NNLO corrections modify the fully
inclusive cross section only at the percent level, which is compatible
with the findings of Reference [ 21 ] . However, after VBF cuts, the
NNLO corrections are about 5 times larger, reducing the cross section by
@xmath relative to NLO. The magnitude of the NNLO effects after cuts
imply that it will be essential to take them into account for future
precision studies. Note that in both the inclusive and VBF-cut cases,
the NNLO contributions are larger than would be expected from NLO scale
variation.

Differential cross sections are shown in Figures 2.7 and 2.6 , for
events that pass the VBF cuts. We show in Figure 2.6 distributions of
the transverse momentum of the two leading jets, @xmath and @xmath , and
in Figure 2.7 distributions of the Higgs boson transverse momentum,
@xmath , and the rapidity separation between the two leading jets,
@xmath . The bands and the patterned boxes denote the scale
uncertainties, while the vertical error-bars denote the statistical
uncertainty. The effect of the NNLO corrections on the jets appears to
be to reduce their transverse momentum, leading to negative (positive)
corrections in regions of falling (rising) jet spectra. One can see
effects of up to @xmath . Turning to @xmath , one might initially be
surprised that such an inclusive observable should also have substantial
NNLO corrections, of about @xmath for low and moderate @xmath . Our
interpretation is that since NNLO effects redistribute jets from higher
to lower @xmath ’s (cf. the plots for @xmath and @xmath ), they reduce
the cross section for any observable defined with VBF cuts. As @xmath
grows larger, the forward jets tend naturally to get harder and so
automatically pass the @xmath thresholds, reducing the impact of NNLO
terms.

As observed above for the total cross section with VBF cuts, the NNLO
differential corrections are sizeable and often outside the uncertainty
band suggested by NLO scale variation. One reason for this might be that
NLO is the first order where the non-inclusiveness of the jet definition
matters, e.g. radiation outside the cone modifies the cross section.
Thus NLO is, in effect, a leading-order calculation for the exclusive
corrections, with all associated limitations.

To further understand the size of the NNLO corrections, it is
instructive to examine a NLO plus parton shower ( NLOPS ) calculation,
since the parton shower will include some approximation of the NNLO
corrections. For this purpose we have used the POWHEG VBF @xmath +2-jet
calculation [ 47 ] , showered with PYTHIA version 6.428 with the Perugia
2012 tune [ 77 ] . The POWHEG part of this NLOPS calculation uses the
same PDF, scale choices and electroweak parameters as our full NNLO
calculation. The NLOPS results are included in Figures 2.7 and 2.6 , at
parton level, with multi-parton interactions (MPI) switched off. They
differ from the NLO by an amount that is of a similar order of magnitude
to the NNLO effects. This lends support to our interpretation that final
(and initial)-state radiation from the hard partons is responsible for a
substantial part of the NNLO corrections. However, while the NLOPS
calculation reproduces the shape of the NNLO corrections for some
observables (especially @xmath ), there are others for which this is not
the case, the most striking being perhaps @xmath . Parton shower effects
were also studied in Reference [ 78 ] , using the MC@NLO approach [ 79 ]
. Various parton showers differed there by up to about 10%. In addition
to the NNLO contributions, precise phenomenological studies require the
inclusion of electroweak (EW) contributions and non-perturbative
hadronisation and MPI corrections. The former are of the same order of
magnitude as our NNLO corrections [ 63 ] . Using Pythia 6.428 and
Pythia 8.185 we find that hadronisation corrections are between @xmath
and @xmath , while MPI brings up to @xmath at low @xmath ’s. The small
hadronisation corrections appear to be due to a partial cancellation
between shifts in @xmath and rapidity.

##### 2.3.1 Precision Studies for the LHC

Given that the effects mentioned above are of the same order as our NNLO
corrections, it is useful to investigate their combined impact. In this
section ³ ³ 3 The results presented in this section are also reported
in Reference [ 4 ] . , we study in detail the combined effects of the
NNLO QCD corrections presented here and EW contributions. In addition to
that, we also study the effect of PDF and @xmath uncertainties. The
numerical results presented here have been computed using the values of
the EW parameters given in Section 1.3 . The electromagnetic coupling is
fixed in the @xmath scheme,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the weak mixing angle, @xmath , is defined in the on-shell scheme,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The renormalisation and factorisation scales are set equal to the @xmath
-boson mass,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and both scales are varied in the range @xmath keeping @xmath , which
catches the full scale uncertainty of integrated cross sections (and of
differential distributions in the essential regions). This fixed scale
choice is a consequence of limitations in the implementation of the EW
corrections.

The QCD corrections for inclusive cross sections and differential
distributions have been obtained as described earlier in this chapter.
EW corrections have been computed using HAWK ⁴ ⁴ 4 The predictions from
HAWK were provided by Stefan Dittmaier. [ 80 , 81 ] . HAWK is a
parton-level event generator for Higgs production in vector boson fusion
[ 82 , 63 ] , @xmath , and Higgs-strahlung [ 83 ] , @xmath leptons. It
includes the complete NLO-QCD and EW corrections and all weak-boson
fusion and quark–antiquark annihilation diagrams, i.e. @xmath -channel
and @xmath -channel diagrams with VBF-like vector boson exchange and
@xmath -channel Higgs-strahlung diagrams with hadronic weak-boson decay,
as well as all interferences. HAWK allows for an on-shell Higgs boson or
for an off-shell Higgs boson (with optional decay into a pair of gauge
singlets). The EW corrections include also the contributions from
photon-induced channels, but contributions from effective Higgs–gluon
couplings, which are part of the QCD corrections to Higgs production via
gluon fusion, are not taken into account. External fermion masses are
neglected and the renormalisation and factorisation scales are set to
@xmath by default. Since version 2.0, HAWK includes anomalous
Higgs-boson–vector boson couplings. Further features of HAWK are
described in [ 80 ] and on its web page [ 81 ] .

In the calculation of the QCD-based cross sections, we have used the
PDF4LHC15_nnlo_100 PDFs [ 46 ] , for the calculation of the EW
corrections we have employed the NNPDF2.3QED PDF set [ 84 ] , which
includes a photon PDF. Note, however, that the relative EW correction
factor, which is used in the following, hardly depends on the PDF set,
so that the uncertainty due to the mismatch in the PDF selection is
easily covered by the other remaining theoretical uncertainties.

For the fiducial cross section and for differential distributions the
following reconstruction scheme and cuts have been applied. Jets are
constructed according to the anti- @xmath algorithm [ 75 ] with @xmath .
Jets are constructed from partons @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the pseudo-rapidity. Real photons, which appear as
part of the EW corrections, are an input to the jet clustering in the
same way as partons. Thus, in real photon radiation events, final states
may consist of jets only or jets plus a real identifiable photon,
depending on whether the photon was merged into a jet or not,
respectively. Both events with and without isolated photons are kept.

Jets are ordered according to their @xmath in decreasing progression.
The jet with highest @xmath is called leading jet @xmath , the one with
next highest @xmath subleading jet @xmath , and both are the tagging
jets. Only events with at least two jets are kept. They must satisfy the
additional constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the rapidities of the two leading jets. The cut on the
2-jet invariant mass @xmath is sufficient to suppress the contribution
of @xmath -channel diagrams to the VBF cross section to the level of
@xmath , so that the DIS approximation of taking into account only
@xmath - and @xmath -channel contributions is justified. In the cross
sections given below, the @xmath -channel contributions will be given
for reference, although they are not included in the final VBF cross
sections by default.

While the VBF cross sections in the DIS approximation are independent of
the CKM matrix, quark mixing has some effect on @xmath -channel
contributions. For the calculation of the latter we employed a
Cabbibo-like CKM matrix (i.e. without mixing to the third quark
generation) with Cabbibo angle, @xmath , fixed by @xmath . Moreover, we
note that we employ complex W- and Z-boson masses in the calculation of
@xmath -channel and EW corrections in the standard HAWK approach, as
described in [ 82 , 63 ] .

The Higgs boson is treated as on-shell particle in the following
consistently, since its finite-width and off-shell effects in the signal
region are suppressed in the SM.

###### 2.3.1.1 Integrated VBF Cross Sections

The final VBF cross section @xmath is calculated according to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the NNLO-QCD prediction for the VBF cross section in DIS
approximation with PDF4LHC15_nnlo_100 PDFs. The relative NLO EW
correction @xmath is calculated with HAWK , but taking into account only
@xmath - and @xmath -channel diagrams corresponding to the DIS
approximation. The contributions from photon-induced channels, @xmath ,
and from @xmath -channel diagrams, @xmath are obtained from HAWK as
well, where the latter includes NLO-QCD and EW corrections. To obtain
@xmath , the photon-induced contribution is added linearly, but @xmath
is left out and only shown for reference, since it is not of true VBF
origin (like other contributions such as H+2jet production via gluon
fusion).

Tables 2.3 and 2.3 summarise the total and fiducial Standard Model VBF
cross sections and the corresponding uncertainties for the different
proton–proton collision energies for a Higgs-boson mass @xmath .

The scale uncertainty, @xmath , results from a variation of the
factorisation and renormalisation scales in Equation 2.17 by a factor of
@xmath keeping @xmath , as indicated above, and the combined PDF @xmath
uncertainty @xmath is obtained following the PDF4LHC recipe [ 46 ] .
Both @xmath and @xmath are actually obtained from @xmath , but these
QCD-driven uncertainties can be taken over as uncertainty estimates for
@xmath as well. The theoretical uncertainties of integrated cross
sections originating from unknown higher-order EW effects can be
estimated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first entry represents the generic size of NNLO-EW corrections,
while the second accounts for potential enhancement effects. Note that
the whole photon-induced cross-section contribution @xmath is treated as
uncertainty here, because the PDF uncertainty of @xmath is estimated to
be @xmath with the NNPDF2.3QED PDF set. At present, this source, which
is about @xmath , dominates the EW uncertainty of the integrated VBF
cross section ⁵ ⁵ 5 Very recently a more precise determination of the
photon PDF has been proposed under the name of LUXqed [ 85 ] . Although
this fit does not have a lot of overlap with the NNPDF2.3QED PDF set,
things are greatly improved in the more recent NNPDF3.0QED PDF. It would
thus be of interest to investigate the photon contribution to VBF Higgs
production from the LUXqed PDF set. The reported uncertainty of LUXqed
is at the percent level. .

###### 2.3.1.2 Differential VBF Cross Sections

Figures 2.12 , 2.11 , 2.10 , 2.9 and 2.8 show the most important
differential cross sections for Higgs production via VBF in the SM.

The upper panels show the LO cross section as well as the best
fixed-order prediction, based on the analogue of Equation 2.20 for
differential cross sections. The lower panels illustrate relative
contributions and the ratios @xmath and @xmath of QCD predictions when
going from LO to NLO-QCD to NNLO-QCD. Moreover, the relative EW
correction to the (anti)quark–(anti)quark channels ( @xmath ) and the
relative correction induced by initial-state photons ( @xmath ) are
shown. Finally, the relative size of the @xmath -channel contribution
for Higgs+2jet production ( @xmath ) is depicted as well, although it is
not included in the definition of the VBF cross section. Integrating the
differential cross sections shown in the following, and all its
individual contributions, results in the fiducial cross sections
discussed in the previous section.

The ratio @xmath shows a quite large impact of NLO-QCD corrections, an
effect that can be traced back to the scale choice @xmath , which is on
the low side if mass scales such as @xmath and @xmath get large in some
distributions. The moderate ratio @xmath , however, indicates nice
convergence of perturbation theory at NNLO-QCD. The band around the
ratio @xmath illustrates the scale uncertainty of the NNLO-QCD cross
section, which also applies to @xmath .

The EW corrections @xmath to (pseudo)rapidity and angular distributions
are rather flat, resembling the correction to the integrated (fiducial)
cross section. In the high-energy tails of the @xmath and @xmath
distributions, @xmath increases in size to @xmath – @xmath , showing the
onset of the well-known large negative EW corrections that are enhanced
by logarithms of the form @xmath . The impact of the photon-induced
channels uniformly stays at the generic level of @xmath – @xmath ,
i.e. they cannot be further suppressed by cuts acting on the variables
shown in the distributions.

The contribution of @xmath -channel (i.e. VH-like) production uniformly
shows the relative size of about @xmath observed in the fiducial cross
section, with the exception of the @xmath and @xmath distributions,
where this contribution is enhanced at the lower ends of the spectra.
Tightening the VBF cuts at these ends, would further suppress the impact
of @xmath , but reduce the signal at the same time. As an alternative to
decreasing @xmath , a veto on subleading jet pairs with invariant masses
around @xmath or @xmath may be promising. Such a veto, most likely,
would reduce the photon-induced contribution @xmath , and thus the
corresponding uncertainty, as well.

The theoretical uncertainties of differential cross sections originating
from unknown higher-order EW effects can be estimated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. @xmath is taken somewhat more conservative than for integrated
cross sections, accounting for possible enhancements of higher-order
effects due to a kinematical migration of events in distributions. Note
that @xmath , in particular, covers the known effect of enhanced EW
corrections at high momentum transfer (EW Sudakov logarithms, etc.). As
discussed for integrated cross sections in the previous section, the
large uncertainty of the current photon PDF forces us to include the
full contribution @xmath in the EW uncertainties.

##### 2.3.2 Future Circular Collider Studies

In this section ⁶ ⁶ 6 The results presented in this section are also
reported in Reference [ 3 ] . we study the production of a Standard
Model Higgs boson through vector boson fusion at a @xmath proton-proton
collider. As is the case at @xmath , VBF has the second largest Higgs
production cross section and is interesting on its own for a multitude
of reasons: 1) it is induced already at tree-level; 2) the transverse
momentum of the Higgs is non-zero at lowest order which makes it
suitable for searches for invisible decays; 3) it can be distinguished
from background processes due to a signature of two forward jets. This
last property is very important, as the inclusive VBF signal is
completely drowned in QCD background. One of the aims of this section is
to study how well typical VBF cuts suppress this background at a @xmath
proton-proton machine. In contrast to previous sections, we will here
therefore also study Higgs plus 2 jets production in the gluon fusion
channel (QCD @xmath ).

###### 2.3.2.1 Generators

Fixed order QCD and EW predictions have been obtained in the same way as
in previous sections. NLO interfaced to a parton shower ( NLOPS )
results have been obtained using the POWHEG-BOX [ 47 , 73 , 86 , 74 ]
together with version 6.428 of PYTHIA [ 87 ] with the Perugia Tune P12 [
77 ] . LO QCD @xmath results are obtained from the POWHEG-BOX using the
fixed-order part of [ 88 ] . The NLO QCD @xmath predictions have been
obtained by using the setup developed for an analogous analysis at
@xmath and @xmath [ 89 ] , and is based on the automated tools GoSam [
90 , 91 ] and Sherpa [ 92 ] , linked via the interface defined in the
Binoth Les Houches Accord [ 93 , 94 ] .

The one-loop amplitudes are generated with GoSam , and are based on an
algebraic generation of @xmath -dimensional integrands using a Feynman
diagrammatic approach. The expressions for the amplitudes are generated
employing QGraf [ 95 ] , Form [ 96 , 97 ] and Spinney [ 98 ] . For the
reduction of the tensor integrals at running time, we used Ninja [ 99 ,
100 ] , which is an automated package carrying out the integrand
reduction via Laurent expansion [ 101 ] , and OneLoop [ 102 ] for the
evaluation of the scalar integrals. Unstable phase space points are
detected automatically and reevaluated with the tensor integral library
Golem95 [ 103 , 104 , 105 ] . The tree-level matrix elements for the
Born and real-emission contribution, and the subtraction terms in the
Catani-Seymour approach [ 106 ] have been evaluated within Sherpa using
the matrix element generator Comix [ 107 ] .

Using this framework we stored NLO events in the form of Root Ntuples.
Details about the format of the Ntuples generated by Sherpa can be found
in Reference [ 108 ] . The predictions presented in the following were
computed using Ntuples at @xmath and @xmath with generation cuts
specified by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for which the Higgs boson mass @xmath and the Higgs vacuum
expectation value @xmath are set to @xmath and @xmath , respectively. To
improve the efficiency in performing the VBF analysis using the
selection cuts described below, a separate set of Ntuples was generated.
This set includes an additional generation cut on the invariant mass of
the two leading transverse momentum jets. To generate large dijet masses
from scratch, we require @xmath ⁷ ⁷ 7 The NLO QCD Hjj predictions were
provided by Gionata Luisoni. The text used here to describe the
calculation is identical to the one found in section 3.3.1 of Reference
[ 3 ] . .

###### 2.3.2.2 Parameters

The setup for this study is identical to the one used in the previous
section except that for VBF predictions we have used the
MMHT2014nnlo68cl [ 58 ] PDF set and for QCD @xmath predictions we have
used the CT14nnlo [ 57 ] PDF set as implemented in LHAPDF [ 109 ] .

In order to estimate scale uncertainties we vary @xmath up and down a
factor @xmath while keeping @xmath . For QCD VBF results we use the
scale choice of Equation 2.14 , for EW predictions we use @xmath as
central scale and for QCD @xmath predictions we use @xmath as our
central scale defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sum runs over all partons accompanying the Higgs boson in the event.

###### 2.3.2.3 Inclusive VBF Production

Due to the massive vector bosons exchanged in VBF production the cross
section is finite even when both jets become fully unresolved in
fixed-order calculations. In Table 2.4 we present the fully inclusive LO
VBF cross section and both NNLO-QCD and NLO-EW corrections at a @xmath
proton-proton collider.

In order to compute the VBF cross section we combine the NNLO-QCD and
NLO-EW corrections according to Equation 2.20 .

The combined corrections to the LO cross section is about @xmath with
QCD and EW corrections contributing an almost equal amount. The scale
uncertainty @xmath is due to varying @xmath by a factor @xmath up and
down in the QCD calculation alone keeping @xmath . For comparison the
total QCD and EW corrections at @xmath amount to about @xmath and the
QCD induced scale variations to about @xmath , cf. Table 2.3 .

###### 2.3.2.4 VBF Cuts

In order to separate the VBF signal from the main background of QCD
@xmath production we will extend typical VBF cuts used at the LHC to a
@xmath proton-proton collider. These cuts take advantage of the fact
that VBF Higgs production, and VBF production in general, has a very
clear signature of two forward jets clearly separated in rapidity.
Examining the topology of a typical VBF production diagram it becomes
very clear that this is the case because the two leading jets are
essential remnants of the two colliding protons. Since the @xmath of the
jets will be governed by the mass scale of the weak vector bosons and
the energy by the PDFs the jets will typically be very energetic and in
opposite rapidity hemispheres.

As is clear from Figure 2.13 the hardest jet in VBF production peaks at
around @xmath . As discussed above, this value is set by the mass of the
weak vector bosons and hence the @xmath spectra of the two hardest jets
are very similar to what one finds at the LHC. From this point of view,
and in order to maximise the VBF cross section, one should keep jets
with @xmath . Here we present results for @xmath to study the impact of
the jet cut on both the VBF signal and QCD @xmath background. We only
impose the cut on the two hardest jets in the event.

To establish VBF cuts at @xmath we first study the variables which are
typically used at the LHC. These are the dijet invariant mass, @xmath ,
the rapidity separation between the two leading jets, @xmath , the
separation between the two leading jets in the rapidity-azimuthal angle
plane, @xmath and the azimuthal angle between the two leading jets
@xmath . In Figure 2.14 we show @xmath and @xmath after applying a cut
on the two leading jets of @xmath and requiring that the two leading
jets are in opposite detector hemispheres. This last cut removes around
@xmath of the background while retaining about @xmath of the signal.

In order to suppress the QCD background a cut of @xmath is imposed. This
cut also significantly reduces the QCD @xmath peak and shifts the VBF
peak to about @xmath . In order to further suppress the QCD background
we impose @xmath . After these cuts have been applied, and requiring
@xmath , the VBF signal to QCD background ratio is roughly 3 with a
total NNLO-QCD VBF cross section of about @xmath pb. From Figure 2.15 it
is clear that one could also impose a cut on @xmath to improve the
suppression whereas a cut on @xmath would not help to achieve that. We
hence state the VBF cuts that we will be using throughout this section
are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the hardest jet in the event and @xmath is the second
hardest jet. At a @xmath machine the VBF cross section is @xmath under
typical VBF cuts and the QCD @xmath background roughly a factor six
smaller.

In Table 2.5 we show the fiducial cross section obtained after applying
the VBF cuts of Equation 2.24 to VBF and QCD @xmath production. The
cross sections are reported at the three different jet @xmath cut values
@xmath . All numbers are computed at LO. It is clear from the table that
requiring a somewhat higher jet @xmath cut than @xmath leads to a lower
@xmath ratio. In going from @xmath to @xmath this reduction is however
small.

In Table 2.6 we show for comparison the cross sections obtained after
only applying the three jet @xmath cuts. As expected the VBF signal is
drowned in the QCD background. It is worth noticing that the @xmath
ratio is still very large when one assumes an integrated luminosity of
@xmath and that it declines as the jet cut is increased.

###### 2.3.2.5 Perturbative Corrections

The results shown in the previous section were all computed at LO. Here
we briefly investigate the impact of NNLO-QCD, NLO-EW and parton shower
corrections to the VBF cross section computed with @xmath and under the
VBF cuts of Equation 2.24 at a @xmath collider. We also compare to the
NLO-QCD predictions for QCD @xmath production.

In Table 2.7 we show the best prediction for @xmath as obtained by
Equation 2.20 and compare it to the same cross section obtained by
showering POWHEG events with PYTHIA6 but including no effects beyond the
parton shower itself. The NLO-EW and NNLO-QCD corrections are found to
be of roughly the same order, and amount to a total negative correction
of @xmath . As was the case for the inclusive cross section, the
corrections are a factor two larger than at @xmath . Even though the
perturbative corrections to QCD @xmath production are negative, the
effect of including higher order corrections to both VBF and QCD @xmath
production is that the @xmath ratio at an integrated luminosity of
@xmath is decreased from @xmath to @xmath .

In Figures 2.19 , 2.18 , 2.17 and 2.16 we show comparisons between VBF
and QCD @xmath production computed at NNLO and NLO in QCD respectively.
We have applied the VBF cuts of Equation 2.24 . Also shown is the
k-factor for VBF production going from LO to NLO and NLO to NNLO. Note
that the QCD @xmath predictions have been obtained in the effective
theory where the top quark is treated as infinitely heavy and hence the
@xmath spectra should not be trusted beyond @xmath . As can be seen from
the plots the VBF cuts have suppressed the background QCD @xmath
production in all corners of phase space. One could still imagine
further optimising these cuts, for example by requiring @xmath in the
vicinity of @xmath or a slightly larger invariant dijet mass. We note in
particular that requiring that the Higgs Boson has a transverse momentum
greater than @xmath seems to favour the VBF signal. Since a cut on the
transverse momentum of the decay products of the Higgs would in any case
have to be imposed, this improves the efficiency of the VBF cuts in
realistic experimental setups.

###### 2.3.2.6 Differential Distributions

In addition to the distributions already presented in the previous
section, we here show a number of distributions to indicate the
kinematical reach of the VBF channel at @xmath . Assuming an integrated
luminosity of @xmath ab @xmath we study how many events will be produced
with a Higgs whose transverse momentum exceeds @xmath . In Figures 2.21
and 2.20 we show this distribution for various cut configurations. This
variable is particularly interesting in the context of anomalous
couplings in the weak sector. It can be seen that even under VBF cuts
and requiring hard jets, a number of Higgs bosons with transverse
momentum of the order @xmath will be produced in this scenario.

In Figure 2.22 we show the same distribution but fully inclusively and
at various perturbative orders. Also shown is the k-factor going from LO
to NLO and from NLO to NNLO. The perturbative corrections to this
variable are modest as it is not sensitive to real radiation at the
inclusive level. After applying VBF cuts and jet cuts the low @xmath
-spectrum receives moderate corrections whereas the corrections at
larger values of @xmath can become very large as indicated in Figure
2.17 .

In Figure 2.23 we show how many events will be produced with a dijet
invariant mass exceeding @xmath at various cut configurations. Because
the two hardest jets in the VBF event are typically the proton remnants
the invariant dijet mass can become very large. As can be seen from the
figure, even after applying VBF cuts and requiring very hard jets
hundreds of events with an invariant dijet mass larger than @xmath is
expected. This is of interest when probing for BSM physics at the very
highest scales. It is also worth noticing that the tail of the
distribution is almost unaffected by the VBF cuts, as the VBF cuts are
optimised to favour high invariant dijet events.

###### 2.3.2.7 Detector Implications

The requirement that the two hardest jets are in opposite detector
hemispheres and are separated by at least @xmath units of rapidity,
means that a symmetric detector in the style of ATLAS or CMS must have a
rapidity reach well above @xmath . In fact, looking at Figure 2.24 ,
which shows the fraction of events which satisfy @xmath for various cut
configurations, it becomes clear that a detector with a rapidity reach
of @xmath would at best only retain @xmath of the VBF events after VBF
cuts are applied. Since a jet with @xmath GeV can be produced at a
rapidity of @xmath whereas a jet with @xmath GeV can only be produced
with rapidities up to @xmath , the required rapidity reach of the
detector will also depend on how well soft jets can be measured and
controlled at @xmath . In all cases a rapidity reach above 6 seems to be
desirable.

#### 2.4 Conclusions

With the calculation presented in this chapter, differential VBF Higgs
production has been brought to the same NNLO level of accuracy that has
been available for some time now for the ggH [ 110 , 111 ] and VH [ 112
] production channels. This constitutes the first fully differential
NNLO @xmath hadron-collider calculation, an advance made possible thanks
to the factorisable nature of the process. At both @xmath and @xmath the
differential NNLO corrections are non-negligible, @xmath – @xmath ,
i.e. an order of magnitude larger than the corrections to the inclusive
cross section. These corrections are found to be of the same order of
magnitude as the NLO-EW corrections. Their size might even motivate a
calculation one order higher, to N @xmath LO, which we believe is within
reach with the new “projection-to-Born” approach introduced here. It
would also be of interest to obtain NNLO plus parton shower predictions,
again matching the accuracy achieved recently in ggH [ 113 , 114 ] . Our
studies of VBF at a @xmath collider showed that it is still possible to
suppress QCD backgrounds with suitable VBF cuts. However this
suppression is roughly a factor two worse than what can be obtained at a
@xmath collider. In addition to that, we found that experimental
detectors with a rapidity reach in excess of @xmath is needed to catch
all of the VBF signal.

## Part II Parton Shower Matching

### Chapter 3 The POWHEG Method

In this chapter we discuss how one might go about matching a fixed-order
NLO calculation to a parton shower ( NLOPS ). The reason such a matching
is desirable is obvious. Fixed-order calculations are very good at
predicting observables that are inclusive over QCD radiation, but can
never make accurate predictions for exclusive final states, due to the
presence of soft and collinear divergences in the fixed order results.
On the other hand Shower Monte Carlo programs can readily predict
exclusive quantities through all order resummations, currently done in
the leading logarithmic approximation. The showers are however limited
to LO hard matrix elements at best, which do not reproduce inclusive
quantities with the desired accuracy. A matching of the two approaches
eliminate the deficiencies of both, retaining NLO accuracy of inclusive
observables and exclusive final state generation.

Currently there exists two widely used methods for obtaining NLOPS
accurate predictions: the MC@NLO method [ 79 ] and the POWHEG ¹ ¹ 1
POsitive Weight Hardest Emission Generator method [ 73 , 86 ] . Here we
spend some time reviewing the core results of the latter. In addition to
that, a number of lesser used prescriptions exist [ 115 , 116 , 117 ,
118 , 119 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 ] , some because they are relatively
recent additions and others because development halted after the initial
ideas were presented. The POWHEG method has been implemented in two
publicly available frameworks: Sherpa [ 92 ] and the POWHEG-BOX [ 74 ] .

#### 3.1 Matching NLO Calculations and Showers

Deriving all the details of the POWHEG method from first principles is a
rather involved affair. Here we will assume that the reader already has
familiarity with Shower Monte Carlos and only focus on the ingredients
which are particular to the POWHEG method. The discussion below is
therefore schematic at best. For a thorough discussion we refer the
reader to [ 124 , 125 , 73 , 86 ] .

##### 3.1.1 The Shower

To set up the notation we start by briefly considering a splitting of an
incoming parton with energy @xmath into two partons with momentum
fraction @xmath and @xmath respectively as shown in Figure 3.1 ² ² 2 In
this chapter we will restrict ourselves to only discussing final state
showers. The discussion generalises to initial state showers, cf.
Section 6 of Reference [ 73 ] . . By momentum conservation the
transverse momentum of the two outgoing partons with respect to the
incoming parton will be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the small angle approximation we have @xmath from which it follows
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Defining @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and one can then show that the probability for a parton with ordering
parameter @xmath splitting into two partons with momentum fractions
@xmath and @xmath is [ 124 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath are the unregularised Altarelli-Parisi splitting functions.
They are intricately related to the splitting kernels of Equation 1.30 .
To lowest order they are given by [ 27 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The Sudakov form factor, @xmath , is
the probability that no branching has taken place between @xmath and
@xmath . Taking this as our ansatz we may now integrate Equation 3.4 and
obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which has the solution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is a lower cut-off to avoid the pole in @xmath . It is typically
of the order @xmath . The angular ordered shower can now formally be
expressed as the following recursive equation ³ ³ 3 Following the
notation of [ 73 ] we have here dropped the azimuthal integration in the
shower assuming that it is uniform in this variable.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the initial state parton. This equation can be solved
iteratively through ordinary Monte Carlo methods, i.e. one generates a
random number @xmath in the range @xmath to @xmath and solves @xmath to
find @xmath . Then @xmath can be generated according to @xmath and one
repeats the procedure until @xmath , at which point there can be no more
emissions and the shower terminates. At leading-order it is
straightforward to match the shower to a matrix element. If @xmath is
the Born-level cross section, we simply act with @xmath on @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In this case the starting scale of the shower, @xmath , should be set to
the scale of the hard process, such that the parton shower correctly
simulates soft and collinear partons while the matrix element describes
the hard partons.

In order to discuss the POWHEG method we need to transform the above
shower into a @xmath ordered shower ⁴ ⁴ 4 POWHEG also works with an
angular ordered shower, although in this case one has to introduce a
truncated shower to account for the fact that the first emission in the
shower is not necessarily the hardest one. , that is we want to make
sure that the hardest emission is generated first such that it can be
described by the real matrix element. It is clear from Equation 3.3 that
if one generates first an emission with @xmath and then on the hardest
emission line one generates an emission with @xmath the @xmath of the
second emission can easily be larger than that of the first. We will
state without proof than one can implement a @xmath veto by modifying
the Sudakov form factor in the obvious way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Equation 3.3 we can immediately transform this into an integral in
@xmath . For the first emission the Sudakov form factor is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The differential cross section for the first emission can then be
written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the following @xmath expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to turn this expression into something with which we can easily
compare later on, we introduce the “+”-prescription to regulate the
singularities in the splitting kernel. We define it in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Doing so the above equation reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In writing the cross section in this form we have isolated the
approximate Shower Monte Carlo NLO contribution. In fact, the two
non-trivial terms of the bracket of Equation 3.13 correspond to the
approximate virtual and real contributions to the cross section. The “+”
prescriptions simply guarantees that the virtual and real singularities
cancel. With this observation it becomes clear why matching fixed-order
NLO calculations and partons showers poses a problem. If we are not
careful the shower can generate configurations which are formally @xmath
spoiling the claimed NLO accuracy. We can avoid this double counting by
generating the first emission according to the NLO matrix element and
all subsequent emissions with the shower.

##### 3.1.2 POWHEG

Up until this point we have restricted our discussion to the effect of a
parton shower on one jet only. In general we are interested in studying
@xmath scattering in which @xmath of the @xmath final states are
coloured. In this case the above discussion is modified in the following
way

-   @xmath is replaced by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.16)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and we define

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.17)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This in turn means that all lines, and not just the line emitting,
    will have @xmath factors associated to them. These factors are there
    to ensure consistency with the @xmath veto applied in the shower.

-   Then one generates the hardest @xmath according to @xmath and
    chooses values @xmath and @xmath according to @xmath . From these
    two values we can construct the two new partons from @xmath and let
    the full @xmath partons shower with a @xmath veto.

We now write the exact NLO formula for the cross section in the
following schematic way

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For simplicity we are assuming that the real matrix element, @xmath ,
has only one singular region, corresponding to the mapping @xmath from
the @xmath -body kinematics to the @xmath -body kinematics. Here we will
assume the simplest case, which is that @xmath and we write @xmath where
@xmath is the three dimensional phase space associated with the emitted
parton. In this way we can rewrite the cross section in the following
very suggestive way

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By comparing the last line of this expression to the approximate NLO
expression of Equation 3.15 we deduce how one would have to adjust
Equation 3.12 in order to obtain the exact NLO expression. We first
define the POWHEG Sudakov form factor by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath is not unique, but has to correspond to the
transverse momentum of the emitted parton relative to the emitter close
to the singular limit. It is worth noticing, that in the collinear/soft
limits this Sudakov form factor corresponds to the one of Equation 3.10
since in this limit the real matrix element factorises and @xmath . We
then write the NLO cross section as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By expanding @xmath in the above expression we exactly obtain Equation
3.19 analogously to the way Equation 3.15 can be obtained from Equation
3.12 . One could in principle stop here and implement Equation 3.21 in a
Shower Monte Carlo program. However, this expression has the
disadvantage of being able to generate negative weights, simply because
the first bracket is not required to be positive. A simple way of curing
this problem is by introducing the NLO weighted Born term , @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and write the hardest emission cross section as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is equivalent to Equation 3.21 at @xmath . This expression avoids
the generation of negative events, since the @xmath function is expected
to be positive whenever perturbation theory is valid. Equation 3.23 is
in essence the master formula of the POWHEG method. For the purpose of
our discussion of MiNLO later on, we note that the @xmath function can
receive corrections of @xmath without spoiling the accuracy of the cross
section.

Before we continue and apply the POWHEG method to VBF @xmath production
we will for completeness give the most general form of the above
equation when there are more than just one singular region.

Equation 3.23 takes the following form [ 86 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and ⁵ ⁵ 5 For the ease of notation, we have omitted the two counter
terms needed to cancel the initial state collinear singularities.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This expression looks complicated at first, but the various extra
indices which have been introduced are easily explained. The outer sum
runs over all Born-like flavour structures, @xmath . To each such
flavour structure exists a number of real graphs which have the
underlying flavour structure, @xmath . We label these real graphs by
@xmath according to their underlying flavour structure, @xmath , and
such that they each have one and only one singular region. Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

To each singular region corresponds a mapping, @xmath to a set of
underlying Born-like momenta. Hence we see that Equation 3.24 simply
sums over all possible Born-like flavour states while including all real
contributions with that underlying flavour state.

It may so happen that certain real graphs have no singular regions and
therefore no underlying Born structure. This happens for instance in
Higgs production through gluon-fusion where the sub-process @xmath can
easily be seen to be non-singular. It can be useful to split the real
contributions into the singular and non-singular ones to avoid the
exponentiation of large corrections. In this case @xmath should be
substituted by the singular part of @xmath and the non-singular part
added outside of the @xmath -function.

To construct the @xmath function it is convenient to introduce another
function, @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is simply a parametrisation of the unit cube for the
radiation variables.

Presently there exists a framework, the POWHEG-BOX [ 74 ] , where a user
may implement any fixed-order NLO calculation to be matched with the
POWHEG method. The POWHEG method has been applied to a vast number of
Standard Model processes and several studies of Beyond the Standard
Model physics. The POWHEG-BOX requires the user to provide a list of
Born, virtual, and real processes along with their respective matrix
elements. The user also has to provide Born phase space mappings from
the unit cube along with a suitable Jacobian. From these ingredients the
POWHEG-BOX automatically finds the singular regions, constructs
subtraction terms, and computes the @xmath and @xmath functions. An
interface to HERWIG and PYTHIA also exists, hence it is straightforward
within this framework to match existing NLO fixed-order calculations to
Shower Monte Carlo programs. In the next section we study the
implementation of VBF @xmath production in the POWHEG-BOX .

#### 3.2 Electroweak @xmath Production

A primary goal of the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is an in-depth
understanding of the mechanism responsible for electroweak symmetry
breaking. Data collected and analysed by the ATLAS [ 8 ] and CMS [ 9 ]
collaborations have revealed the existence of a scalar boson with a mass
of about @xmath . Investigations on the properties of this new particle
consolidate its interpretation as the Higgs boson of the Standard Model
(SM). In particular, measurements of its spin and CP properties [ 126 ,
127 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 131 , 132 , 133 ] as well as of its couplings to
gauge bosons and fermions so far have disclosed no deviation from the SM
expectation of a spin-zero, CP-even particle. Should physics beyond the
Standard Model be realised in nature, its effects on observables in the
Higgs sector seem to be small, calling for high precision in experiment
as well as in theoretical predictions.

An ideal environment for the determination of the tensor structure and
strengths of the Higgs couplings to gauge bosons is provided by vector
boson fusion processes [ 18 , 134 , 135 ] . As we have already seen in
previous chapters, because of their very pronounced signature in phase
space, featuring two well-separated jets in the forward regions of the
detector, VBF reactions can be separated well from QCD-induced
background reactions.

In this section we wish to present a tool for the simulation of @xmath
-boson pair production via vector boson fusion. The purely electroweak
process @xmath predominantly proceeds via the scattering of two quarks
by the exchange of weak vector bosons in the @xmath -channel with
subsequent emission of two @xmath bosons. Diagrams with a Higgs
resonance contribute as well as weak boson scattering graphs that are
sensitive to triple and quartic gauge boson couplings.

NLO-QCD corrections to this process, including leptonic decays of the
@xmath bosons in the @xmath and @xmath modes, have been computed in
Reference [ 136 ] and are publicly available in the computer package
VBFNLO [ 137 ] . While that code allows the computation of, in
principle, arbitrary distributions within experimentally feasible
selection cuts, an interface to parton-shower Monte Carlo programs at
NLO-QCD accuracy is not yet available. We have therefore worked out a
matching of the NLO-QCD calculation with parton-shower programs in the
framework of the POWHEG formalism described earlier in this chapter. To
this end, we are making use of the POWHEG-BOX [ 74 ] , a tool that
provides all the process-independent building blocks of the matching
procedure, but requires the user to implement process-specific
ingredients in a specific format by themselves. Recently a Version 2 of
the POWHEG-BOX has been released, POWHEG BOX V2 . Version 2 includes a
number of new features among which are

-   the possibility to produce grids in parallel and combine them;

-   the option to modify scales and parton distribution functions a
    posteriori, through a reweighting procedure of Les Houches events;

-   a faster calculation of upper bounds, and the possibility to store
    upper bounds and combine them;

-   an improvement in the separation of regions for the real radiation [
    138 ] , which results in smoother distributions.

Given the complexity of electroweak @xmath production, we found it
useful to take full advantage of these features and therefore
implemented the process directly in Version 2 of the POWHEG-BOX .

In the following section we describe the technical details of our
implementation. In Section 3.2.2 we present phenomenological results for
some representative applications in the case of leptonic final states,
in the case of cuts suitable to study the continuum, double-resonant
production. We also discuss the potential of this process to constrain
the size of dimension-six operators that arise in effective field theory
approaches to physics beyond the Standard Model. In particular we study
the capability of future Colliders to constrain the couplings even
further.

##### 3.2.1 Technical Details of the Implementation

Our implementation of electroweak @xmath production in the context of
the POWHEG - BOX proceeds along the same lines as previous work done for
@xmath [ 139 ] , @xmath [ 140 ] , and @xmath production [ 141 ] via
vector boson fusion. We therefore refrain from a detailed description of
technical aspects that are common to all vector boson fusion processes
considered so far, but refer the interested reader to the aforementioned
references.

The first calculation of the NLO-QCD corrections to @xmath production
via VBF in the context of the Standard Model, including decays of the
@xmath -boson pair into four leptons or two leptons plus two neutrinos,
has been presented in Reference [ 136 ] and is publicly available in the
context of the VBFNLO package [ 137 ] . We adapted the matrix elements
of that calculation to the format required by the POWHEG-BOX , and
additionally computed the scattering amplitudes for the semi-leptonic
decay modes of the @xmath bosons, i.e. decay modes where one @xmath
-boson decays leptonically and the other hadronically.

In addition to that we account for physics beyond the Standard Model in
the weak gauge boson sector by means of an effective field theory
approach [ 142 ] with operators of dimension six that affect triple and
quartic gauge boson vertices, but do not change the QCD structure of the
Standard Model. Details of the operators entering the Lagrangian are
given later. Notice that because decays are not affected by QCD
corrections, it is enough to have an LO implementation of the modified
decay currents even at NLO in QCD. We could therefore adapt the LO
implementation of the effective field theory in M adGraph 5 [ 143 ] for
the modelling of the modified electroweak building blocks needed for
@xmath .

In either model, at order @xmath electroweak @xmath production
predominantly proceeds via the scattering of two (anti-)quarks mediated
by weak-boson exchange in the @xmath -channel. The external @xmath
bosons that in turn decay into a pair of leptons, neutrinos, or quarks
can be emitted from either of the two fermion lines, or stem from vector
boson scattering sub-amplitudes of the type @xmath (with @xmath
generically denoting a photon, a @xmath , or a @xmath boson). In order
to maintain electroweak gauge invariance, contributions with one or two
photons instead of the @xmath bosons and diagrams for single- and
non-resonant four-fermion production in association with two jets have
to be considered as well. A representative set of diagrams is depicted
in Figure 3.2 .

For partonic subprocesses with quarks of identical flavour, in addition
to the aforementioned @xmath -channel exchange diagrams, @xmath -channel
diagrams arise that are taken fully into account. However, the
interference of @xmath -channel with @xmath -channel contributions is
neglected. We furthermore disregard contributions induced by the
exchange of a weak boson in the @xmath -channel. This gauge-invariant
subset of diagrams is strongly suppressed in the phase-space regions
that are explored experimentally in vector boson fusion searches,
c.f. Reference [ 144 ] for a tree-level assessment of the numerical
impact these contributions have in a realistic setup for the related
case of electroweak @xmath production at the LHC.

For @xmath final states we neglect the interference with @xmath
production, when the @xmath bosons decay into the same final state. In
the case of QCD production, this interference has been shown to be very
small [ 145 ] . In the semi-leptonic decay modes, interference effects
between the scattering quarks and the decay quarks are neglected.

For simplicity, we will refer to the electroweak production processes
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath within the aforementioned approximations as
@xmath production via VBF in the fully leptonic, leptonic-invisible and
semi-leptonic decay modes, respectively, even though we always include
contributions from off-resonant diagrams that do not arise from a @xmath
intermediate state.

In the case of semi-leptonic decay modes we do not explicitly take into
account QCD corrections to the hadronic decays of the @xmath bosons, or
QCD corrections that connect the @xmath production with the @xmath decay
processes. While the latter corrections are expected to be very small,
corrections to the hadronic @xmath decay are well-described by
Monte-Carlo programs that are interfaced to our NLO-QCD calculation. In
fact their decay machinery is tuned to reproduce collider data.

We note that, similarly to the cases of electroweak @xmath and @xmath
production, the POWHEG-BOX requires a prescription for dealing with
singularities emerging in the Born cross section for @xmath via VBF. One
such type of singularities stems from collinear @xmath configurations
that emerge when a photon of low virtuality is exchanged in the @xmath
-channel. Phenomenologically, such contributions are irrelevant, as they
are entirely removed once VBF-specific selection cuts are applied on the
@xmath cross section that require the two partons of the underlying Born
configuration to exhibit sufficient transverse momentum to be identified
as tagging jets. We therefore drop this type of contributions already at
generation level, by removing all events with an exchange boson in the
@xmath -channel with a virtuality smaller than @xmath . To improve the
efficiency of the phase-space integration, we use a Born-suppression
factor @xmath that dampens the phase-space integrand whenever a singular
configuration is approached [ 146 ] . This is ensured by the choice

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath denote the transverse momenta of the two final-state
partons of the underlying Born configuration, and @xmath is a cutoff
parameter that we set to @xmath .

In VBF @xmath production processes, an additional type of singular
configurations is caused by diagrams with a quasi on-shell photon that
decays into a fermion pair, @xmath . Such contributions can easily be
identified by a small value of the invariant mass @xmath of the decay
system. In our simulations, we remove all configurations with @xmath ,
where we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

unless explicitly stated otherwise.

In the presence of a light Higgs boson, the VBF @xmath cross section
receives contributions from two regions of phase space with very
different kinematic properties. Therefore it is useful to split the
phase space into two separate regions, around and away from the Higgs
resonance. The full result is then obtained by adding the results of the
two separate contributions [ 140 ] .

##### 3.2.2 Phenomenological Results

We will concentrate in the following on the fully charged leptonic decay
mode, which has a smaller branching fraction than the semi-leptonic (
@xmath ) or the leptonic-invisible ( @xmath ) decay modes, but is
experimentally cleaner. Because of the Higgs and @xmath resonances,
events tend to have either four leptons with an invariant mass close to
the Higgs mass, or two pairs of leptons with an invariant mass close to
the mass of the @xmath boson each. Typically, according to whether one
is interested in studying Higgs production with subsequent @xmath decays
or VBF @xmath production in the continuum one applies different
invariant mass cuts that suppress one of the two contributions, and
leave the other almost unchanged. Continuum VBF @xmath production is a
rare SM process that is well-suited to probe triple but also quartic
gauge boson couplings. In this section we present few sample results
obtained with our POWHEG-BOX implementation, both in the pure SM and
involving anomalous couplings that in our framework arise from an
effective Lagrangian.

Let us stress here that the @xmath mode, although plagued by large QCD
backgrounds, could in principle be studied with an analysis that uses
boosted techniques and jet-substructure (see e.g. Reference [ 147 ] ),
along the lines of what was done in Reference [ 141 ] . However, because
of the small production cross sections for VBF @xmath , considering the
boosted regime where only a tiny part of the inclusive cross section
survives is pointless at the LHC.

###### 3.2.2.1 Standard Model Results

With Run II already well under its way, and anticipating an energy
upgrade of the LHC, we consider proton-proton collisions at a
centre-of-mass energy of @xmath . We use the NLO-QCD set of the MSTW2008
parametrisation [ 148 ] for the parton distribution functions of the
proton, as implemented in the LHAPDF library [ 149 ] . Jets are defined
according to the anti- @xmath algorithm [ 150 , 75 ] with @xmath ,
making use of the FASTJET package [ 76 ] . Electroweak input parameters
are set according to known experimental values and tree-level
electroweak relations. As input we use the mass of the @xmath boson,
@xmath , the mass of the @xmath boson, @xmath , and the Fermi constant,
@xmath . For the widths of the weak bosons we use @xmath and @xmath .
The width of the Higgs boson is set to @xmath which corresponds to
@xmath . Factorisation and renormalisation scales are set to @xmath
throughout, unless specified otherwise.

Here, we present numerical results for VBF @xmath production at the LHC
in the fully leptonic decay mode. Our analysis requires each lepton pair
to have an invariant mass close to @xmath . This completely excludes any
contamination from a Higgs boson consistent with the one observed by the
ATLAS and CMS collaborations at @xmath [ 8 , 9 ] , which results in
@xmath decays with at least one off-shell gauge boson. Our
phenomenological study is inspired by [ 151 ] . In the following, we
will always consider decays to @xmath . Neglecting same-type lepton
interference effects, the cross-section for @xmath bosons decaying to
any combination of electrons and muons is twice as large. In Section
3.2.2.1 all results are quoted for the @xmath decay mode only, whereas
the results in Section 3.2.2.2 have been obtained for the @xmath decay
mode and then multiplied by two to account for any decay into electrons
or muons, while neglecting same-type lepton interference effects.
