This thesis constitutes a first attempt to derive aspects of standard
model particle physics from little more than an algebra. Here, we argue
that physical concepts such as particles, causality, and irreversible
time may result from the algebra acting on itself.

We then focus on a special case by considering the algebra @xmath , the
tensor product of the only four normed division algebras over the real
numbers. Using nothing more than @xmath acting on itself, we set out to
find standard model particle representations: a task which occupies the
remainder of this text.

From the @xmath portion of the algebra, we find generalized ideals, and
show that they describe concisely all of the Lorentz representations of
the standard model.

From just the @xmath portion of the algebra, we find minimal left
ideals, and show that they mirror the behaviour of a generation of
quarks and leptons under @xmath and @xmath . These unbroken symmetries,
@xmath and @xmath , appear uniquely in this model as particular
symmetries of the algebraâ€™s ladder operators. Electric charge, here, is
seen to be simply a number operator for the system.

We then combine the @xmath and @xmath portions of @xmath , and focus on
a leptonic subspace, so as to demonstrate a rudimentary electroweak
model. Here, the underlying ladder operators are found to have a
symmetry generated uniquely by @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, we find
that this model yields a straightforward explanation as to why @xmath
acts only on left-handed states.

We then make progress towards a three-generation model. The action of
@xmath on itself can be seen to generate a 64-complex-dimensional
algebra, wherein we are able to identify two sets of generators for
@xmath . We apply these generators to the rest of the space, and find
that it breaks down into the @xmath representations of exactly three
generations of quarks and leptons. Furthermore, we show that these
three-generation results can be extended, so as to include all 48
fermionic @xmath charges.
