The dark side of the universe is mysterious and its nature is still unknown.
In fact, this poses perhaps as the biggest challenge in the modern cosmology.
The two components of the dark sector (dark matter and dark energy) correspond
today to around ninety five percent of the universe. The simplest dark energy
candidate is a cosmological constant. However, this attempt presents a huge
discrepancy of 120 orders of magnitude between the theoretical prediction and
the observed data. Such a huge disparity motivates physicists to look into a
more sophisticated models. This can be done either looking for a deeper
understanding of where the cosmological constant comes from, if one wants to
derive it from first principles, or considering other possibilities for
accelerated expansion, such as modifications of general relativity, additional
matter fields and so on. Still regarding a dynamical dark energy, there may
exist a possibility of interaction between dark energy and dark matter, since
their densities are comparable and, depending on the coupling used, the
interaction can also alleviate the issue of why dark energy and matter
densities are of the same order today. Phenomenological models have been widely
explored in the literature. On the other hand, field theory models that aim a
consistent description of the dark energy/dark matter interaction are still
few. In this thesis, we explore either a scalar or a vector field as a dark
energy candidate in several different approaches, taking into account a
possible interaction between the two components of the dark sector. This thesis
is based on the following papers: 1611.00428, 1605.03550, 1509.04980,
1508.07248, 1507.00902 and 1505.03243. The author also collaborated in the
works 1607.03506 and 1605.05264.