The aim of this thesis is to investigate the absence of pulses in pulsar, a
phenomena also know as pulsar nulling. The motivation for the work done in
thesis is listed in Chapter 2. A detailed discussion on the previous work
carried out to investigate pulsar nulling phenomena is also included in Chapter
2. Chapter 3 discusses in details all the observations carried out for the
thesis. In Chapter 4, details regarding the nulling behaviour of various
pulsars are listed. Chapter 4 highlights the fact that nulling is
unpredictable. Chapter 5 presents a comparison between two pulsars with high
NFs. It is shown that both the pulsars exhibit similar bursting behaviour, but
strikingly different quasi-periodicities and emission properties. Chapter 6
discusses the details regarding the simultaneous observations of two nulling
pulsars at four different frequencies. These observations suggest that nulling
is a frequency independent phenomena simultaneous occuring over a decade of
frequency. Chapter 7 summaries the results obtained in three different studies
along with their implications. The future work to extend the work carried out
in the thesis is also listed in Chapter 7. The main conclusions of the thesis
are as follow, (1) NF is not an ideal parameter to quantify nulling behaviour,
confirmed firmly by comparing low NF pulsars as well as high NF pulsars, (2)
Nulling occurs randomly with unpredictable length durations.
Quasi-periodicities seen in the high NF pulsars can also be explained by the
Markov models with a forcing function, (3) Nulling is an extreme form of
mode-changing phenomena which occurs on a global magnetospheric scale, (4)
Geometric reasons are less favoured as a likely cause of nulling phenomena due
to the randomness and broadband behaviour reported in this thesis.