This thesis presents the results of the experimental study performed on
spin qubits realized in gate-defined gallium arsenide quantum dots, with
the focus on noise suppression and long-distance coupling.

First, we show that the susceptibility to charge noise can be reduced by
reducing the gradient of the qubit splitting with respect to gate
voltages. We show that for singlet-triplet and resonant exchange qubit
this can be achieved by operating a quantum dot array in a highly
symmetric configuration. The symmetrization approach results in a
factor-of-six improvement of the double dot singlet-triplet exchange
oscillations quality factor while the dephasing times for the
three-electron resonant exchange qubit are marginally longer.

Second, we present the study of the Overhauser field noise arising due
to interaction with the nuclear spin bath. We show that the Overhauser
field noise conforms to classical spin diffusion model in range from
1 mHz to 1 kHz. Meanwhile the megahertz-scale noise spectrum is focused
in three narrow bands related to relative Larmor precession of the three
nuclear species. Application of the dynamical decoupling sequence
designed to notch-filter the narrowband noise enables us to put the
highest, up to date, lower bound on the electron spin coherence time in
gallium arsenide: 870 @xmath s.

Later, we study the perspectives of exploiting a multielectron quantum
dot as a mediator of the exchange interaction. We investigate
interaction between a single spin and the multelectron quantum dot in
nine different charge occupancies and identify ground state spin in all
cases. For even-occupied spin-1/2 multielectron quantum dot a variation
of the gate voltage by a few milivolts in the vicinity of the charge
transition leads to sign change of the exchange interaction with a
single neighboring electron.

Finally, we demonstrate the exchange coupling between distant electrons
mediated by the even-occupied spin-0 multielectron quantum dot. The
exchange interaction strength can be controlled up to several gigahertz
frequencies. Small level spacing and many body effects give raise to the
positions in the gate voltage space that are characterized by decreased
susceptibility to charge noise which can be used to implement high
fidelity, long-range two-qubit gates.
