The present work, which has been discussed in the following chapters, is
devoted to the reconstruction of the dark energy models using diverse
observational data sets. The parametric approach has been adopted for
the reconstruction of cosmological models. The reconstruction of
kinematical quantities and the possibility of interaction between dark
energy and dark matter has also been emphasised. In first chapter, a
brief introduction to cosmology has been presented. In the second
chapter, a reconstruction of the dark energy equation of state parameter
for a quintessence scalar field model has been discussed. The nature of
evolution of the relevant cosmological parameters and the quintessence
potential has also been studied for the reconstructed model. In the
third chapter, a parametric reconstruction of the effective or total
equation of state has been discussed. The reconstructed model mimics the
@xmath CDM model for a particular value of the model parameter, thus the
reconstruction indicates the consistency or deviation form @xmath CDM. A
comparative study of the reconstructed model and the @xmath CDM model
has been done by representing both the models on the same parameter
space. It has been shown that the reconstructed model ensures tighter
constraints on the kinematic quantities like the deceleration parameter
and the jerk parameter. In the fourth chapter, a kinematic approach in
the reconstruction of dark energy model through the parametrization of
the cosmological jerk parameter has been discussed. Four different
parametric form of the jerk parameter have been studied. The evolution
of the deceleration parameter, dark energy equation of state and also
the nature of associated quintessence potential have been studied for
these models. The fifth chapter is also about a kinematic approach to
the reconstruction of dark energy. The reconstruction has been done with
an assumption that the jerk parameter is a very slowly varying function.
This model invokes the possibility of interaction between dark matter
and the dark energy. The interaction term has also been reconstructed
and it shows that the possibility of interaction is high in the past,
but it is very small at the present time. The sixth chapter is devoted
to the reconstruction of the interaction rate in holographic dark energy
model. The interaction rate has been reconstructed for three different
parametrization of the deceleration parameter. The evolution of the
interaction rate, the nature of dark energy equation of state parameter
etc. have been studied. The cosmic coincidence problem has also been
addressed in the context of holographic dark energy. Finally, chapter
seven contains the concluding remarks and relevant discussions regarding
the overall work presented in the thesis.
