The introduction of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes into the population
has recently been proposed as an alternative strategy against dengue.
Although laboratory experiments have shown that the Wolbachia bacterium
can reduce the levels of dengue virus in mosquitoes, it is also
important to assess the performance of Wolbachia in reducing the
incidence of dengue in human populations.

In this thesis, deterministic mathematical models of human and mosquito
populations in which either one or two dengue serotypes circulate are
developed. We adapt these models to enable the investigation of dengue
disease dynamics in the absence and presence of Wolbachia in order to
assess the performance of Wolbachia as a strategy to reduce human dengue
incidence.

When studying the situation in which a single dengue serotype is present
in the population, we consider scenarios where dengue is introduced into
the human population once and multiple times. We find that when
mosquitoes infected with the Wolbachia strain WMel , which reduces the
mosquito lifespan by at most 10%, are released into the population, the
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes persist. The ranges of the reproductive
and death rates for Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes which allow
mosquitoes carrying Wolbachia to persist in competition with non-
Wolbachia carrying mosquitoes are also found. Furthermore, the
transmission probability, the biting rate and the average death rate are
the parameters exerting the most influence on the cumulative number of
infectious individuals in the population. An analysis of the basic
reproduction number, @xmath , for the model considering the absence and
presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes shows that the presence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes reduces the number of days for which
@xmath . When multiple introductions of dengue are considered, it is
found that the presence of Wolbachia reduces the potential lengths of
the seasons in which epidemics are likely to occur. The strength of
seasonality also affects the reduction in dengue incidence caused by the
introduction of Wolbachia : if seasonality is strong, then there are
some seasons when mosquitoes have longer life spans and more individuals
are infected in each outbreak so that Wolbachia becomes less effective
in reducing dengue incidence.

Our two-serotype dengue models are used to investigate dengue serotypes
with symmetric and asymmetric characteristics. For serotypes with
symmetric characteristics, we investigate the performance of Wolbachia
in reducing dengue incidence under different disease introduction
scenarios, and find that a difference in the disease introduction
scenario does not affect the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
incidence. Furthermore, the transmission probability is a more
influential parameter regulating dengue dynamics than antibody-dependent
enhancement. When dengue serotype characteristics differ (asymmetry),
the more transmissible dengue serotype will dominate the primary
infection, while the other serotype will dominate the secondary
infections. The number of secondary infections caused by the more
transmissible serotype can still be reduced by the introduction of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, but the proportional reduction in dengue
cases is not as high.

Our findings suggest that Wolbachia intervention can be used as an
effective alternative strategy against dengue. Wolbachia should reduce
the number of primary dengue cases in areas with moderate transmission
levels, and can provide an even greater reduction in the number of
secondary cases. Given the higher risk of severe outcomes in secondary
cases, Wolbachia has great potential for improving public health.
