## Part I Introduction

### Chapter 1 Integrability in the AdS/CFT correspondence

For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,
Carry them here and there, jumping o’er times,
Turning th’ accomplishment of many years
Into an hour-glass: for the which supply,
Admit me chorus to this history;
Who prologue-like your humble patience pray,
Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.

– William Shakespeare, Henry V

#### 1.1 The AdS/CFT conjecture

Since the AdS/CFT correspondence was conjectured [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] there has
been a huge development in this field. The basic idea of this conjecture
is that a (type IIB super)string theory where the strings propagate on
an @xmath background is partnered with a particular Conformal Field
Theory (CFT) defined at the (conformal) boundary (of the @xmath space),
being this boundary flat @xmath -dimensional spacetime while the @xmath
part becomes a symmetry of the theory.

The particular CFT involved in this duality is @xmath Super Yang-Mills
(SYM) with color group @xmath in four dimensionsal flat space. This
theory is a gauge theory whose field content is one vector multiplet in
the adjoint representation of @xmath . As we have @xmath supersymmetry
we can organize the vector multiplet into bosons and fermions that
transform in different representations of an @xmath symmetry called
R-symmetry . Therefore the vector multiplet can be divided into a vector
gauge field @xmath that transform as a scalar under said R-symmetry,
four Weyl spinors @xmath that transform as a vector and six real scalars
@xmath that transform as the second rank complex self dual
representation. For some computations it is more interesting to organize
it in one vector multiplet and three chiral multiplets of @xmath
supersymmetry or one vector multiplet and one chiral multiplet of @xmath
supersymmetry [ 4 ] . Supersymmetry also completely fixes the Lagrangian
of the theory to

  -- -- -- ---------
           (1.1.1)
  -- -- -- ---------

where the covariant derivative is defined as @xmath and Tr is a trace
over the color indices. It can be checked that the matter content of
this theory makes the one-loop @xmath -funcion of the theory vanishes by
using the well known formula for the beta functions of Yang-Mills
theories [ 5 ] . This computation can be done for higher loops, giving a
vanishing of the @xmath -funcion for two and three-loop [ 6 , 7 , 8 ] .
Even more, using light-cone gauge it was argued that the @xmath
-function should be zero to all loops [ 9 , 10 ] , making it a quantum
theory with exact conformal symmetry. The generating functional of
correlation functions involving the local operator @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Type IIB string theory is a chiral superstring theory in 10 dimensions
with @xmath supersymmetry. There is no manifestly Lorentz-invariant
action for this theory [ 11 ] , but one can write down the equations of
motion, and the symmetries and transformation rules. Together with type
IIA string, which is related with this one by T-duality, they are the
two string theories with two supersymmetries in ten dimensions. In
addition to the flat ten-dimensional Minkowski space, type IIB
supergravity admits another maximally supersymmetric solution which is
product of the five-dimensional Anti-de-Sitter space @xmath and the
five-sphere @xmath . This solution is supported by a self-dual
Ramond-Ramond five-form flux, whose presence precludes the usage of the
standard Neveu-Schwarz-Ramond approach in a straightforward way to build
up the action. This will make us look for alternative approaches.

The AdS/CFT duality relates the string partition function with sources
@xmath for the string vertex operators fixed to value @xmath at the
boundary of the AdS space to the CFT partition function with sources
@xmath for local operators (operators composed from the fundamental
fields all residing at a common point in spacetime)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One of the cornerstones of the AdS/CFT correspondence is the so-called
Planar Limit , that is, the limit where the range of the gauge group
@xmath goes to infinity. This limit was first described in [ 12 ] and so
it is also sometimes called ’t Hooft Limit . The idea behind it is that
we can classify Feynmann diagrams of an @xmath gauge theory by their
topology, so the dependence of the diagrams on the Yang-Mills coupling
constant @xmath and the number of colors @xmath is given by @xmath where
@xmath is the number of propagators, @xmath the number of vertices,
@xmath the number of quark loops and @xmath the number of faces, which
is equal to the sum of quark ¹ ¹ 1 By quark here we mean matter in the
fundamental representation. Matter in other representations has to be
treated in a different way. loops @xmath and index loops @xmath . Using
Euler’s Theorem @xmath , where @xmath is the Euler characteristic and
@xmath counts the number of “holes” of the surfaces ( @xmath for the
sphere, @xmath for the torus, etc), the prefactor can be rewritten as
@xmath . As a consequence, diagrams with no quark loops and planar
topology, that is diagrams with @xmath or without self-intersections,
dominate at large @xmath . The immediate corolary is that a quarkless
theory, which means @xmath for every diagram, with a large number of
colors it is more naturally described as a perturbation theory in the
combination @xmath , called ’t Hooft coupling constant , than in the
usual Yang-Mills coupling constant @xmath . This can be seen as the
gauge theory turning into surfaces, which remind of the genus expansion
in string theory generated by joining and splitting of string. This
suggest a possible relationship between both, in which gauge theory
diagrams would triangulate the worldsheet of an effective string [ 13 ]
. The AdS/CFT correspondence is a concrete realization of this
connection.

We can classify different versions of the AdS/CFT duality depending on
the range of validity of it:

-   The weakest version: the duality is only valid in the planar limit
    with @xmath in the CFT side and in the supergravity approximation
    (the limit where the string coupling constant @xmath ) of the string
    theory with @xmath restriction ² ² 2 This restriction is a
    consequence of the coupling constants being related as @xmath
    const., where the precise constant depends on the normalization of
    the actions. The two main choices are 1, which is used for example
    in [ 14 ] , and @xmath , which can be found in [ 15 ] . .

-   A stronger version will be to move away from the low energy limit,
    that is, to include @xmath corrections to the string theory, but
    remaining in the @xmath limit. In the gauge theory this corresponds
    to taking into account all @xmath corrections but still in the
    planar limit.

-   The strongest version would be a duality between the two full
    theories, that is, for any values of @xmath and @xmath (or @xmath
    and @xmath ).

As @xmath is the natural expansion parameter of the SYM theory, the
weakest AdS/CFT correspondence will relate the weak-coupling limit of
the string theory with the strongly coupled limit of the SYM theory. In
the same way, we can examine the weak-coupling limit of the SYM theory,
but we will find that the dual string theory will be a strongly coupled
one. This makes it a strong/weak duality . The different regimes of the
theories are represented in Figure 1.1 : Classical gauge theory , where
we work at weak ’t Hooft coupling (or strong @xmath ) @xmath and general
value of the number of colors @xmath ; the planar limit where we perform
calculations in the limit @xmath ; and the free classical strings limit
, where we work around the point @xmath and @xmath . In the classical
gauge theory limit we can obtain more accurate estimations by the usual
procedure of pertubative gauge theory. In the planar limit we can do the
same by taking non-planar Feynman graphs into account. In the classical
strings limit we can perform two different expansions, an expansion in
@xmath by adding quantum corrections to the worldsheet sigma model, or
an expansion in @xmath by adding handles to the string worldsheet.

Solving the theory requires to compute all its observables. For a gauge
theory there are the scaling dimensions (the sum of the constituents
dimensions plus quantum corrections from interactions between them),
scattering amplitudes, structure constants, expectations values of
Wilson loops, etc. One of the most powerful tools to perform these
computations is the use of symmetries of the theory. For example,
conformal invariance heavily restricts the functional form of
correlation functions. In the case of the two-point functions it is
restricted to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is completely fixed up to two constants: the scaling dimension
@xmath , which is characterized by how the operator transforms under a
dilatation, and the normalization @xmath , which can be set to one in
general. In a similar way the three-point function can be constrained

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are called structure constants . Again the
correlation function is completely constrained up to the structure
constants and the scaling dimensions. However conformal invariance is
not enough to completely constrain the functional form of the four-point
functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an arbitrary function. The quantities @xmath and @xmath
are usually refereed in the literature as conformal cross-ratios
(sometimes they are also referred as double ratios, anharmonic ratios or
simply as ratios).

Another way to simplify our computation of observables is to use the
Operator Product Expansion (OPE). The idea behind this expansion is
that, in the limit of the positions of two operator insertions
approaching one another, the product of those two operators can be
approximated as a series of local operators ³ ³ 3 Actually the operator
in the right hand side can be inserted in any point on the line @xmath ,
@xmath . Although different points result in a different choices of the
structure constants @xmath , they depend only on the difference @xmath
regardless of this choice. The choice of this insertion point depends on
the author. For example [ 16 ] chooses @xmath while [ 17 ] chooses
@xmath , being this last one the most common choice in string theory
textbooks and articles.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath functions are also called structure constants and, although
they are not the same as the @xmath constants from the three-point
functions, they are related. Note that this is an operator statement,
meaning that it only holds inside a general expectation value as long as
the distance between @xmath and @xmath is small compared with the
distance to any other operator. This expansion can be done to arbitrary
accuracy and within a conformal field theory, like @xmath SYM, the
expression is not asymptotic but exact at finite separation. Performing
several expansions we can write all correlation functions involving
@xmath local operators in terms of correlation functions involving only
two or three operators ⁴ ⁴ 4 This is not completely true if we are
working on the planar limit of the theory, as higher-point functions of
single trace operators in general need information about multi-trace
operators even in this limit. However there are certain limits where
these contributions are suppressed and the OPE expansion can be
performed only with single trace operators. We refer to [ 18 ] for a
complete discussion. .

Another very powerful method that has been widely used in the recent
years and allow us to perform exact computations of some particular
quantities in supersymmetric field theories is the supersymmetric
localization . This method was already known in the context of
cohomology theory and topological field theories (see the
Duistermaat-Heckman [ 19 ] and Atiyah-Bott-Berline-Vergne [ 20 , 21 ]
formulae) but it was the computation of partition functions on @xmath
supersymmetric theories made Pestun [ 22 ] what brought the current
attention to this method. The main idea is the following: If our action
is invariant under a fermionic symmetry generated by the supercharge
@xmath , we can try to construct a functional @xmath such that @xmath is
@xmath invariant ( @xmath ) and has a definite positive bosonic part. If
we add this extra @xmath term to the partition function in the following
way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can prove that such partition function is independent of the
parameter @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

if we assume that the measure are @xmath -invariant, that is, the
fermionic symmetric is not anomalous. This implies that vacuum
expectation values of operators depend only on the @xmath -cohomology of
the operator and they are independent of the inclusion of the extra
@xmath term. Therefore, we can perform all our computations in the large
@xmath limit, where the path integral is given by the saddle point
approximation @xmath , as other configurations are going to be
suppressed because @xmath is definite positive. Keeping up to quadratic
expansion around this fixed point we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

With proper treatment if bosonic zero modes are present. And, because
the partition function is independent of @xmath , this saddle point
approximation has to become exact .

In this thesis we mostly will make use of a third tool at our disposal,
the integrability of both the classical string theory and the @xmath SYM
gauge theory, chose implications are going to be explained in the
following two sections.

#### 1.2 Integrability on the CFT side

In [ 23 ] Minahan and Zarembo showed that the @xmath SYM one-loop
dilatation operator for scalar operators in the planar limit is
isomorphic to the Hamiltonian of an @xmath spin chain. The main idea
behind this isomorphism comes from writing the operators in a basis of
single trace operators made of products of scalar fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a generic scalar @xmath . Therefore each operator @xmath
is associated with an @xmath tensor with @xmath indices @xmath . These
tensors form a linear space @xmath with @xmath , which can be understood
as a lattice with @xmath sites whose ends are identified and each
lattice site host a six-dimensional real vector. Therefore it can be
regarded as the Hilbert space of a spin system.

Composite operators have to be renormalized due to the emergence of UV
divergences in the loop integrals of Feynman diagrams. Renormalized
operators in general are linear combinations of bare operators, so we
can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the renormalization factor @xmath depends on the UV cutoff @xmath
and on the ’t Hooft coupling @xmath in the large @xmath limit. By
standard arguments, the matrix of anomalous dimensions can be computed
as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whose eigenvalues determine the anomalous dimensions of the
(multiplicatively renormalizable) operators on our theory. After
computing and adding the only three possible kinds of diagrams that
contribute at one-loop in the planar limit ⁵ ⁵ 5 As we commented above,
the non-planar graphs are suppressed by a factor of @xmath . However we
also need the length of the operator @xmath to be @xmath to suppress the
non-planar contributions, as there are @xmath tree level diagrams of
which only @xmath are planar. (gluon exchange, @xmath interaction and
self-energy corrections) the renormalization factor reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.4)
              @xmath      (1.2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for each link of the lattice. The total @xmath factor is the product
over all links. The operator @xmath is called trace operator and the
operator @xmath is called permutation operator . They act as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are orthonormal unit vectors in @xmath . With the
expression for the renormalization factor we can compute the matrix of
anomalous dimensions

  -- -- -- ---------
           (1.2.8)
  -- -- -- ---------

which can be interpreted as the local Hamiltonian of an @xmath spin
chain. Hence the isomorphism of states can be generalized to an
isomorphism between the anomalous dimensions and the spectrum. It is
important to point out that this Hamiltonian was known to be integrable
[ 24 , 25 ] , so it can be diagonalized using the Bethe Ansatz technique
(either the coordinate or the algebraic version, both ansätze will be
reviewed in chapter 5 ).

The isomorphism between the dilatation operator and a Hamiltonian was
later expanded to the full @xmath superconformal symmetry at one-loop [
26 , 27 ] . It was also proven to be generalizable to two-loops in the
planar limit [ 28 ] , although non-planar corrections were proven to be
non-integrable. This last development prompted people to think about the
existence of a Hamiltonian that captures the full non-perturbative
planar structure of the dilatation operator. A proposal for the @xmath
sector appeared [ 29 ] based on the integrability of the theory, field
theory considerations and comparisons with string theory results. This
proposal together with similar arguments for the @xmath and @xmath
sectors lead to a more general hypothesis for the full @xmath spin chain
describing planar @xmath Super Yang-Mills Theory (asymptotically) to
arbitrary loop order was proposed in [ 30 ] . However this description
breaks down at some point due to finite size corrections ⁶ ⁶ 6 The spin
chain Hamiltonian associated to @xmath SYM at @xmath -loops has
interactions involving, at most, up to the @xmath nearest neighbour.
Hence, the description breaks down when the loop order is greater than
the length of the spin chain, and finite size or wrapping corrections
have to be incorporated. Note that this also imply that the Hamiltonian
associated to the dilatation operator beyond one-loop has long-range
interactions. so more sophisticated machinery were developed. The
Y-system [ 31 , 32 ] , the Thermodynamical Bethe ansatz [ 33 , 34 , 35 ]
, and the Quantum Spectral Curve [ 36 ] are examples of upgrades of the
usual Bethe ansätze that are able to deal with long-range interactions,
wrapping effects, or both. In part III of this thesis we are going to
make an extensive use of these isomorphisms.

#### 1.3 Integrability on the string theory side

As the action for the @xmath superstring has a complicated structure,
people have tried to bypass this difficulty by considering special
limits involving other parameters apart from the ’t Hooft coupling
@xmath to simplify computations. The two main approaches are

-   The BMN limit: in [ 37 ] Berenstein, Maldacena and Nastase
    considered the case of near-BPS states, which are related to near
    point-like strings rotating along the great circle of @xmath with
    angular momentum @xmath . In the limit @xmath but @xmath finite one
    obtain a string theory in the pp-wave background and it is possible
    to compute the dispersion relation

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.3.1)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath is the AdS radius.

    The most important part of this limit is the possibility to identify
    the unique state with zero light-cone Hamiltonian with the chiral
    primary operator of @xmath SYM,

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.3.2)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath is a complex scalar. The energy of the state can be
    identified with the conformal dimension of the operator, as both are
    protected from corrections.

    Luckily the identification does not end with the ground state. If we
    move to the case of modes with @xmath , on the string theory side
    new states can be constructed by applying the zero momentum
    oscillators @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath , to the light-cone
    vacuum (because the total light-cone energy is equal to the total
    number of oscillator that are acting, as they are massive modes),
    while on the field theory side we have the possibility of adding
    four possible scalars (the scalars that do not form the complex
    scalar @xmath ), the four possible @xmath derivatives and the eight
    components with @xmath of the sixteen component gaugino. As we have
    the same number of possibilities in both sides it is very tempting
    to identify both of them, but to do that we have to prove that
    adding more fields is an operation equivalent to adding excitations
    and that the dispersion relation is equal to the conformal
    dimensions.

    The first part is easily proven, as each time we act with a rotation
    of @xmath that does not commute with the @xmath symmetry singled out
    by the @xmath operator we modify the chiral primary into

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.3.3)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath is a scalar that does not form part of @xmath and the
    equality comes from the cyclicity of the trace. If we apply another
    time a rotation of the same kind we can change the @xmath operators
    that were left unchanged by the first rotation or we can apply it to
    the same operator as the first rotation. However, this second case
    is subleading in a @xmath expansion and can be neglected in the
    large @xmath limit we are considering. A similar scenario can be
    proven for other transformations.

    The second part is a little bit more tricky to prove. We can compute
    the one-loop correction to the dilatation operator (as described in
    the previous section) and compare it with the expansion of the BMN
    dispersion relation @xmath , which they agree when we write @xmath
    and identify @xmath with the momentum of the excitations. The
    details of the computation can be found in [ 37 ] , together with a
    very incomplete Hamiltonian realization of the dilatation operator
    that, although it reproduces the full BMN dispersion relation,
    leaves out many diagrams and operators.

    After stating these two-points we can say that the “string of @xmath
    operators” becomes the physical string and a correspondence between
    the energies of the string states and scaling dimensions of @xmath
    SYM can be established in the near-BPS limit.

-   The GKP string: the opposite case is to investigate strings far from
    the BPS states. A very important result was found in [ 38 ] by
    Gubser, Klebanov and Polyakov, where they considered strings with
    large spin in @xmath . On one hand, they found that the dispersion
    relation of these kind of string can be written as

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.3.4)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath . On the other hand, they found that the conformal
    dimension of twist two operators (operators formed by a high number
    of derivatives and two scalars) have the same expression but with
    @xmath . As the expression are the same up to the @xmath function,
    they might represent different asymptotics of the same function.
    This means that we can identify the GKP strings with twist two
    operators.

These results helped to present a map between classical string solutions
and Riemann surfaces (finite gap equations) [ 39 ] . The structure of
cuts connecting the sheets composing these Riemann surfaces bear some
resemblance with the strings of solutions of the Bethe equations in the
scaling limit, which lead to the proposal of a quantum string Bethe
ansatz in [ 40 ] . However it was shown a discrepancy between the BMN
scaling and four-loop perturbation theory in the field theory side
(while integrability persists) [ 41 ] . This discrepancy was later
explained by using the freedom of adding an scalar phase (dressing
phase) to the S-matrix.

Similar expansions can be expected for other semiclassical string
states. However we will focus our attention into the following case:
some particular multispin string states (with at least one large angular
momentum in @xmath ) have regular expansion in @xmath while the quantum
superstring sigma model corrections are suppressed in the limit @xmath
with @xmath constant. The first step to test the non-BPS sector of
AdS/CFT was made with the construction of solutions with one spin @xmath
and one angular momentum @xmath [ 42 ] , which can be obtained by
boosting the center of mass of the string rotating in @xmath along a
circle of @xmath . Solutions with two and three angular momenta were
constructed in [ 43 ] and [ 44 ] respectively. The possibility to test
the non-BPS sector of AdS/CFT by comparing the @xmath limit of the
dispersion relation/conformal dimension was successfully accomplished in
[ 45 , 46 , 47 ] among others. In part II of this thesis we are going to
focus mainly in these kind of string states.

In addition, the world-sheet sigma model on @xmath background supported
by a self-dual Ramond-Ramond five-form flux was proven to be classically
integrable by the explicit construction of its Lax connection [ 48 , 49
, 50 ] . Later the exact @xmath -matrix for the world-sheet excitations
of this theory was found in [ 51 ] using that, in the uniform light-cone
gauge, the symmetry breaks to @xmath and can be centrally extended by
relaxing the level-matching condition ⁷ ⁷ 7 We have to relax the
level-matching condition because, although a multiparticle state would
fulfil it, arbitrary pairs of particles forming this state do not
necessarily obeys it, therefore the two particle S-matrix needs to be
computed without imposing this condition. . This @xmath -matrix was
shown to be equivalent to the @xmath SYM @xmath -matrix up to some
twists [ 52 ] .

#### 1.4 Outline of the thesis

The rest of this thesis is divided in three well differentiated parts.
The first part of this thesis is devoted to the string theory side of
the duality and it contains chapters two to four. In the second chapter
we will present an introduction to string theory where we explain the
construction of bosonic string theories, both from the Polyakov action
and from the Principal Chiral Model over a symmetric coset, using the
last as an example to introduce the concept of classical integrability
and the toolbox it provides; and the construction of supersymmetric
string theories, mostly using Wess-Zumino-Witten models over
semi-symmetric cosets. In the third chapter we will use one of the tools
provided by integrability to study a deformation of the @xmath
background by the presence of mixed R-R and NS-NS fluxes. In particular
that tool will be the rewriting of the string Lagrangian for spinning
strings in @xmath as a Neumann-Rosochatius model, developed in [ 53 ] .
This will allow us to write analytical expressions for the dispersion
relations for spinning strings as a series in inverse powers of the
total angular momentum. In the fourth chapter we will apply the
rewriting of the string Lagrangian in @xmath as a Neumann-Rosochatius
model to study spinning strings in @xmath -deformed @xmath space.

The second part of this thesis is centered around the spin chain
interpretation of the field theory side of the duality and it constains
chapters five to seven. In the fifth chapter we will present the main
computational tools we are going to use: the Coordinate Bethe Ansatz and
the Algebraic Bethe Ansatz. Some problems arising from the different
normalization of the states obtained from both methods are also
discussed. We will dedicate a section to the Beisert-Dippel-Staudacher
(BDS) spin chain [ 29 ] , an all-loops ansatz for the spin chain picture
of @xmath SYM. We will end this chapter by presenting the bootstrap
program and discussing the Smirnov’s form factors axioms [ 54 ] . The
sixth chapter is focused on the computation of two-point correlation
functions. In particular we will present computations of form factors
using the Algebraic Bethe Ansatz for the Heisenberg spin chain and for
the BDS spin chain. The seventh chapter is instead focused on
three-point functions. We will describe first the Tailoring method [ 55
, 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] and a proposal for an all-loop generalization,
called the hexagon form factor [ 60 ] . We end this chapter presenting
an “algebraic version” of the hexagon proposal that gives an explanation
to some of its characteristics.

We conclude this thesis with the third and last part, presenting a
summary and conclusions and two appendices with some details on our
computations.

## Part II Integrability on the string theory side

### Chapter 2 Strings in coset spaces

The motivation of formal string theory is to understand the truly
fundamental ideas in string theory which is assumed by the practitioners
to be the theory explaining or predicting everything in the Universe
that may be explained or predicted. How may someone say that the
motivation is similar to that of mathematicians?

– Lubos Motls, Formal string theory is physics, not mathematics

In this chapter we will present a review of semi-classical string theory
and classical integrability, together with the tools we are going to use
for the rest of this part. In the first section we introduce the basis
of classical bosonic string theory, mostly following [ 61 ] , and an
alternative construction using the Principal Chiral Model. This second
construction is explained following [ 62 ] for the description of the
models involved and [ 63 ] for the construction of the bosonic string
theory. After explaining the Polyakov action, we will present the
Principal Chiral Model Lagrangian and use it as an example to introduce
the concept of classical integrability and the tools it provides. After
it, the Wess-Zumino-Witten model is presented both as a way to introduce
a @xmath -field for a bosonic string theory and as knowledge needed for
the extension of the method to supersymmetric theories. We end this
section by constructing a bosonic string theory as a Principal Chiral
Model over a symmetric coset. The second section is completely devoted
to the construction of supersymmetric string theories, mostly following
[ 64 ] and [ 65 , 66 ] for some specific parts. First we will review the
concepts of Neveu-Schwarz-Ramond superstring, Green-Schwarz superstring
and the rewriting of the last one as a coset model. Before building the
coset models explicitly we will present the superconformal algebra we
will use for that intent and the idea of semi-symmetric spaces. After
that we will construct a Wess-Zumino-Witten model on a semi-symmetric
space, presenting some of the characteristics like the construction of
the Lax and the @xmath -symmetric. Following [ 64 ] and [ 66 ] we will
do it for the two cases we are interested in: the @xmath and the @xmath
backgrounds.

#### 2.1 Principal Chiral Model

We are going to start this section describing the basic concepts of a
bosonic string theory. However, our end goal is to construct a
supersymmetric string theory, so it will be more useful to write the
theory as a coset sigma model. We will accomplish it at the end of the
section. Before doing that we are going to introduce a @xmath -model
called Principal Chiral Model (PCM) to stablish some characteristics and
to see how integrability arises.

##### 2.1.1 Basic concepts. The Polyakov action

As the action of a relativistic particle can be written as the length of
its trajectory or world-line , we can directly generalize it to write
the action of a relativistic string as the area of the world-sheet swept
out by the string. This action, written using an auxiliary field @xmath
that can be interpreted as a metric for the world-sheet, is called the
Polyakov action ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the two coordinates of the world-sheet (chosen such
that @xmath and @xmath ), @xmath are the embeddings functions, @xmath ,
@xmath is the metric of the space-time and @xmath is a constant called
string tension . This action is not only invariant under
re-parametrization of the world-sheet but also Weyl invariant (invariant
under re-scaling of the auxiliary field). These two invariances allow us
to fix the auxiliary field to @xmath , a choice called conformal gauge ,
but with the equations of motion for this metric as constraints. Both
constrains are related with the energy-momentum tensor of the
world-sheet theory, defined treating the auxiliary field as a metric

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is called Regge slope . In particular, the diffeomorphism
invariance imply that the energy-momentum tensor is conserved, the Weyl
invariance requires it tracelessness @xmath and re-parametrization
invariance requires to fix it to zero @xmath . These last conditions are
usually called Virasoro constrains because, together with
energy-momentum conservation, give rise to an infinite number of
conserved charges which form a Virasoro algebra.

##### 2.1.2 PCM lagrangian and integrability

Let us consider a field @xmath periodic in @xmath that takes values over
a Lie group. We define the Lagrangian density of the PCM as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a metric and @xmath is a coupling constant. There are
some similarities between this Lagrangian and Polyakov action regarding
the treatment of @xmath . This allow us to impose conformal gauge @xmath
without further discussion. The domain of the coordinates is chosen as
@xmath and @xmath , so @xmath .

The Lagrangian is more conveniently written in term of left-invariant
and right-invariant currents ¹ ¹ 1 The definition of left and right
currents depend on the authors. This is because some authors define
left-invariant and right-invariant currents (for example [ 67 ] ) and
other authors define Noether currents corresponding to multiplications
of @xmath by a constant element of the group from the left and from the
right (for example [ 68 ] ). This gives opposite definitions of these
currents and some confusions. Sometimes the definition of the
left-invariant current has an extra global minus sign (for example [ 64
] ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which are, respectively, the Noether currents associated to the
transformation of the field by the right and left multiplication by a
constant element of the group. Note that because @xmath is defined over
a Lie group, the currents are defined over the corresponding Lie
algebra. The Lagrangian can be written now as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used the cyclicity of the trace to get the second
Lagrangian. The equations of motion associated to the first Lagrangian
are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These equations can be supported with an equation reflecting the fact
that the current is exact

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with similar equations for the right current.

One can define now a new current, which we are going to call Lax
connection , that contains both equations at the same time

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a real parameter called spectral parameter and the
current used can be either the left or the right current ² ² 2 The Lax
connection of a system is not unique. Given an arbitrary matrix @xmath ,
the flatness condition is invariant under the gauge transformation

@xmath (2.1.9)

If we choose the particular case @xmath we can relate the Lax connection
written in the left and in the right currents. . This new current can
actually be viewed as a flat connection @xmath and this flatness for all
values of the spectral parameter implies both the equation of motion and
the flatness of the original current @xmath .

This flatness equation, usually called zero curvature equation in the
literature, can be seen as the compatibility condition of the linear
problem

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Solving this linear system will give us information about the solution
of the Lagrangian [ 69 , 70 ] . The function @xmath , called classical
wave function , is determined up to a constant, usually fixed to @xmath
.

The existence of this connection implies the (classical) integrability
of the Lagrangian. Its flatness allow us to define a well behaved
parallel transport

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a path from @xmath to @xmath and P stands for an
ordering of the points along the path of integration such that the
points closer to @xmath stand to the left of those closer to @xmath .
Using the Baker-Cambell-Hausdorff formula and Stoke’s theorem we can
prove that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

therefore the vanishing of the curvature implies that the parallel
transport defined by this connection is independent of the path. The
parallel transport can be used to compute the wave function as @xmath .

We will be particularly interested in the path given by constant @xmath
and @xmath varying from @xmath to @xmath . The parallel transport for
this particular path,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is called monodromy matrix . The @xmath evolution of the monodromy
matrix can be computed in the following way

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.1.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the vanishing of the curvature and periodicity of the
Lax connection in the @xmath coordinate. From here it is obvious that
the trace of the monodromy matrix @xmath Tr @xmath , called transfer
matrix , is independent of the @xmath coordinate on-shell. Therefore if
we expand this trace on inverse powers of the spectral parameter we get
an infinite set of charges that are conserved (we will prove later that
they Poisson-commute), proving the integrability of the Lagrangian. This
formalism can be generalized to non-periodic solutions with @xmath .
However the definition of the monodromy matrix case present some
subtleties when we take the limit in which the endpoints go to infinity
[ 70 , 71 ] .

To end this section we are going to define the concept of R-matrix.
Although it is a useful concept in classical integrability, it is not as
useful as in quantum integrability, where it will become the central
element of the formalism. At the level of the Poisson Brackets of the
Lax operators, we assume the existence of a matrix such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

this is an equation on @xmath , with @xmath a Lie algebra, where the
subindices @xmath and @xmath labels the algebra in which the operators
act. This is the definition of the classical R-matrix, which is a @xmath
-valued function. The Jacobi identity of the Poisson brackets implies
the following property

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

called Classical Yang-Baxter Equation (CYBE). This equation has been
studied in detail [ 72 ] and two important property are: 1. If @xmath is
a nondenerate solution of the CYBE meromorphic around @xmath , then it
can be extended meromorphically to the whole complex plane having only
simple poles. 2. The set of these poles is a discrete subgroup of @xmath
relative to the addition and it allows to classify the R-matrices into
three different categories: rational R-matrices (when the rank of this
subgroup is zero), trigonometric R-matrices (when its rank is @xmath )
and elliptic R-matrices (when it has rank @xmath , which only exists for
@xmath ).

From the definition of the R-matrix we can find the Poisson-Lie brackets
between transport matrices, called fundamental Sklyanin relation [ 69 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whose consequence is that the traces of powers of the monodromy matrix
generate Poisson-commuting quantities ³ ³ 3 To prove that we used the
property @xmath . , a statement equivalent to the one obtained from the
expansion of the transfer matrix.

##### 2.1.3 WZW models

The PCM is enough for writing bosonic string theories as sigma models.
But to write supersymmetric string theories or to write a bosonic string
theory with a B-field we need a further extension of the PCM called
Wess-Zumino-Witten models.

To understand what we want to accomplish first we have to write the
world-sheet in euclidean light-cone coordinates @xmath (usually called
holomorphic coordinate) and @xmath (usually called anti-holomorphic
coordinate). In this new coordinates, conservation of left and write
currents can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The idea behind the extension is to enhance the symmetry of the model to
make both components separately conserved @xmath . This enhancement is
done in a non-obvious way by adding a Wess-Zumino term

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a 3-dimensional manifold whose boundary is the
compactification of our original space and @xmath is the extension of
our original field @xmath to this manifold. However this extension is
not unique, hence a potential ambiguity in the definition of this term
arise. But the difference between two choices gives @xmath times a
topological quantity, defined modulo @xmath ( @xmath if our group is
@xmath ). So a well defined path integral needs @xmath to be integer (or
an even integer for @xmath ).

If we derive now the equations of motion for this action we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

thus the choice @xmath selects the anti-holomorphicity of the
anti-holomorphic current as the equations of motion. That is, it reduces
the equations of motion to @xmath . Furthermore, as @xmath is a
conserved current, it also imposes @xmath . The equations of motion can
then be solved by choosing @xmath for arbitrary functions @xmath and
@xmath , reminding a free-field theory.

It is very important to notices that the original @xmath symmetry of the
PCM is now enhanced to a local @xmath symmetry ⁴ ⁴ 4 Which one acts on
the left and on the right depends on if we are working with the left or
the right invariant current. In particular, for the left invariant
current we have @xmath . .

##### 2.1.4 Bosonic string theory as a coset model

We are going to move now to the construction of a PCM-like Lagrangian on
a coset @xmath . To do that we are going to impose the equivalence
relation @xmath , where @xmath , which will treat the fields @xmath as
gauge fields. As in section 2.1.2 , it is better to write everything in
term of the currents instead of the fields. The equivalence relation
between fields maps into the decomposition of the currents into a direct
sum of the two algebras @xmath where @xmath is the algebra associated to
the group @xmath and @xmath is the orthogonal complement to @xmath in
@xmath . Hence dividing the current into @xmath and @xmath , they
transform under the equivalence relation as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have assumed that the algebra we are using is simple, so @xmath
. This transformation property imply that the @xmath field can be
understood as a gauge field as it has the same transformation properties
as one, while @xmath only undergoes a similarity transformation. Thus a
Lagrangian of the Principal Chiral Model on the coset @xmath can be
written as a gauge invariant Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whose equations of motion are @xmath , where we define the covariant
derivative as @xmath .

In principle, having a simple algebra ensures that @xmath and @xmath ,
so the equations of motion are well defined. Nevertheless it is
interesting to also impose @xmath . This extra restriction allows us to
introduce a @xmath symmetry that acts as @xmath and @xmath . These kinds
of cosets are called symmetric cosets . The reason to impose the last
condition is related to the flatness condition of @xmath and, by
extension as we saw in the last section, to the integrability of the
Lagrangian.

Because @xmath is a symmetric coset, the flatness condition can be
broken into

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the field strength associated to @xmath , allowing us to
define the following Lax connection

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whose existence implies the integrability of the system.

#### 2.2 Supersymmetric string as coset model

In this section we will discuss how to construct a supersymmetric string
theory. First we present the two different approaches to construct it,
the Neveu-Schwarz-Ramond superstring and the Green-Schwarz superstring,
of which we will present their most important characteristics. Of those
approaches we are going to choose the second one as our approach to
supersymmetric strings, as this one can be constructed using coset
models in a similar way as the bosonic string in the previous subsection
2.1.4 . Before doing it, we will study the supersymmetric algebra we are
going to use as the group over which we are going to quotient. Finally,
we will take all the elements together to present the construction of
the GS action.

##### 2.2.1 NSR and GS string theories

There are two ways to introduce supersymmetry in a string theory: the
Neveu-Schwarz-Ramond superstring (NSR) and the Green-Schwarz superstring
(GS). Both theories should give the same physical results and have
supersymmetry both in the world-sheet and in the space-time. The only
difference between them is which of those two supersymmetries is
explicit.

-   NSR superstring introduces the supersymmetry in the world-sheet. It
    does that by introducing Grassmann superspace coordinates @xmath ,
    where @xmath count two different components. These coordinates
    should be spinors under the usual Clifford algebra in the conformal
    gauge, so we can define the matrices

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.2.1)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    We can generalize now our space-time coordinates to superfields,
    assuming that its fermionic components are Majorana (real) fermions

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.2.2)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where spinor indices are omitted. Because our action should be
    invariant under the supersymmetric charges @xmath , we have not only
    to generalize our coordinates but also our derivatives to a
    covariant derivative. We can check that @xmath indeed satisfy @xmath
    . Therefore we can choose our action as

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.2.3)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Expanding the derivatives and the fields and using that @xmath is
    the only non-vanishing integral of Grassmann coordinates, gives us

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.2.4)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where we can see that @xmath is an auxiliary field whose field
    equations imply @xmath ⁵ ⁵ 5 In reality, things are more complex
    because the auxiliary field that is the world-sheet metric @xmath
    also needs to be supersymetrized. Hence we don’t work with it, but
    with the zweibein @xmath defined as @xmath and their supersymmetric
    partner, a Majorana spinor-vector called gravitino . However, at the
    end we can gauge away these fields and get a superconformal gauge
    where we put the gravitino to zero and the zweibein to identity. .

    This formalism has some problems: first of all, the two components
    of fermions @xmath and @xmath can be made independently periodic
    (called Ramond boundary conditions) or antiperiodic (called
    Neveu-Schwarz boundary conditions) in the sigma coordinate, but we
    cannot have all four combinations at the same time. We have to
    project out some of them, this process is called the GSO
    (Gliozzi-Scherk-Olive) projection. Second we are interested in
    backgrounds like @xmath , which has a five-form (Ramond) flux, but
    the Ramond-Ramond vertex needed to construct them is non-local in
    terms of world-sheet fields [ 73 ] , so it is unclear how to couple
    it to the string world-sheet. Because of these problems we are going
    to work with the other formalism.

-   GS superstring instead introduces the supersymmetry directly in the
    space-time. Constructing the GS action for arbitrary superstring
    solutions is difficult because the full structure of the superfields
    has to be determined from the bosonic solution, something not
    generally known. However, inspired from formulations like [ 74 ] ,
    where the authors constructed the flat space GS action as a WZW-type
    non-linear sigma model on the Poincaré group modded by @xmath ,
    other constructions have been developed. In particular

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    In this thesis we are going to be mostly interested in the first and
    the last one.

##### 2.2.2 Superconformal algebra

Before writing the coset for the supersymmetric theories we are
interested in, it is better to understand first the @xmath algebras with
@xmath . This includes the superalgebras @xmath and @xmath , which we
will use for the construction of the @xmath and @xmath backgrounds
respectively.

The matrix representation of the superalgebra @xmath is spanned by
@xmath matrices with vanishing supertrace. If we write them in term of
@xmath blocks

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

then we have to impose that @xmath . There is an obvious @xmath grading
where @xmath and @xmath are even and @xmath and @xmath are odd. This
symmetry will mix with another @xmath symmetry when defining the coset.
By the fundamental theorem of finitely generated abelian groups they
will give either @xmath or @xmath . As we will see, the later one is the
correct.

We can reduce the superalgebra to @xmath by imposing the additional
constrain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that apart from the obvious @xmath bosonic subalgebras there is an
additional @xmath coming from the identity, which is supertraceless in
this case. We can quotient our algebra by this generator ⁶ ⁶ 6 Sadly
this quotient has no realization in terms of @xmath matrices. to get the
@xmath superalgebra.

However the explicit construction of the @xmath action is going to be
different for @xmath and @xmath . Let us first consider the case of the
@xmath algebra. The outer automorphism group Out @xmath contains a
finite subgroup isomorph to the Klein group @xmath with generators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denote the supertranspose. Although the second one seems to
be of order four, in fact it is of order two in the group of outer
automorphism as it squares to the grading transformation we have defined
before, which is an inner automorphism. Actually the @xmath
transformation is the one that generates the @xmath structure we talked
about, but instead of using it, we are going to work with the
automorphism

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which conserves the commutator but not the product nor the hermitian
conjugation

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is called hypercharge. This allows us to split the algebra
into four separated graded spaces

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with the property

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The coset @xmath , obtained when we mod out the group associated to the
bosonic algebra @xmath , is then called a semi-symmetric superspace. The
semi-symmetric spaces can be considered a supersymmetric generalization
of the symmetric spaces we have used to construct the bosonic string
theories. Therefore it is natural to try to write the supersymmetric
string theories with them as a building block.

In the case of the @xmath background we are going to make use of having
two copies of @xmath to construct the automorphism as an operation that
interchanges the two copies and whose square is @xmath where @xmath is
the grading (+1 for odd generators and 0 for even ones). In particular
we can choose

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as the @xmath transformation. Similarly this transformation allow us to
define an splitting of the algebra and to construct a semi-symmetric
coset.

##### 2.2.3 Green-Schwarz string as a coset model

In this section we are going to see how to construct the Green-Schwarz
action for @xmath and @xmath backgrounds using the superalgebras
presented in the previous section.

###### @xmath GS action

As we have seen just discussed, we can write the @xmath superalgebra as
a direct sum of four subalgebras defined by how they transform under the
@xmath symmetry. This property can be directly applied to the
construction of invariant currents

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

but we have still to quotient this algebra by the subgroup generated by
the subalegra invariant by the @xmath automorphism. Taking this quotient
is equivalent to treating the current @xmath as a gauge degree of
freedom in the same way as we have done above. This is because applying
a transformation by one element of this subgroup transforms the current
@xmath as a gauge field and acts as a similarity transformation on the
rest of the currents.

The coset action we are going to work with is an extension of the
already studied one ⁷ ⁷ 7 We have left a general @xmath metric instead
of directly choosing the conformal gauge @xmath because later we are
going to consider a symmetry transformation that has @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

formed by a kinetic term that is equivalent to the bosonic coset model
we presented above and a Wess-Zumino term formed only with fermionic
currents. Obviously it has the right symmetry and is @xmath invariant.
Although it seems that the action depend on the full @xmath group
because the identity element is inside @xmath , the supertraces of the
identity and of the rest of components of @xmath vanish. Therefore the
action will only depend on the square of @xmath , the part of @xmath
that does not contain the identity, and so it do not depend on this
@xmath subalgebra.

Note also that, naïvely, the second term of the action does not seem
like a WZ term. This is because the invariant three-form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is an exact form, proving that the second term in the action is indeed a
WZ term.

If we define the current

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we can express the conserved currents associated to the global @xmath
symmetry and the equations of motion in a compact way,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.19)
     @xmath      (2.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The three components of the last equation (as the @xmath -th component
vanishes identically) can be separated into

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.21)
     @xmath      (2.2.22)
     @xmath      (2.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where in the last two equations we have introduced the “projections”
@xmath . We put the word projections between quotations because those
operators are orthogonal projectors only when @xmath .

The Lax connection for this Lagrangian is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

proving that it is indeed an integrable Lagrangian.

Finally, the equations of motion for the world-sheet metric give the
stress energy tensor

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which has to be set to zero to recover the Virasoro constraints.

###### Kappa symmetry in @xmath

We have built the Lagrangian with an explicit invariance under global
left @xmath transformation. In this paragraph we are going to see a
remaining symmetry generated by right multiplication by a local
fermionic element @xmath called @xmath -symmetry. Because we are
interested on the coset model we will allow to have a compensating
element @xmath , that is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

However the superstring action in general is not invariant under this
transformation. Hence some restriction has to be imposed on @xmath . We
can divide @xmath into the part that transforms in @xmath and @xmath
under the @xmath transformation, that is, @xmath . Then the
transformation of the current, that is, @xmath can be expanded into the
different four components of the algebra as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and the same can be done to the variation of the Lagrangian density,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the flatness condition of @xmath and @xmath to
simplify it. To reduce this expression even further in order to find the
variation of the metric, we will choose an ansatz for the @xmath
functions

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we have written @xmath . These expressions have indeed the right
transformation properties

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and, after some computations the variation of the metric can be written
as [ 64 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We must note that to get this result we had to assume that @xmath are
projectors, therefore this @xmath -symmetry only exists if @xmath . Now
the important question is how many fermionic degrees of freedom can we
“gauged away” using it. It can be checked that the answer is 16 real
fermions [ 64 ] , leaving 16 physical fermionic degrees of freedom.

###### @xmath GS action

The construction of the action for the @xmath background is very similar
to the one we have already described for @xmath . Consequently we will
only point out the differences between both constructions. The most
important difference is the definition of the currents, which boils down
to the different definition of the @xmath transformation and the @xmath
grading. In this case we can define the currents on the different
symmetry subalgebras as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath refers to each of the copies of @xmath , not to
left and right invariant currents. The Lagrangian, the equations of
motion, and the Virasoro constrains remain the same. However the
construction of the @xmath -symmetry needs some modifications. For
example the ansatz 2.2.32 for @xmath and @xmath has to be modified to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

###### @xmath GS action with mixed flux

For the case of @xmath background we can add an extra WZ term to the
coset action. In particular the new action reads ⁸ ⁸ 8 All the
expressions of this subsection are written in the language of
differential form to make the expressions more readable and compact.

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are coupling constants that have to be fixed.
The requirements to fix these constants are to preserve conformal
invariance, integrability and @xmath symmetry of the theory.

Inspired from the other Lax connections we have written, we take the
ansatz

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and impose its flatness @xmath . The equations obtained in this way have
no solutions unless the coupling constants are related as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

but we cannot fix all the constants of the ansatz. This is because one
of them adopts the role of the spectral parameter. After choosing a
convenient parametrization, the Lax connection can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The conformal invariance and the kappa symmetry of the action can be
proved expanding around a fixed classical background [ 66 ] .

### Chapter 3 Flux-deformed Neumann-Rosochatius system

One should try to formulate even familiar things in as many different
ways as possible.

– M. Kac, Some Stochastic Problems in Physics and Mathematics [ 75 ]

While the use of integrability is widely developed on @xmath SYM theory
and @xmath , integrability methods are potentially applicable to other
@xmath backgrounds with RR flux and consequently to their dual CFTs. For
instance one of the manifestations of the integrability in the case of
the @xmath correspondence that can be generalized is the identification
of the Lagrangian describing closed strings rotating in @xmath with the
Neumann and the Neumann-Rosochatius integrable systems. Furthermore it
allowed to write an analytical expression (at least for the large spin
limit) for the dispersion relations and their one-loop correction, a
quantity easily comparable with the anomalous scaling dimensions of
operator to perform a check of the duality.

This chapter is divided into four sections. In the first section we will
present the Neumann system and the Neumann-Rosochatius systems. We will
prove the integrability of these systems and how the string Lagrangian
in @xmath reduces to them when the closed spinning string ansatz is
chosen. This section will be mostly based on references [ 47 , 53 ] . In
the second section we will introduce part of the case of interest for
us, as we will study the Lagrangian for strings moving in @xmath with
R-R and NS-NS three-form flux. We will prove that this Lagrangian can be
identified with a deformation of the Neumann-Rosochatius Lagrangian when
we substitute the closed spinning string anstaz. We will also prove that
this system is integrable by computing the deformed version of the
integrals of motion, called Uhlenbeck constants. Once these tools are
presented, we will compute the solutions of the equations of motion for
the case of constant radii (a proper definition of these radii will be
presented later). For this case we can construct the dispersion relation
as a series in inverse powers of the total angular momentum. We will
also be able to build the exact dispersion relation for some particular
simple limits. After that we will make use of the deformed Uhlenbeck
constants to compute more general solutions, which we are going to call
elliptic strings, given that they are described by Jacobi Elliptic
functions. Finally we will examine in detail the limit of pure NS-NS
flux where the system simplifies, as the coset model becomes a pure WZW
model. In this case the Elliptic functions degenerate to trigonometric
ones, and an exact dispersion relation can be constructed. In the third
section the case of strings moving only in @xmath space with R-R and
NS-NS three-form flux will be studied. Most of the methods developed in
the previous section can be applied to this problem as the @xmath space
can be formally treated as an analytical continuation of the sphere. In
section four, we will address the full problem of strings moving in
@xmath with R-R and NS-NS three-form flux. In this section we take the
tools developed in the previous two sections and put them together to
describe the full Lagrangian. While we mostly follow the same steps as
the two previous sections, we are not going to present the general
elliptic solution, only their pure NS-NS limit. This is because the full
solution is not very enlightening as some of the relations involving
winding numbers and angular momenta are very difficult to invert in
order to obtain the dispersion relation. We end this chapter changing
our focus from the spinning string ansatz to its natural counterpart,
the pulsating string ansatz, defined in the same way but with the roles
of @xmath and @xmath exchanged. The results presented in sections 2, 3
and 4 are extracted from references [ 76 , 77 ] . The results presented
in the last section are novel and will be published soon.

#### 3.1 Neumann-Rosochatius systems in @xmath

Let us consider the bosonic part of the classical closed string
propagating in the @xmath space-time. In the conformal gauge the
Polyakov action can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the first term correspond to the @xmath part and the second one to
the @xmath part with metric @xmath . Throughout the rest of this chapter
we are going to use three different parametrizations of the @xmath
background

-   The first one is the @xmath embedding we have already used to
    formulate the Lagrangian: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath with
    the constrains @xmath and @xmath . These constrains are implemented
    using Lagrange multipliers.

-   The second one is the angle parametrization, which can be related to
    the embedding coordinates as

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

    Which does not need to impose any constrain, so a Lagrange
    multiplier is not needed.

-   Throughout this chapter will mostly use the third parametrization,
    as it is adapted to the spinning string ansatz we will consider
    below

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.2)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.3)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    with the constrains @xmath and @xmath imposed through a Lagrange
    multiplier.

Both metrics have three commuting translational isometries which give
rise to six global commuting integrals of motion: three spins @xmath ,
@xmath from the sphere and two spins @xmath , @xmath and the energy
@xmath from the AdS space. In the embedding coordinates those are
defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the dot means derivative with respect to @xmath and, for
convenience, we have set the domain of the @xmath coordinate to @xmath .
Index @xmath runs from 1 to 3 and index @xmath can take values 1 and 2.

Let us focus for the moment only on the sphere and set the AdS to a
trivial solution @xmath , @xmath . We are interested in the periodic
motion with three non-vanishing spins, so it is natural to choose the
ansatz

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

While the constrain on the radii remains unchanged

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the angular momenta can be simplified to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the energy can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the prime means derivative with respect to @xmath and the second
equality comes from one of the Virasoro constrains. The other Virasoro
constrain is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We cannot go much further without giving an ansatz for the @xmath
variables. In the rest of this section three different ansätze are
examined, giving rise to three different integrable models.

##### 3.1.1 Neumann system

The most simple ansatz we can choose for @xmath is to assume
independence of the @xmath variable, making the periodicity condition of
the embedding coordinates easier to implement, and linear in the @xmath
variable. This means

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus the periodicity constrain reads now @xmath . This ansatz also
simplifies the expression of the spins, being now

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the constraints on the radii can also be rewritten as a
condition over the spins and the @xmath ’s,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting this ansatz into the Lagrangian ( 3.1.1 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is the Lagrangian of a @xmath dimensional harmonic oscillator
constrained to remain on an unit 2-sphere. This is a special case of the
Neumann system [ 78 ] , which is known to be integrable [ 79 ] . The
integrals of motion are given by the so called Uhlenbeck constants ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

but not all of them are independent, being the constraint @xmath . The
Hamiltonian can be written as a function of these conserved quantities
as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This Lagrangian can be explicitly solved, but we are not going to do
that here. Instead we are going to find the solutions for a more general
ansatz which includes this one as a particular case. More results about
the Neumann system can be found in [ 47 , 80 ] .

##### 3.1.2 Rosochatius system

The second ansatz is, in some way, opposite to the previous one: we are
going to assume independence of the @xmath variable but general
behaviour on the @xmath coordinate. This means

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so the whole Lagrangian is independent of the @xmath variable. However
the periodicity constraint now is more involved because we have to
impose not only @xmath but also

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath can be interpreted as winding numbers. Substituting
this ansatz into the Lagrangian we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which depends on @xmath only through its derivative. This means that
there are a conserved quantities associated to shifts of these functions
and we can get rid of them in the Lagrangian. The equations of motion
for these functions are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the three integrals of motion from the shifts of the
angles. We can substitute these equations of motion back into the
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is a particular case of the Rosochatius system in a 2-sphere. This
system was shown to be integrable by Rosochatius [ 81 ] , while the Lax
pair was computed in [ 82 ] . We can write its integrals of motion as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is very reminiscent of the Uhlenbeck integrals.

There are some similarities between the Rosochatius system and the
Neumann system, as pointed out by [ 83 ] . Thus we may think about an
ansatz that incorporated both systems. That is what we are going to
present next.

##### 3.1.3 Neumann-Rosochatius system

The last ansatz we are going to study is the mixture of both previous
ansätze;

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In consequence we have to impose the same periodicity condition as the
Rosochatius system

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Substituting this ansatz into the Lagrangian we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which again depends on @xmath only through its derivative. Repeating the
same steps as before we can rewrite it as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which describes the so called Neumann-Rosochatius integrable system,
studied, among others, in [ 84 ] . This system is also integrable, being
the integrals of motion a deformation of the original Uhlenbeck
constants

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with the same constraint as the original ones @xmath . Furthermore the
Hamiltonian of the Neumann-Rosochatius system,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

can be written in terms of the Uhlenbeck constants and the integrals of
motion @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we are going to analyse the solutions of this Lagrangian with
constant radii. To do that it is better to look at the equations of
motion that follow from ( 3.1.26 ) instead of the Uhlenbeck constants.
These equations of motion read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the constraints from the Lagrange multiplier impose

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We can see that indeed @xmath const. and @xmath const. are a solution.
This imposes that the derivatives of the angles @xmath also become
constant and thus

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the integration constants @xmath can be set to zero through a
rotation, and the constants @xmath must be integers in order to satisfy
the closed string periodicity condition. After some algebra we can write
the relations

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

which, in terms of the spins and the energy, read

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

But the solution to these equations cannot be written down explicitly
for generic values of the spins. However we can expand them for large
total spin @xmath obtaining

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath has still to be imposed. Luckily some particular cases can
be solved analytically. Those are the case where two of the spin vanish,
which gives the trivial point-like string rotating in @xmath with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the case of one vanishing spin with equal and opposite windings
@xmath , which imposes @xmath , and has an energy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These results can be generalized to solutions dynamical in the full
@xmath [ 53 ] .

#### 3.2 The flux-deformed Neumann-Rosochatius. Spinning strings in
@xmath

Now we will move our attention to closed spinning string solutions in
@xmath with NS-NS three-form flux. The solutions that we will study will
have no dynamics along the torus and thus we will not include these
directions in what follows. As we said in the previous chapter, the
@xmath background admits an NS-NS B-field. This B-field is of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . The presence of this B-field can be related to the
additional WZ term that, as explained in section 2.2.3 , can be included
in the action for the @xmath background. The value @xmath would
correspond to not adding this extra WZ term, so the theory only has R-R
flux and can be formulated in terms of a pure Green-Schwarz action as
for the case of the @xmath background. In this limit of vanishing NS-NS
flux the sigma model for closed strings rotating in @xmath becomes the
Neumann-Rosochatius integrable system presented in the previous section.
On the other hand the value @xmath would correspond to pure NS-NS flux,
as the usual WZ term has a prefactor @xmath to maintain the conformal
invariance and integrability of the action, and so it cancels. This
limit can be described purely as a supersymmetric WZW model, so some
simplifications are expected.

For the moment we are going to restrict our computations again to the
case of rotation on @xmath , so that we will take @xmath and @xmath for
the @xmath coordinates. For the coordinates along @xmath we will choose
again the ansatz where @xmath has dynamics both in @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the functions @xmath must satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the periodicity constraints are the same as in the undeformed N-R
system,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The bar over the winding numbers is added to distinguish them from the
undeformed ones, as they will have an extra contribution coming from the
presence of the flux. When we enter this ansatz in the Polyakov action
with a B-field term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we find the lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have chosen the conformal gauge. The first piece in ( 3.2.6 )
is the Neumann-Rosochatius integrable system from eq. ( 3.1.26 ). The
presence of the non-vanishing flux introduces the last term in the
Lagrangian ¹ ¹ 1 Note that in the WZW model limit @xmath the Lagrangian
simplifies greatly because we can complete squares. We will find further
evidence on this simplification below. .

The equations of motion for the @xmath variables can be written
compactly using the cyclicity of the Lagrangian on them

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath (we assume summation on @xmath ). The variation of the
Lagrangian with respect to the radial coordinates gives us

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

To these equations we have to add the Virasoro constraints,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.10)
     @xmath      (3.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In terms of the integrals @xmath the second Virasoro constraint can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The energy and the angular momenta of the string are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

##### 3.2.1 Constant radii solutions

A simple solution to the equations of motion can be obtained if we take
the radii @xmath to be constant, @xmath . As in the undeformed case, the
derivatives of the angles @xmath become constant and thus

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the windings get deformed to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The integration constants @xmath can be set to zero through a rotation,
and the constants @xmath must be integers in order to satisfy the closed
string periodicity condition. The equations of motion for @xmath reduce
now to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.18)
     @xmath      (3.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus we conclude that the Lagrange multiplier @xmath is constant on
this solution. The Virasoro constraints can then be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 (3.2.20)
     @xmath      (3.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will now find the energy as a function of the angular momenta and the
integer winding numbers @xmath . In order to do this we will first use
equations ( 3.2.3 ) and ( 3.2.11 ) to write the radii as functions of
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

With these relations at hand and the definitions ( 3.2.13 )-( 3.2.15 ),
together with ( 3.2.20 ), we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

or after some immediate algebra,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we have made use of ( 3.2.21 ) and we have introduced @xmath . Now
we need to write the ratio as a function of the windings @xmath and the
angular momenta @xmath . This can be done by adding equations ( 3.2.14 )
and ( 3.2.15 ), subtracting equation ( 3.2.19 ) from ( 3.2.18 ), and
solving the resulting system of equations,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.25)
     @xmath      (3.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the total angular momentum. When we eliminate @xmath in
these expressions we are left with a quartic equation in w

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Rather than trying to solve this equation explicitly, we can write the
solution as a power series expansion in large @xmath . Out of the four
different solutions to ( 3.2.27 ), the only one with a well-defined
expansion ² ² 2 Two of the expansions will give us @xmath and, because
also @xmath , this gives us that @xmath too instead of the expected
@xmath . The third and fourth expansions will be given by w @xmath and w
@xmath , the first one will be well defined when @xmath , which also
imply @xmath or @xmath , and the second one will be well defined when
@xmath and @xmath are one positive and the other negative. is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which implies that

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Note that the @xmath terms and the subsequent corrections in ( 3.2.29 )
and ( 3.2.30 ) are dressed with a common factor of @xmath that vanishes
for equal angular momenta. We can easily prove the existence of this
factor if we set @xmath in equation ( 3.2.27 ), which reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whose only well-defined solution is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and therefore we can calculate the frequencies @xmath and @xmath
exactly,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting these values into relation ( 3.2.24 ) we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is an exact expression as the ratio is exact. This dispersion
relation is a generalization of the expression of circular string
solutions with two equal angular momenta we have already seen ( 3.1.40
). It can be compared with the one obtained in [ 85 ] via the
deformation the original bosonic currents, coinciding both.

An identical reasoning can be employed to prove the existence of the
global factor @xmath . If we substitute the value @xmath , which
corresponds to the pure NS-NS flux, in the equation ( 3.2.27 ) we can
solve it to get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Substituting into equation ( 3.2.24 ) and performing some algebra, the
expression for the energy reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

when we write the angular momenta @xmath and @xmath in terms of the
total momentum @xmath .

If we substitute the general value of from equation ( 3.2.28 ) in
relation ( 3.2.24 ) we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

When the flux vanishes this expression becomes the expansion for the
energy in the Neumann-Rosochatius system describing closed string
solutions rotating with two different angular momenta ( 3.1.38 ). We
must note that the subleading terms not included in ( 3.2.36 ) contain a
common factor of @xmath . We can check that indeed at the particular
case of @xmath relation ( 3.2.36 ) simplifies to the correct one.
Similarly happens with @xmath factors.

##### 3.2.2 Non-constant radii computations. Elliptic strings

To study the solutions with non-constant radii it will prove more
convenient not to work with the equations of motion but with the
integrals of motion. We have already seen that integrability of the
Neumann-Rosochatius system follows from the existence of a set of
integrals of motion in involution, the Uhlenbeck constants. In the case
of a closed string rotating in @xmath there are only two integrals
@xmath and @xmath , but as they must satisfy the constraint @xmath , we
are left with a single independent constant. As we saw before this
constant is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

When the NS-NS three-form is turned on the Uhlenbeck constants should be
deformed in some way. In order to find this deformation we will assume
that the extended constant can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . This function can be determined if we impose that @xmath
. After some immediate algebra we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the constraint ( 3.2.3 ) together with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the equations of motion ( 3.2.7 ), ( 3.2.8 ) and ( 3.2.9 ). As all
three terms in relation ( 3.2.39 ) are total derivatives, integration is
immediate and we readily conclude that the deformation of the Uhlenbeck
constant is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Hamiltonian including the contribution from the NS-NS flux can also
be written now using the deformed Uhlenbeck constants and the integrals
of motion @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A convenient way to proceed is to change variables to an ellipsoidal
coordinate [ 47 , 80 ] . The ellipsoidal coordinate @xmath is defined as
the root of the equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we choose the angular frequencies such that @xmath the range of the
ellipsoidal coordinate is @xmath . Using that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and solving for @xmath in the deformed Uhlenbeck constant ( 3.2.41 ) we
conclude that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the third order polynomial

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

This polynomial defines an elliptic curve @xmath . In fact if we change
variables to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

equation ( 3.2.45 ) becomes the differential equation for the Jacobian
elliptic sine ³ ³ 3 All the Jacobi elliptic functions and elliptic
integrals in this thesis are written following the convention from [ 86
] . This implies, for example, that @xmath . ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the elliptic modulus is given by @xmath . The solution is thus

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath an integration constant that can be set to zero by
performing a rotation. Therefore we conclude that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We must note that we need to order the roots in such a way that @xmath
to make sure that the argument of the elliptic sine is real. We also
need @xmath to have @xmath , together with @xmath to keep @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4
We made this two choices because, although the Jacobi elliptic functions
are defined for any real valued elliptic parameter @xmath , they can be
re-expressed as Jacobi elliptic functions with elliptic parameter in the
interval @xmath , which we are going to denominate as their fundamental
domain. Furthermore, imposing that ( 3.2.50 ) must have codomain between
@xmath and @xmath demands @xmath . Note that this last restriction does
not apply to @xmath . The periodicity condition on the radial
coordinates implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used that @xmath is the period of the square of the Jacobi
sine, with @xmath being the complete elliptic integral of first kind and
@xmath an integer number ⁵ ⁵ 5 There are four cases in which we have to
alter this periodicity condition. When either @xmath or @xmath the
condition becomes @xmath because of a change of branch in the square
root in ( 3.2.50 ) that increase the perodicity to @xmath , the
periodicity of the Jacobi sine. The two remaining cases correspond to
the limit @xmath , which is the constant radii case, and to the limit
@xmath , where the periodicity of the elliptic sine becomes infinite. In
both cases there is no periodicity condition. We will discuss these two
limits later in this section. . We also want to comment that our
solution is of circular type. An exception could happen in the absence
of R-R flux and setting the @xmath integrals to zero. This choice of
parameters corresponds to solutions of circular type when @xmath is
taken as negative, or solutions of folded ⁶ ⁶ 6 We call a solution
folded if @xmath , that is, the string is the same if it is traversed
forward and backward. type when @xmath is positive [ 47 ] .

We must note that there are important cases where this solution can be
reduced to a simpler one. They correspond to the choices of parameters
that make the discriminant of @xmath equal to zero. Our hierarchy of
roots implies that there are only three cases able to fulfil this
condition. The first corresponds to solutions with constant radii, where
@xmath . These solutions were first constructed in [ 85 ] and later on
recovered by deriving the corresponding finite-gap equations in [ 87 ]
or by solving the equations of motion for the flux-deformed
Neumann-Rosochatius system in [ 76 ] . The second case corresponds to
the limit @xmath , which is obtained when @xmath . These are the giant
magnons analyzed in [ 88 ] for the @xmath case and in [ 89 ] for general
values of @xmath (giant magnon solutions were also constructed in [ 85 ,
87 ] ). The third case corresponds to setting @xmath and cannot be
obtained unless we have equal angular frequencies, @xmath .

Going back to the general case, we can use now equation ( 3.2.50 ) to
write the winding numbers @xmath in terms of the integration constants
@xmath and the angular frequencies @xmath . From the periodicity
condition on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Inserting ( 3.2.50 ) in this expression and performing the integration
we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the complete elliptic integral of third kind. In a
similar way, from the periodicity condition for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that we can integrate to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can perform an identical computation to obtain the angular momenta.
From equation ( 3.2.14 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath the complete elliptic integral of the second kind. As
before, ( 3.2.15 ) implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus after integration we conclude that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These expressions for the angular momenta can be used to rewrite the
first Virasoro constraint ( 3.2.11 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We could now employ these relations to write the energy in terms of the
winding numbers @xmath and the angular momenta @xmath . However the
resulting expression is rather lengthy and cumbersome. Instead in the
following subsection we will focus on the analysis of the above
solutions in the limit of pure NS-NS flux.

We must stress that the expressions we have obtained have to be modified
in the giant magnon solution and other cases where the periodicity
condition cannot be imposed or the string does not close. Therefore
factors @xmath , which had been cancelled in the expressions we have
obtained for the angular momenta and windings, do not cancel anymore.

###### Solutions with pure NS-NS flux

The cubic term in the polynomial @xmath is dressed with a factor @xmath
. Therefore in the case of pure NS-NS three-form flux the degree of the
polynomial reduces to two and the solution can be written using
trigonometric functions. In this limit ⁷ ⁷ 7 We can also take the limit
directly in equation ( 3.2.49 ) if we note that @xmath goes to minus
infinity when we set @xmath . In this limit the elliptic modulus
vanishes but the factor @xmath in the argument of the elliptic sine
remains finite and we just need to recall that @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath the second order polynomial

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.2.64)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solution to equation ( 3.2.63 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have set to zero an integration constant by performing a
rotation. Therefore

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Periodicity of the radial coordinates implies that @xmath must be a
half-integer number ⁸ ⁸ 8 An important exception to this condition
happens when @xmath , which is a solution even if it is not a
half-integer. This value corresponds to the case of constant radii we
have already seen in the previous subsection,

@xmath

. The relation between the winding numbers @xmath and the constants
@xmath and the frequencies @xmath is now rather simple. The periodicity
condition for the angles implies

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.68)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

From the definition of the angular momenta we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can now write the energy as a function of the winding numbers and the
angular momenta. A convenient way to do this is recalling the relation
between the energy and the Uhlenbeck constant. If we assume that both
@xmath and @xmath are positive (the extension to the other possible
signs of @xmath and @xmath is immediate) and we combine equations (
3.2.42 ) and ( 3.2.65 ) we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.71)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus using relations ( 3.2.68 )-( 3.2.70 ) we can write it in terms
of windings and angular momenta

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we can use the Virasoro constraint ( 3.2.11 ) to express it only in
terms of the total angular momentum @xmath , as it allow us to write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Replacing these expressions in ( 3.2.72 ) we obtain the energy as a
function of the winding numbers and the total momentum,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 3.3 Spinning strings in @xmath

Before moving to the full @xmath we are going to take a look to the case
with no dynamics in the sphere. We can describe these configurations
with the ansatz

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

together with the periodicity conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . Note however that the time direction has to be
single-valued so we need to exclude windings along the time coordinate.
Therefore we must take @xmath . When we substitute this ansatz in the
Polyakov action in the conformal gauge we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have chosen @xmath and @xmath is a Lagrange multiplier. The
equations of motion for @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the equations for the angular functions are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are some integration constants analogous to the @xmath we
have defined for the spherical case. To these equations we need to add
the @xmath constraint

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

together with the Virasoro constraints

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.8)
     @xmath      (3.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The spin and the energy in this case are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

##### 3.3.1 Constant radii solutions

As before we can start by looking at solutions where the string radii
are taken as constant, @xmath . In this case the periodicity condition
on @xmath and the fact that the time coordinate is single-valued implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus the equations of motion reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used that @xmath . The Virasoro constraints become then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.14)
     @xmath      (3.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore there are only two kinds of solutions: those with no spin and
those with no winding. However both of them are inconsistent. The first
one gives a pure imaginary value of the energy and the second one
imposes the constraint @xmath , which is inconsistent with the AdS
constraint @xmath .

##### 3.3.2 Non-constant radii computations. Elliptic strings

Despite the fact that there are no consistent constant radii solutions,
there exist consistent elliptic solutions. As in the previous section,
in order to construct general solutions for strings rotating in @xmath
it will be convenient to introduce an analytical continuation of the
ellipsoidal coordinates. The definition of this coordinate @xmath can be
directly borrowed from the definition for the sphere with a change of
sign,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we order the frequencies such that @xmath , the range of the
ellipsoidal coordinate will be @xmath . Now we can again make use of the
Uhlenbeck constants to obtain a first order differential equation for
this coordinate. In the case of the (analytically-continued to @xmath )
Neumann-Rosochatius system the (anallytically-continued) Uhlenbeck
integrals satisfy the constraint @xmath , and thus we are again left
with a single independent constant. To obtain the deformation of, say,
@xmath by the NS-NS flux we can proceed in the same way as in the
previous section. After some immediate algebra we conclude that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Hamiltonian can also be written now using the deformed Uhlenbeck
constants and the integrals of motion @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we need to note that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

When we solve for @xmath in the deformed integral of motion we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the third order polynomial,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

This equation nearly identical to the spherical one, so we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the elliptic modulus is @xmath . As in the case of strings
rotating in @xmath , we must perform now an analysis of the roots of the
polynomial. We need to choose @xmath to make sure that the argument of
the elliptic sine is real, and @xmath to have @xmath , together with
@xmath to keep @xmath . Furthermore we have to impose @xmath which
constrains @xmath and @xmath to be greater or equal than @xmath . This
restriction does not apply to @xmath . Note that this hierarchy of roots
implies that not all possible combinations of the parameters @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are allowed.

As in the previous section, there are three possible cases where this
general solution is simplified as a consequence of the vanishing
discriminant of @xmath . The first one is the constant radii case, where
@xmath . However this limit is not well defined because, as we have
seen, there is no consistent constant radii solution. The second case
corresponds to the limit @xmath and it is obtained when @xmath . In this
case there is no periodicity condition because the elliptic sine has
infinite period and thus the string does not close. The third case
corresponds to @xmath and requires setting @xmath .

The periodicity condition on the radial coordinates now implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath an integer number ⁹ ⁹ 9 Again there are four different cases
where this condition must be modified. When @xmath or @xmath the
periodicity condition becomes @xmath because of a change of branch in
the square root in ( 3.3.22 ). The other two cases are the degenerate
limits where there is no periodicity. . From the periodicity condition
on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Performing the integration we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The periodicity condition for @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we must remember that we are working in @xmath instead of its
universal covering. The time coordinate should therefore be
single-valued, and thus we have to exclude windings along the time
direction. When we set @xmath equation ( 3.3.27 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that we can integrate to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the same way we can perform an identical computation to obtain the
energy and the spin. From equation ( 3.3.10 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Repeating the same steps with ( 3.3.11 ) we obtain an expression for the
spin,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These expressions for the energy and the spin can be used to rewrite the
first Virasoro constraint ( 3.3.9 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is already a very closed expression. However we need a relation
involving only @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This relation can be readily
found from the above equations but it is again a lengthy and complicated
expression and we will not present it here. We will consider instead in
the following subsection the limit of pure NS-NS flux of these
solutions.

As happened in the spherical case, factors @xmath do not cancel anymore
in the expressions for the energy, the spin and the winding number for
the giant magnon and non-periodic solutions.

###### Solutions with pure NS-NS flux

As in the case of strings rotating in @xmath in the limit of pure NS-NS
three-form flux, the above solutions also can be written in terms of
trigonometric functions in the same limit. Now ( 3.3.20 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath the second order polynomial

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.3.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus we conclude that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The periodicity condition on the radial coordinates implies now that
@xmath should be a half-integer number. The frequencies @xmath and the
integration constants @xmath are related to the energy, the spin and the
winding number @xmath by

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Recalling now the Virasoro condition ( 3.3.8 ) the spin can be written
as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the energy is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We must note that we still have to impose a restriction on the
parameters. This restriction comes from imposing that the discriminant
of @xmath must be positive and taking the region in the parameter space
with the correct hierarchy of roots. This condition can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The inequality is saturated in the cases that would correspond to
constant radii. However in this point our equations become not well
defined as a consequence of these solutions being inconsistent.

#### 3.4 Spinning strings in @xmath

We will now extend the previous analysis to the case where the string
can rotate both in @xmath and @xmath , again with no dynamics along
@xmath . Therefore the string solutions that we are going to consider
will have one spin @xmath in @xmath and two angular momenta @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . We can describe these configurations by the two
ansätze we have already seen ( 3.2.2 ) and ( 3.3.1 ), with the same
periodicity conditions. When we substitute this ansatz in the Polyakov
action in the conformal gauge we obtain the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Lagrangian ( 3.2.6 ) and @xmath is the Lagrangian (
3.3.3 ), that is, the pieces of the Lagrangian describing motion along
@xmath and @xmath are decoupled. This implies that the equations of
motion are not modified and are given directly by expressions ( 3.2.7
)–( 3.2.9 ) and ( 3.3.4 )–( 3.3.6 ). The Virasoro constraints do get
modified, and therefore are responsible for the coupling between the
@xmath and the @xmath systems,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.2)
     @xmath      (3.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The angular momenta are defined again as in equations ( 3.2.14 ) and (
3.2.15 ), the spin is defined as in equation ( 3.3.11 ) and the energy
is defined as in equation ( 3.3.10 ).

##### 3.4.1 Constant radii solutions

As before a simple solution to these equations can be found when the
string radii are taken as constant, @xmath and @xmath . In this case the
periodicity condition on @xmath and the fact that the time coordinate is
single-valued implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore the angles can be easily integrated again,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and thus the equations of motion reduce to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.6)
     @xmath      (3.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Virasoro constraints become then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.8)
     @xmath      (3.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the definitions of the energy and the spin, equations ( 3.3.10 )
and ( 3.3.11 ), together with the constraint ( 3.3.7 ), we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The plus sign corresponds to the case where @xmath and @xmath are chosen
to have equal signs, while the minus sign corresponds to the choice of
opposite signs. We can use now this expression to write the energy as a
function of the spin, the two angular momenta and the winding numbers
@xmath and @xmath . As in the previous section we can take the second
Virasoro constraint together with the condition that @xmath to find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking these relations into account when adding the angular momenta (
3.2.14 ) and ( 3.2.15 ) we find a relation between the frequencies
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which extends expression ( 3.2.25 ) to the case of spin in @xmath .
Combining now equation ( 3.4.7 ) with ( 3.4.12 ) we can solve for @xmath
. The result is again a quartic equation,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Once we have found the solution to this equation, we can read @xmath
from ( 3.4.12 ) and use then the first Virasoro constraint to calculate
@xmath . But before writing the resulting equation let us first take
into account that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have made use of ( 3.4.6 ). The Virasoro constraint becomes
thus a sixth-grade equation for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solution to this equation provides @xmath , and thus the energy, as
a function of the spin, the angular momenta, and the winding numbers
@xmath and @xmath . However equations ( 3.4.13 ) and ( 3.4.15 ) are
difficult to solve exactly. As in previous sections, instead of trying
to find an exact solution we can write the solution in the limit @xmath
. Out of the four different solutions to ( 3.4.13 ), the only one with a
well-defined limit is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using now relation ( 3.4.12 ) we find ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Note that, as in the case
of rotation just in the sphere, the @xmath terms and the subsequent
corrections in the expansions for @xmath and @xmath are again
proportional to @xmath . We can prove the existence of this factor as in
the previous section by setting @xmath in equation ( 3.4.13 ).

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Next we can calculate the radii @xmath and @xmath using ( 3.4.11 ), and
solve equation ( 3.4.15 ) to get

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.4.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where as in equation ( 3.4.10 ) the plus or minus subindices refer
respectively to the cases where @xmath and @xmath are chosen with
identical or opposite signs. These expressions can now be substituted in
relation ( 3.4.10 ) to obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.4.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

In the absence of flux the expression for @xmath reduces to the
expansion for the energy in the Neumann-Rosochatius system for a closed
circular string of constant radius rotating with one spin in @xmath and
two different angular momenta in @xmath [ 53 ] .

As in the previous section, we can now consider the limit of pure NS-NS
flux. In this case the above expressions simplify greatly, and we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

##### 3.4.2 Non-constant radii computations with pure NS-NS flux

Now we will consider the case where the string is allowed to rotate both
in @xmath and @xmath with non-constant radii. We will restrict the
analysis to the limit of pure NS-NS flux ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Solutions in @xmath
were analyzed for the case where @xmath in the limit @xmath in [ 88 ] .
. In this case the second Virasoro constraint can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As the pieces in the Lagrangian describing motion in @xmath and @xmath
are decoupled the equations ( 3.2.68 ), ( 3.2.69 ), ( 3.3.39 ) and (
3.3.40 ) are still applicable. We only have to substitute them in the
more general Virasoro constraints,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.25)
     @xmath      (3.4.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

With this relation and the equations of motion ( 3.2.68 ), ( 3.2.69 ), (
3.3.39 ) and ( 3.3.40 ) it is immediate to write the angular momenta and
the energy as functions of @xmath , @xmath , the winding numbers @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath , and the spin @xmath and the total angular
momentum @xmath . In the case where @xmath we conclude that

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.27)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.28)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.29)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

If we choose @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.30)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.31)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.32)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

When we take the limit @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we recover the
expressions from subsection 3.2.2 in both cases. In a similar way when
we set to zero the angular momenta, the winding numbers @xmath and
@xmath we recover the analysis in subsection 3.3.2 . We can also
reproduce the solutions of constant radii from the previous subsection
to check if the expressions are consistent. In this case, when @xmath
the angular momenta are given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the energy reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the case where @xmath the angular momenta are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the energy becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 3.5 Pulsating strings ansatz

Throughout this chapter we have been working with the spinning string
ansatz. Another interesting and useful ansatz is the so called pulsating
string ansatz [ 90 ] . This ansatz is exactly the same as the spinning
string one but with the roles of @xmath and @xmath reversed, that is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Note that there is no @xmath dependence on @xmath as the time has to be
single valued. Additional solutions have been studied before [ 91 , 92 ]
.

We can take advantage of the similarities between both ansätze and
follow the same steps as before. When we enter this ansatz in the
world-sheet action in the conformal gauge the Lagrangian for the sphere
reads ¹² ¹² 12 Note the changes of sign of the flux terms, as we are
working here with @xmath derivatives instead of @xmath derivatives.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while for the @xmath part

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.5.4)
  -- -- -- ---------

Supported with the Virasoro constraints

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the same spirit we can define deformed Uhlembeck constants to reduce
the equations of motion of this Lagrangian to first order differential
equations. The computation can be done by taking the undeformed
Uhlembeck constant and adding deformation terms @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. After some algebra we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath . To simplify our equations we can change to the
ellipsoidal coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

which gives us

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.5.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.5.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

By looking at the results we have obtained it is obvious that the
pulsating string ansatz can be treated as the spinning string ansatz
just by changing @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . However here is
where the similarities end, because the periodicity in the variable
@xmath constrains in different ways in the two cases. While in the
spinning string these constraints have to be imposed, in the pulsating
string they are directly fulfilled (provided that @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are integers). Furthermore the radial functions @xmath and @xmath
are trivially periodic, so the restrictions equivalent to @xmath and
@xmath for spinning strings, described in sections 3.2.2 and 3.3.2 , no
longer apply. This difference gives rise to a richer set of solutions.

Another important difference with the spinning string is that the
conserved quantities now take the very simple form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

However, we are not going to explore the most general solution but only
two particular cases: @xmath , that is, a case where nearly all the
dynamics of the sphere is frozen; and @xmath , the opposite case, where
nearly all the dynamics of the @xmath is frozen.

##### 3.5.1 Pulsating string in @xmath

The first of the particular cases we are going to study is the @xmath
space. To restrict our ansatz to this space we are going to fix @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath while the degrees of freedom of the @xmath will remain
unconstrained. Madacena and Ooguri [ 91 ] have already studied the
@xmath background, with @xmath a compact space, in a setting that
corresponds to our limit @xmath . Their idea was to study this
background, using the methods provided by understanding of the @xmath
WZW model underlying it, as it enables computations in the AdS/CFT
correspondence beyond the gravity approximation and provides an
understanding of string theory on a curved space-time with non-trivial
@xmath component.

Under the restrictions we are considering, the Virasoro constraints read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.11)
     @xmath      (3.5.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first of the Virasoro constraints imposes that @xmath while the
second one will be useful to find the dispersion relation of our
solution.

Because @xmath the cubic equation @xmath is easier to solve as one of
the roots can be found by direct inspection ( @xmath ). The other roots
then are easily obtained

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Solving the differential equation ( 3.5.9 ) is exactly the same as in
the spinning string case ¹³ ¹³ 13 Our solution is a periodic solution in
@xmath , usually called “short string”. This solution can be shifted in
@xmath and continued analytically by @xmath into a solution that comes
from the boundary, contracts to zero and expands again, with no
periodicity. These are called “long strings”. To unify our notation with
the notation from [ 91 ] @xmath for short strings and to @xmath for long
strings.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.14)
                 
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . It is also interesting to analyse the behaviour of the
time coordinate. To do that we use

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which we can integrate to

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.16)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.5.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

For later comparisons it is more interesting to write this coordinate as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the property

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These expressions are not very illuminating at first sight. However
taking the limit @xmath , where @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is equivalent to equation (34) of [ 91 ] ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Note that there
is a typo in eq. (34) in that article. This can easily be seen as it is
inconsistent with eq. (44) in the same article. It can be seen that the
analytically continued version of this equation is indeed equivalent to
eq. (44). .

Now we have all the elements to calculate the dispersion relation. To do
that we set the argument of the elliptic sine to @xmath and extract from
there the energy,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we now substitute the value of @xmath and the value of @xmath found
in the Virasoro constraint and solve the quadratic equation we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Where the upper sign correspond to our solution and the lower sign
correspond to the analytic continuation of our solution found by
performing the change @xmath , which is also a solution. Note that this
dispersion relation in the limit @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which corresponds to the dispersion relations in [ 91 ] ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Note
that eq. (33) has a factor of two dividing @xmath missing, as can be
seen by multiplying eq. (32) by two. . The upper sign corresponds to
“short strings” and the lower sing to “long strings” in that reference.

One interesting result is that the energy of our string is real only if
@xmath is above a particular value, that is, if @xmath , which also
implies that the maximum radius of the string has to have a minimum
@xmath . Note that these restrictions disappear when @xmath .

##### 3.5.2 The pulsating @xmath solution

In this section we are going to study the solution when we set @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath and the degrees of freedom of the sphere remains
unconstrained. For this ansatz the constrains from the Virasoro
conditions can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.20)
     @xmath      (3.5.21)
     @xmath      (3.5.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solution to the differential equation given by the Uhlenbeck
constant reads now

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we did in the previous section, we can set the argument of the
elliptic sine to @xmath and use the Virasoro constraints to find the
dispersion relation. However, this is very difficult to do in the
general case but we can look at two particular configurations: @xmath
and @xmath . For the first configuration the dispersion relation reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have set @xmath as a consequence of the first Virasoro
constraint. While for the second one we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have set @xmath again from the Virasoro constraint.

### Chapter 4 @xmath-deformed Neumann-Rosochatius system

-What makes you think that the theory will still be integrable?
-Unlimited optimism.

– M. Staudacher, replying to A. A. Migdal at the Itzykson Meeting 2007,
[ 93 ]

In this chapter we are going to present other possible way of deforming
the @xmath background that does not break the integrability of the
string Lagrangian. This deformation can be classified among the
Yang-Baxter sigma models . These kind of models were first proposed by
Klimcik in [ 94 ] , and later developed in [ 95 , 96 ] , as a way to
construct integrable deformations of the PCM using classical R-matrices
that solve the modified classical Yang-Baxter equation. This method has
been extended to bosonic coset models [ 97 ] and, in particular, to the
@xmath string action [ 98 , 99 ] . In recent years there has been a
great interest in these kind of deformations, also studied in [ 100 ,
101 , 102 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 106 , 107 ]

In the first section we will review the construction and integrability
of one particular deformation of the @xmath string action called @xmath
-deformation, obtained by using a Drinfeld-Jimbo R-matrix. In that
presentation we will mostly follow [ 108 , 109 ] . In the second section
we will truncate the @xmath Lagrangian to a @xmath Lagrangian. With that
simplification we will be able to construct an easier-to-handle deformed
Uhlenbeck constant which will allow us to construct the solutions to the
equations of motion (additional solutions corresponding to other string
configurations in the full @xmath background have been studied before
using diverse approaches in references [ 110 , 111 , 112 , 113 , 114 ,
115 , 116 , 117 , 118 , 119 ] ). Although we will be able to find the
dispersion relation as a series in inverse powers of the total angular
momentum, as in previous cases dispersion relation for the elliptic
string will be lengthy, complicated and not very illuminating. Instead
we wil dedicate the last part of the section to some particular limits
where solutions are easier to construct. The results obtained for these
limits from the point of view of the deformed Uhlenbeck constant are
compared in Appendix A with results obtained directly from the
Lagrangian for the same limits. The results of this last section were
published in [ 120 ] .

#### 4.1 Neumann system in @xmath-deformed @xmath

There are two known classes of integrable deformations of the @xmath .
On one hand we have deformations that can be conveniently described in
terms of the original theory, where the deformation parameter only
appears as integrable quasi-periodic boundary conditions for the
world-sheet fields. Examples of these deformations are orbifolding (like
the one studied in [ 121 ] ) and TsT deformations, obtained by the
successive application of a T-duality, a shift and another T-duality
(examples of this deformation are [ 122 ] or [ 123 ] ). On the other
hand we have deformations of the underlying symmetry algebra in the
sense of quantum groups [ 124 , 125 , 126 ] . That is the case of the
@xmath -deformation we will present here, where we deform the underlying
@xmath to @xmath with @xmath .

The action for the superstring on the deformed @xmath depending on the
real deformation parameter @xmath is given by ¹ ¹ 1 We have chosen to
follow the normalization of [ 108 ] instead of the one used in [ 98 ] .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have chosen the conformal gauge, @xmath is the left invariant
current, @xmath is a coupling constant, @xmath and operators @xmath and
@xmath are defined as linear combinations of projections over the
different components of the @xmath decomposition of the algebra

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The action of the operator @xmath on the algebra is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we used the same @xmath that defines the current and @xmath is a
linear operator obtained by aplying a supertrace (over the second space)
to a classical R-matrix. If this R-matrix satisfy the modified classical
Yang-Baxter equation [ 127 ] , this operator also satisfy them ² ² 2 The
MCYBE written in [ 127 ] and the one written in [ 95 ] differ by a sign
in the right-hand side. We have chosen the sign convention of the later.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

There are several choices for this operator, each of which generates a
different deformation. For a classification of these operators and
models we refer to [ 128 ] . We will be interested in the deformation
generated by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is a particular case of a Drinfeld-Jimbo R-matrix .

From now on we will focus on the bosonic sector of the theory. The
Lagrangian with the fermionic degrees of freedom switched off simplifies
to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

it is a convenient rewriting of the deformation parameter. Let us choose
the ansatz that gave us the Neumann Lagrangian in the previous chapter,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

after some algebra, which can be checked in [ 98 ] and [ 109 ] , the
Lagrangian acquires the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The Lax connection for the bosonic Lagrangian is constructed in the
following way [ 98 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Using the Lax formalism we have explained in section 2.1.2 , we can
generate integrals of motion. However these integrals of motion are not
the direct generalization of the Uhlenbeck but a linear combination of
them. In [ 109 ] these generalized Uhlenbeck constants were obtained as
a deformation of the original ones

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A generalization of these Uhlenbeck integral to a @xmath -deformed
Neumann-Rosochatius was later presented in [ 129 ] .

#### 4.2 @xmath-deformed Neumann-Rosochatius system. Spinning strings in
@xmath-deformed @xmath

We will now move to the case of a spinning string in the @xmath
-deformation of @xmath with the more general ansatz that gave us the
Neumann-Rosochatius Lagrangian in the previous chapter

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which gives us the following Lagrangian for the sphere component, the
@xmath -deformed Neumann-Rosochatius system ³ ³ 3 Note that we can use
the constraint @xmath to bring the first term in ( 4.2.2 ) to the form

@xmath

Furthermore the term before the Lagrange multiplier is just a total
derivative,

@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where, for convenience, we have defined @xmath . It is immediate to
write down the complete equations of motion for the radial and angular
coordinates coming from this Lagrangian. However in this chapter we will
only be interested in the case of a string spinning on an @xmath
-deformed three-sphere. Therefore, rather than presenting the general
set of equations we will focus on how we should perform a consistent
reduction to capture the dynamics on a deformed three-sphere. We can
clarify this by inspecting the equation of motion for @xmath , which is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that @xmath is a solution independently of the behaviour of the
other two coordinates. This means that setting @xmath is a consistent
truncation from the @xmath -deformed five-sphere to an @xmath -deformed
three-sphere ⁴ ⁴ 4 However this is not the only reduction that we can
perform to obtain a consistent truncation from the @xmath to @xmath .
For instance, from the equation of motion for @xmath ,

@xmath @xmath @xmath

with @xmath , we conclude that the choice @xmath provides indeed another
possible truncation. When we set @xmath the Lagrangian becomes

@xmath

which can be easily seen to be equivalent to the one for the @xmath
truncation. . The Lagrangian simplifies to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The equations of motion for the radial coordinates are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.5)
     @xmath      (4.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and for the angular functions we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Virasoro constraints become

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.8)
     @xmath      (4.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the energy and the angular momenta are given now by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can exhibit that integrability remains a symmetry of the system after
the @xmath -deformation by constructing a deformation @xmath of the
Uhlenbeck constants which makes them constants of motion again. To find
this deformation we are going to assume that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and impose that @xmath . By doing this we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have made use of the equations of motion ( 4.2.5 ) and ( 4.2.6
). We can easily integrate this relation to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an integration constant that we will set to 1. We can
proceed in the same way to obtain the function @xmath . We finally
conclude that ⁵ ⁵ 5 The Uhlenbeck constants for the @xmath
Neumann-Rosochatius system were constructed using the Lax representation
in [ 129 ] . Some immediate algebra shows that those more general
constants reduce to the one we present in here along the @xmath
truncation.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will now focus on the construction of general solutions of the @xmath
-deformed Neumann-Rosochatius system. In order to do so we will
introduce an ellipsoidal coordinate defined as the root of the equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we assume that @xmath , then the ellipsoidal coordinate will vary
from @xmath to @xmath . When we replace the radial coordinates by the
ellipsoidal one in the equations of motion we are left with a
second-order differential equation for @xmath . Following the strategy
used in the previous chapter, we can more conveniently reduce the
problem to the study of a first-order equation by writing the Uhlenbeck
constant in terms of the ellipsoidal coordinate. We find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the fourth-order polynomial

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We can solve this equation if we change variables to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which transforms equation ( 4.2.16 ) into

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have defined @xmath and @xmath . The solution to this equation
is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an integration constant that we can set to zero by
performing a rotation. Therefore we conclude that ⁶ ⁶ 6 We should note
that this solution is well defined not only for real values of the
parameter @xmath , but also for pure imaginary values of this parameter
(although an analytical continuation of the @xmath coordinates may be
needed for that). If we define @xmath we have

@xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . Now we could use this expression to write the energy as a
function of the winding numbers and the angular momenta. However, the
first step in this direction, which is finding the winding numbers and
the momenta in terms of the integration constants @xmath and the angular
frequencies @xmath , already leads to complicated integrals. Instead of
following this path, which leads to cumbersome and non-illuminating
expressions, in what follows we will analyse the problem in several
interesting regimes of @xmath .

But before we move to the study of the fate of solutions ( 4.2.21 ) for
some limiting values of the deformation parameter, we will consider the
case where the radii are taken to be constant. When we set to zero the
derivatives in the equations of motion and solve for the Lagrange
multiplier we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can rewrite this expression as ⁷ ⁷ 7 It is immediate to see that in
the limit @xmath the solution reduces to @xmath , @xmath , together with
either zero total angular momentum or zero winding @xmath because of the
Virasoro constraint ( 4.2.9 ).

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the constraint @xmath and the fact that @xmath
because the winding velocities are constant when the radii are constant.
However solving exactly this equation together with the Virasoro
constraint leads to an algebraic equation of sixth degree. Instead of
trying to solve the problem directly, we can write the solution as a
power series expansion in inverse powers of the total angular momentum.
We get ⁸ ⁸ 8 There is an additional possible expansion, depending on the
choice of signs of the winding numbers.

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

for the radial coordinates, and

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

for the angular frequencies, where we have introduced @xmath . Using now
equation ( 4.2.8 ) it is immediate to write the dispersion relation,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 4.3 Limiting cases of the @xmath-deformed N-R system

In this section we are going to see how the solution we have found in
the previous section behave in some particular limits of the deformation
parameter from the Uhlenbeck constant point of view. Upon inspection of
the polynomial ( 4.2.17 ) it is clear that the limits @xmath and @xmath
simplify the evaluation of the roots. The backgrounds obtained from
taking these limit has been studied in [ 130 , 131 ] . In the case
@xmath the deformed ten-dimensional metric is T-dual to de Sitter space
times the hyperboloid, @xmath , which can also be understood as a
flipped double Wick rotation of @xmath . On the other hand, in the limit
@xmath ⁹ ⁹ 9 From an algebraic point of view, the @xmath limit behaves
in the same way as the limit of pure NS-NS flux in the analysis of the
deformation by flux of the Neumann-Rosochatius system presented in the
previous chapter. the deformed ten-dimensional metric turns into a
pp-wave type background. We will also analyse these limits from the
point of view of the Lagrangian formalism in Appendix A , where some
relations between these limits are more transparent.

We will first focus on the @xmath limit and the case where @xmath . We
can see that the four roots, as series on @xmath , behave in the
following way

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Actually the series for the two first solutions come from the solution
to a quadratic equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore in the @xmath limit one of the roots goes to @xmath and we
reduce the degree of our polynomial to @xmath . In order to take the
limit at the level of the solution, we need to make sure that @xmath .
This requires writing ( 4.2.21 ) in the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, after taking @xmath and @xmath , becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and substituting explicitly the remaining roots we arrive to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The second interesting @xmath limit is the @xmath case. In this limit
the roots become

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and thus the degree of the polynomial is reduced again from four to
three. The general solution, after a reordering of the roots in a
similar way as in the previous case, is given by ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 A similar
result was obtained for the pulsating string ansatz in [ 116 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where, in the last line, we have made use of the relation @xmath sn
@xmath sn @xmath . We must note that this solution contains four
different regimes. We can see that our solution has four different
regimes: @xmath where we have to analytically continue the @xmath
coordinate to @xmath . The same happens with the @xmath , while the
region @xmath requires the continuation of the @xmath coordinate
instead. Finally in the region @xmath the solutions is circular, which
completely disappears in the @xmath limit, which is agreement with the
transformation of the sphere into the hyperbolic plane for @xmath showed
in [ 130 ] .

To conclude our analysis we are going to study the @xmath limit. In this
limit the contribution from @xmath is negligible and @xmath becomes a
shift in the Uhlenbeck constant. Therefore @xmath and @xmath are the
only important free parameters. First we are going to consider the case
@xmath , where the roots behave like

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Substituting and performing some manipulations we arrive to the solution

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The other limit, @xmath , is characterized by the roots

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.3.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we have kept @xmath to simplify our computations, as the Uhlenbeck
constant has to be modified when both @xmath vanish. Substituting and
performing some manipulations we arrive to the solution

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we can eliminate the @xmath factor by the redefinition @xmath . This
happens, as we said, because the term encoding the dependence with
@xmath in the Uhlenbeck becomes a constant in the @xmath limit, making
it a dummy variable.

Although the solutions for @xmath and @xmath seem completely different,
they are deeply related. This relation is not explicit from the
Uhlenbeck constant, but it is evident when we write the Lagrangian
systems associated to both limits. We will explore this direction in
Appendix A .

## Part III Integrability on the Field Theory side. Spin chains

### Chapter 5 Introduction: The two Bethe Ansätze

Quantum Mechanical Spin. What is it? And don’t give me any of that
bullshit about Pauli Matrices, Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein statistics,
etc. Any Monkey can do the Math but what does the math mean? I mean,
WHAT IS SPIN REALLY?!!

– Abstruse Goose 342, Moment of Clarity(?) - part 2

In this chapter we are going to review two techniques to perform
computations in quantum theories in general, and spin chains and
theories in a lattice in particular: the Coordinate Bethe Ansatz (CBA)
and the Algebraic Bethe Ansatz (ABA). Although in the recent years there
has been a boom of new and powerful methods, like the Analytic Bethe
Ansatz [ 24 ] , Off-diagonal Bethe Ansatz [ 132 ] , Separation of
Variables (SoV) [ 133 ] … The two Bethe Ansätze we are going to focus on
are the cornerstones of quantum integrability and still very powerful by
themselves.

This chapter is divided in five sections. In the first one we will
introduce the CBA. In particular we are going to present it by solving
the Heisenberg Hamiltonian. For this section we will mostly follow [ 134
] . In the second section we will present the second of the ansätze, the
ABA. We will construct it from first principles as a lattice version of
the Lax formalism presented in section 2.1.2 . After that we will
specify the particular case of the Heisenberg Hamiltonian and explicitly
solve it. The last part of this section is devoted to understanding the
relation between operators in both ansätze and how to compute scalar
products in the ABA. For this section we will mostly follow references [
135 , 136 , 137 ] . The third section deals with the scalar products in
both the CBA and the ABA. We will present the computation of the same
correlation functions in both formalism and compare the different
normalizations. For this section we will mostly follow [ 138 ] . After
that we will present the so-called BDS spin chain, a spin chain
hamiltonian that reproduces @xmath SYM at all loops up to the lenght of
the chain, as it does not take into account wrapping effects. In the
last section we will present the details of the bootstrap program and
the form factor axioms. For this section we will follow references [ 134
, 139 ] .

#### 5.1 Coordinate Bethe Ansatz

Let us consider the spin @xmath Heisenberg Hamiltonian on a chain of
length @xmath . Our Hilbert space will be @xmath copies of the Hilbert
space of a spin @xmath particle, that is, @xmath and the Hamiltonian
will be given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.1)
              @xmath      (5.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a coupling constant ² ² 2 This is called the
ferromagnetic Heisenberg Hamiltonian because, as we will show, its
ground state is a saturated state with all spins aligned. When @xmath
the behaviour changes radically. This other regime is called
antiferromagnetic or Néel phase. The Hilbert space can be constructed in
a similar way as the one we are going to present but starting from the
state given by a chain with alternated spins called “Néel state” [ 140 ]
, although it is not the ground state (this happens because because it
minimizes the expectation of @xmath but it does not minimize it for the
other two components). and the @xmath are the Pauli matrices. The
subindices indicate in which chain site the Pauli matrices act
non-trivially, that is,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We also want to impose periodic boundary conditions, which means @xmath
.

A generalization of this Hamiltonian is the so-called XYZ spin chain
Hamiltonian, where each of the three terms of the Hamiltonian have
different couplings. We recover the Heisenberg Hamiltonian by putting
@xmath and hence it is usually called the XXX spin chain. Another case
of interest is the XXZ spin chain where @xmath .

This particular Hamiltonian is of interest for us because, by using the
isomorphism between anomalous dimensions of single-trace operators and
spin chains, it corresponds to the restriction to the scalar @xmath
sector of the matrix of anomalous dimensions/spin chain Hamiltonian
presented in equation ( 1.2.8 ). The isomorphism works in the following
way: each operator is build out from a single trace of products of two
complex scalars and is mapped to a spin chain state. One of these
complex scalars is interpreted as the spin up (usually identified with
the complex scalar @xmath ), while the other as the spin down (usually
identified with the complex scalar @xmath ). This restriction to the
@xmath subgroup is consistent because it is a closed sector at one-loop
³ ³ 3 A closed sector is a subgroup of the full @xmath spin chain such
that the operator mixing can only occur between operators inside said
subgroup. We will talk a little more in depth about it in section 5.4 .
.

There are two obvious symmetries on this Hamiltonian. The first one is
the shift operator @xmath , which shifts the states on the chain one
lattice position to the right. It is immediate to prove that @xmath from
the form of the Hamiltonian and its periodicity. Note that periodicity
also imposes @xmath . The second symmetry is the total spin in one
direction, which we are going to choose as the @xmath direction @xmath ,
where the total spin @xmath is computed as the sum of the individual
spins of each lattice site, @xmath . The existence of these two
symmetries implies that we can classify the eigenstates of the
Hamiltonian by the total spin in the @xmath direction and the total
momentum.

Also, the second writing of the Hamiltonian ( 5.1.2 ) hints us two of
its eigenstates, the one with all spins up in the @xmath direction and
the one with all spins down. These two states are annihilated by the
@xmath and @xmath operators respectively for every value of the lattice
coordinate @xmath . This imply that, when we apply the Hamiltonian
operator to these states, the two first terms of every addend in the sum
vanish, leaving only the contribution of @xmath , of which they are
already an eigenstate. We are going to take the first one as our
reference state for our construction of the Hilbert space as it is a
ground state. We can see that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while if one of the spins if flipped two of the contributions pick the
opposite sign and the energy grows. The following construction can be
done in a symmetrical way if we choose @xmath as our reference state.

If we have only one spin flipped down we can write an ansatz for the
eigenvector of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the subindex indicates the number of spins down and @xmath is the
state with all spins up except for the one at lattice site @xmath .
Translational invariance tells us that we should choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a normalization constant ⁴ ⁴ 4 There are two usual
normalizations of these states, either @xmath or @xmath . We are going
to choose the first one for simplicity even though the states are not
properly normalized in that way. A third less usual normalization, but
useful in the AdS/CFT context, is @xmath , where @xmath is the range of
the gauge group and @xmath the number of flipped spins. This last one is
used, for example, in [ 37 ] . and @xmath with @xmath because of
periodicity. Therefore there are @xmath states in the Hilbert space of
one spin down, as expected. These states are usually called one magnon
states , as they are constructed by one excitation that takes the shape
of a “spin wave”. The energy of these states is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which we have separated it into the energy of the ground state @xmath
and the energy of the excitation @xmath .

In principle we can repeat part of the strategy for the case of two
spins flipped down

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Translational invariance implies in this case that @xmath
, but it doesn’t provide enough information to find the eigenvector.
However, Bethe [ 141 ] proposed the product of plane-waves as ansatz

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which solves the condition of being an eigenstate if @xmath .
Translational invariance transforms into the condition @xmath and the
periodicity condition now reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The physical interpretation of this equation is that the total phase
shift undergone by a spin wave after traveling around the closed chain,
which should be trivial, is given by a kinematical factor (like in the
case of one magnon) and a phase shift produced by the interchange of the
two spin waves, which we are going to call @xmath -matrix (although in
this cases it is only a number, not a matrix). But we still have to fix
the value of this @xmath -matrix. To do so we have to impose the
eigenstate condition for @xmath , which gives us

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Joining this result with the periodicity condition we obtain the
equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which called in the literature the Bethe Ansatz Equation . It is
important to notice here that there are two kinds of solutions to these
equations, something already noticed by Bethe in his original article,
namely, one set of solutions with real momenta and other set of
solutions with complex conjugated momenta, which can be understood as a
bound state of the magnons. We still have to find a normalization for
the coefficients. We are going to choose @xmath for convenience, as
explained in a previous footnote. The energy of these states, after some
algebra, is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (5.1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

that is, the total energy of the two particle excitation is just like
the two particles were completely independent. This is already a sign of
the underlying integrability of the model, but we still have to present
the tools to prove it.

Moving now to the case of three magnons, we can again write the
eigenfunction as a sum over the possible positions of the spins down
weighted with a wave function

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for which Bethe proposed again a plane-wave ansatz,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where translational invariance imposes @xmath and the periodicity
condition imposes

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

which determines all the coefficients up to one of them, which depends
on the normalization we choose. These equations hide the most important
condition of quantum integrability, the factorized scattering and the
Yang-Baxter equation. We will talk more about it in the next section.
For the moment we are going to define the S-matrices as the quotient of
two prefactors with one of the indices fixed, that is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Hence the Bethe ansatz equations can be written now

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the form of the S-matrices is fixed again by imposing the
eigenstate condition when two magnons are not separated and the third is
well separated

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is the same as in the case of two magnons. The energy can be
obtained from the eigenstate condition with all magnons well separated.
We get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so again it is the sum of the contribution of each individual magnon.

From the case of three magnons it is easy to see how to generalize the
formalism to an arbitrary number of magnons @xmath . The most important
formulas are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.21)
     @xmath      (5.1.22)
     @xmath      (5.1.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we can see they are a direct generalization of the formulas for three
magnons ⁵ ⁵ 5 This method can be directly applied in other models like
XXZ spin chain or the Lieb-Liniger model (bosonic particles in a
1-dimensional box with delta interactions) [ 142 ] . However it needs
some modification to solve the XYZ spin chain. .

This construction can easily be generalized to groups with higher rank.
In particular a general construction for the @xmath spin chain
Hamiltonian can be found in chapter 1.1 of [ 143 ] .

We want to end this section by recalling that we will be interested in
the case of spin chains representing @xmath supersymmetric Yang-Mills
operators. These kinds of spin chains should correspond to single-trance
operators, so a more restrictive periodicity condition has to be imposed
as traces are cyclic. In particular cyclicity of the trace implies that
the shift operator we presented above should be trivial, which imposes a
zero total momentum condition over the spin chain,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.1.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 5.2 Algebraic Bethe Ansatz

##### 5.2.1 Lax formalism in the lattice and the ABA

We are going to start this section by writing lattice versions of the
Lax formalism whose classical versions we have already presented in
section 2.1.2 . First of all, we are going to present a lattice
equivalent of the infinitesimal parallel transport, that is, the space
component of the linearized equations for the classical wave function (
2.1.10 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a vector from the tensor product of the Hilbert space of
site @xmath (usually called “physical space”) and an auxiliary space
@xmath , and @xmath is the Lax operator acting on @xmath with spectral
parameter @xmath . Hence the definition of the monodromy matrix is also
the lattice version of eq. ( 2.1.13 ) ⁶ ⁶ 6 There are two ways of
ordering the Lax operators inside the monodromy matrix. We are going to
use the most common in the literature, which can be found in [ 134 ] , [
135 ] and [ 142 ] among other. The opposite ordering, @xmath , can be
found, for example, in [ 55 ] . ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Actually, this is not the most general monodromy matrix we can write as
we can add a set of extra degrees of freedom in two ways: first, by
adding a set of fixed parameters to each of the arguments of the Lax
operator which are usually called inhomogeneities , introduced in the
following way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

second, by adding a twist matrix @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

although in principle we could have written a more general expression
with left and right twists,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The left and right twists can be related so we have to care only about
having a twist in one of the ends [ 144 ] . Most of the time we will set
these inhomogeneities to be the same and the twists to identity. The
transfer matrix is defined as the trace of the monodromy matrix @xmath
@xmath . To prove that it actually generates a tower of conserved
operators we have to introduce the R-matrix.

If we have now two Lax operators that act in the same Hilbert space but
in different auxiliary space, the commutation rule is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is the quantum version of the definition of the R-matrix ( 2.1.15
). Indeed, there exists a quantum deformation parameter @xmath such that
the the first non-trivial term of the expansion of the R-matrix around
@xmath can be identified as the classical R-matrix ⁷ ⁷ 7 R-matrices that
fulfil this property are called quasi-classical [ 145 ] . Examples of
not quasi-classical solutions can be found in [ 146 , 147 , 148 , 149 ]
. , @xmath , so we can recover the classical R-matrix from the quantum
one [ 150 ] . There is a nice and very useful graphical representation
of this formula and the following ones. If we represent the real space
by vertical lines and the auxiliary space by horizontal lines, the
pictorial representation of the @xmath and @xmath matrices take the form
displayed in figure 5.1 . Figure 5.2 represents the RLL equation using
this identification. This pictorial representation also highlights the
application of the Bethe Ansatz to solve problems involving
Temperley-Lieb algebras (see, for example, [ 151 ] for an introduction
to TL algebras and [ 152 ] for its relation with XXZ spin chains),
either using the coordinate version [ 153 ] or the algebraic version [
154 ] .

Successive applications of the commutation relation ( 5.2.6 ) can be
used to construct the commutation relation for the monodromy matrix

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

usually called RTT relation (sometimes also called FRT exchange relation
[ 155 ] ). This relation is the quantum version of eq. ( 2.1.17 ) and
from it we can prove the commutativity of the transfer matrices

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence we can start constructing conserved quantities as, for example,
logarithmic derivatives of the transfer matrix at some particular value
of the spectral parameter. Using its pictorial representation, figure
5.3 , the RTT relation is very easy to prove from the RLL relation.

Coming back to the R-matrix, we want to highlight that it fulfils the
Yang-Baxter equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, after performing the expansion in the quantum deformation
parameter @xmath we commented before, gives us the classical Yang-Baxter
equation ( 2.1.16 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Yang-Baxter equation is represented in figure 5.4 .

##### 5.2.2 Solving the Heisenberg spin chain with ABA

Now let us present the particular R-matrix, Lax operator and auxiliary
space which we are going to use to describe the XXX Heisenberg spin
chain ⁸ ⁸ 8 In this choice the quantum deformation parameter @xmath is
hidden in a re-scaling of the @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the permutation operator @xmath , @xmath is the spectral
parameter and we have chosen @xmath . This is a particular case of the
6-vertex model, originally introduced by Pauling [ 156 ] to account for
the residual entropy of water ice. The 6-vertex model allow us to solve
also the XXZ spin chain, however the XYZ spin chain requires the more
general 8-vertex model. For our particular case we are going to set all
inhomogeneities to @xmath as this particular value will allow us to
write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the @xmath representation of the spin operators. At this
point it is important to make a comment about the notation, because some
authors use as R-matrix what we call @xmath or has the spectral
parameter shifted ⁹ ⁹ 9 An easy way to distinguish which of the
notations an author used is to compute the value of @xmath or @xmath in
the limit @xmath , depending on which is finite. An example of the
second case can be found in [ 136 , 157 ] , where @xmath and
inhomogeneities set to zero. .

By direct observation it is evident that the point @xmath is a very
particular point, because it simplifies the Lax operator but it does not
make it the identity. We will use that in our advantage. If we compute
the transfer matrix at that point we get,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using now that @xmath and @xmath , we conclude that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the shift operator and momentum operator
introduced in the previous section. Therefore @xmath is a conserved
charge, as we expected. To compute the second conserved charge one
derivative of @xmath is needed. Using that @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.16)
     @xmath      (5.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is the Hamiltonian of the XXX spin chain. Furthermore, we can also
check that the parallel transport (suitably rescaled) implies the
classical spin Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now that the equivalence between working with this Lax operator and with
the XXX spin chain is proven, we have to find a way to construct the
states and compute its energy. To do that, a look at the monodromy
matrix as a matrix on the auxiliary space is needed

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where all four operators act on the tensor product of Hilbert spaces of
all sites of the chain. In terms of these operators, the transfer matrix
reads @xmath . If we compute the action of these four operators over the
reference state we have defined in the previous section, @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.20)
     @xmath            @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This suggests us that the @xmath operator might be used as an
annihilation operator and the @xmath operator might be used as a
creation operator.

Before seeing if this assumption is correct, we have to write the
commutation relations between the operators of the monodromy matrix.
Those are obtained from the RTT relation ( 5.2.7 ). The six interesting
for us at this moment are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.22)
     @xmath      (5.2.23)
     @xmath      (5.2.24)
     @xmath      (5.2.25)
     @xmath      (5.2.26)
     @xmath      (5.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where, for convenience, we have introduce the functions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The complete list of commutation relations can be found, for example, in
section 2.2 of [ 55 ] for the XXX spin chain or in chapter VII of [ 142
] for a general 6-vertex R-matrix. The first relation tells us that the
ordering of the operators defining the state is irrelevant. The second
and the third one tell us how the transfer matrix commutes with the B
operator, giving us two kind of terms: a “wanted” term where the
operators conserve their arguments, and an “unwanted” term where they
exchange them. For our states to be eigenstates of the transfer matrix
we have to impose the cancellation of these unwanted terms. The fourth
and the fifth one are the same but with the C operator instead of the B
operator. We will comment about the sixth one in the next section as it
will be used for computing scalar products.

Applying now the transfer matrix @xmath to a general state

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and taking into account these commutation relations, the wanted term and
the unwanted term involving the transfer matrix with argument @xmath
(that is, the term obtained by commutating in an unwanted way @xmath
with the first @xmath operator but in a wanted way with the rest of the
operators) read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is immediate to see that no other term involving the state @xmath can
appear. To compute the rest of the unwanted terms we can use the
reordering symmetry of the @xmath operators that allows us to put any
factor we want the first. Hence all factors in front of the unwanted
states have the same structure ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 This structure is not easy to
see if we compute the coefficients by brute force. Terms involving the
state @xmath can appear from wanted-unwanted-wanted-…-wanted or from
unwanted-unwanted-wanted-…-wanted sequences and we have to sum both
contributions to get the same answer. So for the state with @xmath
substituted by @xmath we have to sum @xmath terms, making it more
difficult to get the general formula via this procedure. . We can
rewrite the vanishing of the unwanted terms as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that the equations we are getting here are exactly the condition
for the cancellation of the poles of the eigenvalues of the monodromy
matrix, which is the first line of ( 5.2.31 ).

The question that arises now is the meaning of the arguments @xmath ,
which from now on we are going to call rapidities . To see their meaning
we are going to compute the eigenvalue of the shift operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As this has to hold for any number of operators, rapidity and momentum
can be directly related,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which gives @xmath for real rapidity. If we substitute this relation in
the eigenvector condition, eq. ( 5.2.32 ), we obtain that it is the same
as the Bethe Ansatz Equations ( 5.1.22 ) we have obtained in the
previous section. We can also compute the spectrum of the Hamiltonian
using the eigenvalue of the transfer matrix, and in the same way it is
also additive

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we substitute now the rapidity with the momentum, we get the same
answer as for the coordinate Bethe ansatz, @xmath .

However we still have to prove that the @xmath operator is an operator
that flips the spin of the reference state. The easiest way to do that
is to find the spin operator in the monodromy matrix. In particular it
doesn’t appear in the expansion around @xmath but in the expansion
around @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and the following terms are related with the non-zero
levels of the Yangian symmetry [ 158 ] ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 It was shown
independently by Drinfeld [ 159 ] and Jimbo [ 160 ] that the Yang-Baxter
equation ( 5.2.9 ) and the RTT relations ( 5.2.7 ) are related to the
Hopf algebra structures and to the deformations of universal enveloping
Lie algebras. The R-matrix and the Lax matrix appear to be
representation of some universal object called universal R-matrix . .
Taking RTT relations ( 5.2.7 ) in the limit @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which implies that the @xmath operators turns down one spin.

There is also a pictorial way to interpret the state, but we are not
going to talk about it here as it is more complex than the ones we have
presented before. Instead we refer to figure 7 of [ 161 ] .

In the same way we have constructed the states from products of @xmath
operators, the reference state and the Bethe ansatz equations, the dual
states can be constructed with the dual reference state @xmath and
products of @xmath operators. It can be checked that the eigenvector
condition gives the same BAE.

In the same way we could have started with the vacuum with all spins
pointing down @xmath and applied products of @xmath operators. In a spin
chain of finite length there is an isomorphism between both
constructions and it can be shown the equivalente @xmath . The precise
relation between both sets of rapidities can be found, for example, in [
162 ] .

##### 5.2.3 The inverse scattering problem and scalar products

We have seen in the previous section that we can compute quantities like
the momenta and the spectra both in the ABA and the CBA and that we get
the same answers. But there is still one last thing to do: compute the
relations between the entries of the monodromy matrix and the local spin
operators appearing in the CBA. This is the last step of the
construction of states and correlation functions we have presented,
sometimes called quantum inverse scattering method (QISM) for historical
reasons related with classical integrability.

The relation we are looking for was found in [ 163 ] using the method of
factorizing F-matrices for the case of the general XXZ inhomogeneous
spin chain and later in [ 164 ] for the XYZ homogeneous spin chain using
the properties of the R-matrix and the monodromy matrix. The solution
for the inhomogeneous spin chain is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.38)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a given site of the spin chain. Instead of the Pauli
matrices we can write the solution in a compact way in terms of the
elementary operators @xmath , which act on site @xmath as the @xmath
matrices @xmath [ 165 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we will show in the next section and mainly in the next chapter,
these expressions will allow us to calculate expectation values of local
operators by means of the Yang-Baxter algebra. A more detailled
explanation of the quantum inverse scattering problem can be found in [
165 ] , with an emphasis of its generalization to fundamental and fused
lattice models.

Apart form the explicit form of the operators, we need a method to
compute the scalar products of states. For the case of the CBA it is
easy to do that because we already have an explicit form of the wave
function. Therefore we are going to focus in the computation for the
ABA. There is a large amount of literature devoted to this kind of
computation (see, for example, [ 166 ] and references therein).

The scalar products we are going to be interested in are defined as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the set of rapidities @xmath is a solution to the Bethe equations
(we are going to say that it is an “on-shell Bethe vector”) and @xmath
is an arbitrary set of parameters (‘‘off-shell Bethe vector’’). These
scalar products can be constructed as a ratio of two determinants ¹² ¹²
12 N. A. Slavnov proved this formula by induction in [ 167 ] . There are
other ways to prove it, like the use of the F-basis [ 163 ] or by direct
application of eq. ( 5.2.27 ). ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath matrices given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

An equivalent expression holds if we put the set of @xmath operators
on-shell and the set of @xmath operators off-shell.

If we take the limit @xmath in these expressions we recover the Gaudin
formula for the square of the norm of a Bethe state [ 166 , 168 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.2.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This way of calculating scalar products is valid for the case of a
finite spin chain. The generalization of these expressions to the
thermodynamical limit of very long chains can be found, for example, in
reference [ 169 ] .

We must note that there is a more general expression for computing the
scalar product of two off-shell states [ 166 ] . However, we are not
going to explicitly write it here nor use it as it cannot be written as
a determinant, only as a sum over partitions, making it more difficult
to handle.

To end this section we are going to propose a way of simplifying a
little bit the computation of the scalar products. To do that we need
the following property of the R and L matrices: the Yang-Baxter and RLL
equations define these matrices up to an scalar factor, therefore we can
change our normalization choice without changing the underlying physics.
One good choice is to make, which we are going to use for the rest of
this thesis

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This choice makes the eigenvalues of the @xmath and @xmath operators on
the reference state @xmath and @xmath . Hence we only have to care about
one of the factors and the periodicity condition simplifies to @xmath .

#### 5.3 Normalization issues

States in the algebraic and the coordinate Bethe ansatz are normalized
differently. As a consequence, any correlation function evaluated using
the ABA will differ from the corresponding CBA computation by some
global factor. We will see that this global factor is going to arise
from the states not being properly normalized and an extra global phase.

The simplest correlation function that exhibits this issue is @xmath .
In the CBA this correlation function is given by @xmath . In order to
approach the calculation of this correlator in the ABA we just need to
write the spin operators in terms of elements of the monodromy matrix,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

From the commutation relation ( 5.2.27 ) we find that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.3.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

with an identical result for @xmath . Recalling that the Bethe ansatz
equation for a single-magnon state, which the normalization presented in
eq. ( 5.2.46 ), reads @xmath we conclude that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.3.3)
  -- -- -- ---------

We can try to solve the disagreement with the CBA dividing this result
by the norm of the state. This can be easily computed using the Gaudin
formula ( 5.2.45 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.3.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

which is the result in the CBA provided we divide by the norm of the
state in there. Thus we conclude that indeed both ansätze were not
properly normalized.

However we can see that the procedure of dividing the correlation
function by the norm of the states is not enough to cure the
disagreement for general cases. We can easily exhibit that dividing by
the norm is not enough if for instance we calculate the form factor
@xmath and divide by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The reason for the additional @xmath factor is that besides the
different normalization there is also an additional phase which depends
on the rapidity (See reference [ 55 ] for a discussion on this point).

In order to fix the normalization of states in the ABA with respect to
the normalization of states in the CBA we will go back to the definition
of the transfer matrix, equation ( 5.2.3 ), and apply it to the ground
state,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.3.7)
  -- -- -- ---------

If we focus on the operator @xmath , we can write ¹³ ¹³ 13 The operator
@xmath , when not applied over the vacuum, has extra terms which are
schematically of the form @xmath with @xmath , a combination of rising
and lowering operators applied all at different sites in the lattice
with always one more lowering operator than raising operators.

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Therefore states with a single magnon in the ABA, @xmath , relate to
states in the CBA through

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When we repeat this with the state @xmath we conclude that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

because for bra states

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and therefore ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Extra terms of the @xmath operator will have the
same structure than the one for the @xmath operator but with one more
rising operator than lowering operators, @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

An identical discussion holds in the case of states with more than one
magnon, so in general we conclude that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.13)
     @xmath      (5.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first factor can be removed by an appropriate normalization of the
states, and thus there will only remain a shift in the position of the
coordinates by @xmath . The second factor is related to the fact that
CBA states are not symmetric if we interchange two magnons. In fact they
pick up a phase which is equal to the @xmath -matrix. On the other hand
ABA states are symmetric under exchange of two magnons. Therefore if we
want to obtain the same result from the CBA and the ABA we will have to
normalize carefully the states. This can be done if we choose the phase
in such a way that the correlation functions have the structure @xmath ,
for reasons we will explain later ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Actually there is more
freedom in this choice. If we write the S-matrix as @xmath , we can use
instead the product @xmath . Although the easiest choice is @xmath ,
this function can be redefined by a multiplication by a function
symmetric in @xmath and @xmath . In particular @xmath is another
possible choice. We want to thank I. Kostov for pointing us this fact. .
Despite being a very ad hoc solution, we are going to keep this idea in
mind.

An alternative argument can be obtained if instead of using B-states to
define the excitations we use Z-states , where ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Here we are
going to follow the definition given in [ 135 ] . However a different
definition was used in [ 170 ] .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In fact it is natural to use these states because they generate a
Zamolodchikov-Faddeev algebra [ 136 ] , that is, the operators commute
up to an @xmath -matrix,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Later we will define the Zamolodchikov-Faddeev algebra in more detail,
but for the moment we are going to use this definition as the @xmath
sector does not have any index structure. Note that in this way states
in the ABA will have the same behavior under the exchange of two magnon
states in the CBA.

In order to be able to work with @xmath -states we will have first to
calculate the commutation relation between the operator @xmath and the
@xmath operator. To find this commutator we will start by taking the
commutation relations between @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now if we left and right-multiply both expressions by @xmath , and
commute a factor @xmath arising in the second equation, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We also need the action of @xmath over the vacuum state, which can be
easily proven to be trivial. We thus conclude that there is a
relationship between the @xmath -states and the @xmath -states,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used that if we have two magnons with the same rapidity
the state must vanish. Therefore

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.18)
  -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes just an ordering operator in the rapidities. Hence
using the Zamolodchikov-Faddeev states instead of the usual magnon
states introduces a phase shift. In fact this phase is the factor we
wanted to introduce ad hoc.

However there could still be a problem if the norm of our states behaves
in the same way. We can exclude this possibility if we introduce the
operators @xmath . To prove that this is the adequate operator we need
in order to define the correct left-state, we first have to calculate
the commutation relations of @xmath with @xmath . Using the same
procedure as before we find that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

With these equations at hand we can easily prove that @xmath generates a
Zamolodchikov-Faddeev algebra, @xmath , and also that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.19)
  -- -- -- ----------

so that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is indeed symmetric under exchange of @xmath and @xmath as we
wanted ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 Although it is very similar to the
Zamolodchikov-Faddeev, in reality it is more similar to the algebra
proposed by [ 171 ] based on the Yangian double of @xmath . The
difference between both algebras is the commutation relation of the
annihilation operators with the creation operators. .

#### 5.4 BDS spin chain

In the introduction 1.2 we presented the equivalence between the
dilatation operator at one-loop and the Heisenberg spin Hamiltonian. We
can make the exercise of computing higher-loop order planar diagrams and
try to map the new dilatation operator to another spin chain. The
two-loop calculation of the dilatation operator for the @xmath sector
was performed in [ 172 ] by computing only the flavour-permutation
diagrams and determining the term proportional to the identity by
imposing the vanishing of the contribution for the ground state. This
contribution can be written in terms of the permutation operator we
defined in subsection 5.2.2

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so already at two-loops we have interactions beyond nearest-neighbours.
One of the first things that can be shown is that at a given loop order
@xmath the relevant Feynman diagrams can only generate permutation
structures involving @xmath nearest-neighbour, as each nearest-neighbour
permutation is associated with a least one-loop in the underlying
Feynman graph.

As we commented before, we were able to perform the analysis of the
@xmath sector at one-loop because it is what is called closed sector ,
that is, there is no mixing with other sectors. The two-loop computation
proved that it is also closed at this level. In fact the @xmath sector
is closed at all loops ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 This is a consequence of the commutation
of the dilatation operator with the Lorentz and R-symmetry generators,
so mixing can only appear between operators with the same R-charges,
Lorentz charges and bare dimensions. Examples of other closed sectors
are the @xmath sector formed by three types of scalars and two types of
fermions, and the @xmath sector formed by one type of scalar field and
covariant derivatives with one type of polarization. The @xmath sector
we presented in the introduction is only closed at one-loop. .

The first attempt to construct a long-range spin chain to model the
all-loop dilatation operator was [ 173 ] , where it was found that, up
to three-loop order, the dilatation operator in the @xmath sector may be
constructed from the conserved charges of the Inozemtsev model [ 174 ,
175 ] . This proposal lead to an extension to all-loop order made by
Beisert, Dippel and Staudacher [ 29 ] , who proposed to extend the
three-loop @xmath Bethe ansatz in a way that matches the prediction of
the string sigma model and with the BMN dispersion relation ( 1.3.1 ).
This would mean modifying the @xmath Bethe Ansatz equations in the
following way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

All the conserved quantities associated with this spin chain can be
written in the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

being the only exception the momentum, defined above. In particular, the
energy is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Those equations were obtained by redefining the coupling constant and
the charges of the Inozemtsev spin chain, therefore this has to be a
long-range spin chain by definition (that is, the Hamiltonian should
involve interactions beyond first nearest neighbours). Interestingly
this homogeneous long-range spin chain can be mapped to a short-range
inhomogeneous spin chain up to wrapping corrections. The basic idea is
that the left hand side of equation ( 5.4.2 ) can be expanded as a
polynomial and the first @xmath -th terms can be absorbed into the
degrees of freedom of the inhomogeneities, therefore being equivalent up
to wrapping order. Hence we can rewrite the Bethe equations in the
following way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the inhomogeneities have to be chosen in the following way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Because an inhomogeneous spin chain is easier to handle than a
long-range one, we are going to use this second realization in our
following computations.

Shortly after this, Beisert and Staudacher [ 30 ] conjectured the @xmath
symmetric @xmath -matrix for the @xmath spin chain ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 This is
because the excitations of a @xmath spin chain over the vacuum have a
residual @xmath symmetry from fixing the vacuum state. sector at all
loops, and, from the consistency relations which the nested Bethe ansatz
has to satisfy, they conjectured the full @xmath Bethe ansatz at all
loops. However there is still an element missing because BMN scaling
breaks down at the four-loop order. This is because the @xmath -matrix
is fixed by symmetry and Yang-Baxter up to an scalar factor. The element
missing is the so called dressing phase [ 176 , 177 , 178 ] . However we
are not going to include it in our computations.

#### 5.5 The Bootstrap program. Form factors

The bootstrap program is a non-perturbative method to construct a
quantum field theory in @xmath dimensions, not from a Lagrangian, but
from the symmetries of the theory and a set of properties we assume the
theory fulfils. It can be summed up in three steps.

1.  Computing the @xmath -matrix : for that we have to assume unitarity,
    crossing, an underlying symmetry (model dependent), fulfilling of
    the Yang-Baxter equation (if the theory is integrable) and maximal
    analiticity (sometimes called Landau property ). The last one means
    that the two-particle @xmath -matrix is an meromorphic function in
    the physical plane (usually called @xmath -plane, where @xmath is
    the only independent Mandelstam variable in @xmath dim., which we
    are going to analytically continue to the complex plane) that only
    has poles and cuts of physical origin. In particular there has to be
    two cuts @xmath and @xmath with @xmath the mass of the lightest
    particle in the theory, so the @xmath -matrix has to be analytic in
    the segment @xmath except for single poles associated to bound
    states.

2.  Computing the generalized form factors : form factors are matrix
    elements of local operator evaluated between two asymptotic states,
    one incoming and one outgoing. We will talk more about them below.

3.  Computing the Wightman functions : they can be computed from form
    factors by inserting a complete set of intermediate states. In
    particular, the two-point function for a Hermitian operator @xmath
    is given by

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.5.1)
      -- -------- -- ---------

And, by the Wightman Reconstruction Theorem, there have to exists a
(Wightman) QFT for which these functions are Wightman distributions [
179 ] . This program has already been accomplished for some models like
the Sine-Gordon model [ 180 , 181 ] , the Thirring model [ 182 , 183 ]
and the SU(N) Lieb-Lininger model [ 139 ] . Concerning the @xmath SYM,
the first step is already completed. Nowadays we are in the second step
of the program, as we are trying to understand the structure of the form
factors of the theory [ 184 , 185 , 186 , 187 ] .

For local operators, the generalized form factors are defined as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.5.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath are possible quantum numbers, and @xmath are the rapidity
variables, defined as @xmath and @xmath . Therefore if we want a well
defined “in” state we will have to order the rapidities as @xmath . In
the same way we can define form factors using out states,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the rapidities have to be ordered in the opposite way, that is,
@xmath . These two choices are consistent as the fastest particle starts
at the left, interacts with every other particle, and ends at the right.
We will define our form factors using the in-states because we will see
we can write @xmath as a function of @xmath . Maximal analiticity
(taking into account that the segment @xmath in @xmath has the segment
@xmath as image in @xmath ) and LSZ assumptions impose the following
constraints to the form factors:

1.  Watson’s equations [ 188 ] : they impose the transformation under
    the permutation of two variables (giving us how to analytically
    continue to other orderings of the rapidities)

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.5.4)
      -- -------- -- ---------

2.  Crossing relation; also known as deformed cyclicity . Crossing
    defines how to transform an outgoing particle into an ingoing
    particle

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.5.5)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    This equation is a consequence of the mapping between the Mandelstam
    variable @xmath and the rapidity @xmath , as the second one covers
    two times the first one, so @xmath maps to @xmath while @xmath maps
    to @xmath .

    It is interesting to use both axioms at the same time to write a
    tensor-valued Riemann-Hilbert problem,

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      
         @xmath      (5.5.6)
      -- -------- -- ---------

3.  Decoupling condition or particle-antiparticle poles. This kind of
    poles appear when we have a particle-antiparticle pair with opposite
    momenta, so @xmath and @xmath . These poles have residue

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.5.7)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath is the charge conjugation transformation and @xmath
    takes into account the statistics of the operator with respect to
    excitation @xmath .

4.  Bound state poles. For models with bound states there are additional
    poles on the @xmath -matrix with residue @xmath . It is sufficient
    to indicate these poles in the strip @xmath Im @xmath because the
    first two axioms can be used to obtain the rest of them. Then the
    form factors should have simple poles at this bound states with
    residue

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (5.5.8)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Note that form factors containing bound states are secondary objects
    as they can be obtained as residues of form factors of the main
    particles of our theory. Therefore we do not need to compute them.

Finally, not as an axiom but as a consequence of its analytical
properties, form factors of general kind (that is, where the operator is
evaluated between non-trivial in and out states) can be written as an
usual form factor as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This relation provides another way of writing the crossing condition
where the crossing is more explicit,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.5.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

A convenient way to construct states that obey these four axioms is to
use creation and annihilation operators that satisfy the
Zamolodchikov-Faddeev algebra ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 We have already presented the ZF
algebra for the @xmath spin chain in eq. ( 5.3.16 ). However in this
case we need the ZF algebra for a bigger group so we have to care about
the index structure of the operators and of the @xmath -matrix. A
particular index structure is not widely accepted, so we find several
different choices in the literature [ 189 , 190 , 191 ] . Throughout
this thesis we are going to follow the same definition as [ 54 ] , as it
will prove useful later. , defined in the following way

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

This set of operators will automatically assure the fulfilling of the
first, third and fourth axioms because they are properties implemented
directly by the presence of the @xmath -matrix. The second axiom comes
from the writing of out-states as a function of in-states, so it is also
fulfilled.

We want to end this section by pointing out one of the most important
properties of having form factors that satisfy this set of axioms: the
local commutative theorem . This theorem [ 54 ] assures us that two
local operators will commute on a space-like interval if their form
factors satisfy these axioms.

### Chapter 6 Two-points functions and ABA

Taking this point of view, there is a possibility afforded of a
satisfactory, that is, of a useful theory […], never coming into
opposition with the reality, and it will only depend on national
treatment to bring it so far into harmony with action, that between
theory and practice there shall no longer be that absurd difference
which an unreasonable theory, in defiance of common sense, has often
produced, but which, just as often, narrow-mindedness and ignorance have
used as a pretext for giving way to their natural incapacity.

– Carl Von Clausewitz, On War [ 192 ] , Book II, Chapter II

In this chapter we are going to apply the inverse scattering techniques
presented in the previous chapter to compute correlation functions in
general and form factors in particular. This will provide an
understanding of generic correlation functions which could be employed
to shed some light on the spectrum of correlation functions in the
AdS/CFT correspondence.

The ABA and the solution to the inverse scattering problem were first
used in [ 193 ] to evaluate three-point functions of scalar operators in
@xmath SYM as inner products of Bethe states. This lead to the later
expressions of structure constants in terms of some elegant determinant
expressions and integrals [ 55 , 194 , 195 , 196 , 197 , 198 , 199 , 200
, 201 , 202 , 203 , 161 , 204 , 205 , 206 ] . We will review some of
these works in the following chapter.

We will consider here the case of correlation functions with spin
operators located at non-adjacent sites in the @xmath sector of @xmath
SYM. In the first section we will present how computations of spin
operators are related to scalar products of one on-shell Bethe state
with one off-shell Bethe state. As an example we will compute the
correlation function @xmath . In the second section we will move to the
slightly more difficult computation of correlation functions involving
two spin operators. This will require some care because some apparent
singularities have to be removed for the homogeneous spin chain case,
but the final answer has to be finite. Our method to obtain a finite
answer consists on rewriting the problem in a recursive way. This
approach will be the central part of this chapter. The following section
will be dedicated to the application of this method to the case of three
spin operators. In the fourth section we will repeat the same
computation but in the BDS spin chain presented in section 5.4 by using
its inhomogeneous short-range spin representation. The results presented
in this chapter are contained in [ 138 ] .

#### 6.1 Correlation functions involving one operator

We are going to begin the evaluation of correlation functions of spin
operators by explicitly computing the case of the three-magnon form
factor @xmath . At the end of the section we will explain the extension
to form factors with @xmath outgoing magnons and @xmath ingoing magnons,
as it is a generalization of the computation below. Using relation (
5.2.38 ) we can bring the problem to a computation in the ABA,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.1.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Note that although @xmath satisfies the Bethe equations for a
single-magnon state, the pair @xmath does not define a Bethe state.
Therefore to find this form factor we need to calculate the scalar
product of an arbitrary vector with a Bethe state. This can be done
following the recipe we stated in section 5.2.3 . The first step is to
write (recall that @xmath for the Heisenberg chain)

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

so that the @xmath and @xmath matrices are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have used that @xmath and that for a single-magnon the Bethe
ansatz equations imply @xmath . After some immediate algebra the form
factor becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now if we want to read this result in the normalization of the CBA we
need to recall the discussion in section 5.3 . In the case at hand

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we have to divide by the norm of the states in both cases, which can
be easily calculated using the Gaudin formula ( 5.2.45 ). In the ABA,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Recalling again section 5.3 , states in the CBA and the ABA are related
through

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and thus we conclude that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.1.9)
  -- -- -- ---------

Therefore at leading order the norm contributes with a factor @xmath for
each magnon and it does not contain any momentum dependence. The
properly normalized form factor will be

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

At this point there are two important points we should stress. The first
one is that the form factor in the CBA agrees with the computation in
the ABA when using Zamolodchikov-Faddeev states if we also perform the
change @xmath and we include a global minus sign. The second one is that
our expression for @xmath (regardless of whether it is the algebraic or
the coordinate one), conveniently normalized, is valid to all orders in
@xmath provided that we use an expression for the rapidities valid to
all orders in @xmath . We can thus write the rapidities in terms of the
momenta, @xmath and expand in the length of the chain. In the
single-magnon state the momentum is quantized as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the two-magnon state the solution to the Bethe equations can be
expanded as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We conclude that for the case of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The leading order term in this expression is the three-particle form
factor obtained in [ 184 ] using the CBA with one particle of momentum
@xmath and two external particles of momenta @xmath and @xmath . In
order to obtain the subleading term we need to take into account the
@xmath contributions to @xmath and @xmath .

We can get a more compact result, valid to all orders in @xmath , if we
take into account the trace condition ( 5.1.24 ). Then in the two-magnon
state we have @xmath , and the Bethe equations can be solved
analytically, ¹ ¹ 1 We impose the trace condition on the two-magnon
state rather than on both states, because in this later case the
correlation function becomes zero. From the CFT point of view this
happens because the one-excitation state is not a new primary operator
but a descendent of the vacuum.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are integer numbers.

The same computation can be carried out for the operator @xmath
evaluated on on-shell Bethe states with higher number of magnons. First
of all, the left and right @xmath factors act in a known way over the
states, as they are Bethe states. Hence the only difficult step is to
compute the scalar product between an on-shell state, @xmath , and an
off-shell state, @xmath , using equation ( 5.2.43 ). A detailed
computation of these form factors can be found in section 3.1.6 of [ 207
] .

Of course, the computation of correlation functions of the operator
@xmath can be obtained as the conjugate of the computation we have
presented in this section. The way of proceeding for the @xmath operator
is a little bit different, but in the following section we are going to
talk about the operators @xmath and @xmath that can be evaluated in a
similar way to this one.

#### 6.2 Correlation functions involving two operators

In the previous section we have described how the ABA can be employed to
calculate correlation functions for one spin operator. However there
seems to be problems with this method when we want to perform
computations involving two or more operators. This is because most
correlation functions have the general form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, according to the algebra ( 5.2.27 ), whenever we try to
commute the @xmath operators with the @xmath operator a divergence
should appear. In this section we are going to show that actually there
are no divergences at all. We will describe how to deal with these
apparent divergences. We will first show how to proceed in the most
simple case, that is, when we only have the operator @xmath at the left
of the @xmath factor. Later on we will extend the computation to more
general correlation functions involving additional factors.

##### 6.2.1 Evaluation of @xmath (in an easy way)

We are going to start by evaluating the correlation function @xmath . By
using equation ( 5.2.41 ) we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As in the previous section, the action of the @xmath factors over the
Bethe states are known to give exponential of the momenta,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.2.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

Now we can apply the commutation relation ( 5.2.23 ) to move the @xmath
operator all the way to the right (similarly, we can do it by moving it
to the left). Using the reordering symmetry of the @xmath operators as
we did previously to compute equation ( 5.2.31 ) we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath means that the rapidity @xmath is missing from the set
@xmath . If we now apply this expression to the bra state @xmath , the
first term of the sum will involve the scalar product between both
on-shell states, which means that it will only contribute when @xmath .
The rest of the terms will involve the computation of off-shell-on-shell
scalar products. The final answer is then

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.2.4)
  -- -- -- ---------

Although at first sight it seems that we can use equation ( 5.2.43 ) to
compute it, there are some subtleties. To get a better understanding of
this formula and some of the difficulties related with its explicit
computation, we are going to see some particular cases of a low number
of magnons. The most trivial case is the empty case @xmath , which reads

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.2.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

Which trivially agrees with the result we get using CBA. The first
non-trivial case is the one with a single magnon, which reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we impose now the Bethe equations @xmath , we find two well
differentiated cases: either @xmath and everything but the last term
cancels, or @xmath and the first term becomes the norm of the state. So
the final answer can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The second one is easily comparable with the CBA, because the result can
be expressed as @xmath , which agrees with the CBA. In the same way,
after properly normalizing, we obtain that the case @xmath is equal to
@xmath , which is the same expression that can be obtained using the CBA
up to the already expected shift of half a lattice spacing.

Although the one-magnon case has no problems, the case @xmath already
contains some subtleties that will be present for all cases with higher
number of magnons. In particular this computation will involve the
calculation of the correlation functions @xmath and @xmath which
apparently diverge when computed using the Slavnov determinant ( 5.2.43
). This apparent divergence appears because this scalar product have
already been simplified using the Bethe equations. Therefore to find the
correct answer we have to compute first @xmath as off-shell rapidities
and, without imposing the Bethe equations, take the limits @xmath and
@xmath respectively ² ² 2 We want to thank N. A. Slavnov for discussions
about this subject. .

##### 6.2.2 Evaluation of @xmath (in a non-easy way)

Now we are going to repeat the computation from the previous section but
instead of using the definition of @xmath we are going to use the
definition of @xmath and @xmath in a separate way. The computation is
going to be more cumbersome and longer, but it has two advantages with
respect to the previous one: firstly it can be generalized to the
computation of correlation functions of @xmath , that is, where the two
operators are not placed in the same site, which cannot be done with the
procedure presented in the previous section; and secondly it is going to
lighten us the way to compute the correlation function of @xmath
operator. As we only want to present the basic computations and the
procedure to remove the apparent singularities, we are going to focus
mainly on the easiest correlation function to compute @xmath .

Again, the starting point in the ABA are the relations between local
spin operators in the CBA and the elements of the monodromy matrix. If
we recall that @xmath for the Heisenberg chain, we will need to evaluate

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to evaluate this correlation function we have to commute the
operators @xmath with @xmath or @xmath using equation ( 5.2.27 ).
However, although it seems that when trying to commute @xmath we should
obtain a pole of order @xmath because of the divergence of the
commutation relations when the two rapidities are equal, the residue
turns out to be zero for all @xmath and the expression is finite. In
order to understand this cancellation some care will be needed. Let us
first introduce some notation. We will define

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes any operator. The reason for the subindex @xmath is
that in all the cases that we will consider that @xmath includes a
factor @xmath . Then using ( 5.2.25 ) and ( 5.2.26 ) we can write

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Now if we expand in a Taylor series we find that all terms of order
@xmath cancel themselves. Therefore we can safely take the limit @xmath
to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We should stress that in this expression the derivative in @xmath must
be understood with respect to the argument of the @xmath operator. As a
consequence it does not act on the rest of the operators. This will
introduce some subtleties in the next step of the calculation. The idea
now is to use ( 6.2.11 ) as a recurrence equation to find @xmath .
However this is not straightforward, as it requires information on
correlation functions of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

but returns instead information about correlators of the form

  -- -- -- ----------
           (6.2.13)
  -- -- -- ----------

We must note also that the argument of the first @xmath factor in (
6.2.13 ) depends on @xmath and thus in order to find the correct
correlation function we should take the derivative with respect to
@xmath in @xmath , and then take the limit @xmath , instead of taking
directly the derivative in @xmath . Therefore using ( 6.2.10 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The remaining piece of the calculation is similar to the previous one.
In this case after a series expansion we find a pole of order two and a
pole of order one, but they cancel themselves. The final result is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

So far we have proven that when we have one derivative and we commute
one @xmath factor we get another derivative over the correlation
function. In general if we have @xmath derivatives we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

that can be easily proved if we assume that the left-hand side of the
equation has no poles. Under this assumption, when we expand in a Taylor
series we only need to track the terms without a factor @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The second term on the right hand side of this expression can be written
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the dots stand for terms proportional to @xmath . Now it is clear
that the terms in @xmath are canceled by the terms in @xmath . Therefore
the only term surviving is the one with @xmath , which does not have a
partner. This is expression ( 6.2.16 ).

Let us summarize our results up to this point. We have obtained a
complete set of recurrence equations,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is just a convenient notation to refer both to the
derivative and the limit,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we are ready to calculate the correlation function provided a
starting condition is given. In our case, using equation ( 5.2.27 ) ³ ³
3 It is important to stress here that this “norm” cannot be computed
using the Gaudin determinant ( 5.2.45 ) because it assumes the
fulfilling of the Bethe equation and @xmath is not a Bethe state. ,

  -- -- -- ----------
           (6.2.20)
  -- -- -- ----------

which takes values @xmath and @xmath .

In order to find the only non-vanishing correlation function, which we
know from CBA arguments and the previous subsection to be @xmath , we
have to calculate @xmath . Because @xmath has a zero of order @xmath ,
the only terms that can contribute are those which involve a number of
derivatives of @xmath greater than or equal to @xmath (other possible
terms will require many more derivatives). In appendix B we will
construct the correlation function @xmath in full generality, but in
this case it is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the limit @xmath we conclude that the value of this correlation
function is one, as expected from the CBA.

As we can see, the computations using this technique are longer. However
it is “worth” the effort as we can prove that @xmath for @xmath , which
cannot be computed using the procedure from the previous section and
agrees with the result @xmath when @xmath obtained using the CBA.

##### 6.2.3 Evaluation of @xmath

We will now evaluate the correlation function @xmath . Using relation (
5.2.38 ) we can bring again the problem to the ABA,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . The first factor @xmath acts trivially on the vacuum. On
the contrary, the last factor @xmath acts on the two magnon state @xmath
and provides a factor @xmath , where in the last equality we have used
the periodicity condition for the Bethe roots. The contribution from the
remaining factors can be obtained in a similar way to the previous
correlation function. To continue with the notation introduced in that
case, now we will name correlation functions with @xmath inner factors
of @xmath by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we will show, the problem can again be solved as a recurrence and
thus the starting point will be to find the initial correlator

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is the product of a on-shell Bethe state with an off-shell Bethe
state. As described in section 5.3 we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now the functions @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and thus the matrices @xmath and @xmath become

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

After some algebra we can easily organize @xmath as an expansion in
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.2.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

with @xmath and @xmath given by ⁴ ⁴ 4 Because of periodicity it is
unnecessary to write the explicit expression for @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath respectively. The next step
is to find the general form of the correlation function @xmath . Using
the recurrence equations ( 6.2.18 ) the first terms can be easily
calculated for a general value of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.2.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath . If we take now the limit @xmath , all the
@xmath and derivatives of @xmath disappear, unless it is a derivative of
@xmath of order greater or equal to @xmath . The computation of @xmath
with arbitrary @xmath is a little bit more involved. We have collected
all details in appendix B . We find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Heaviside step function. If we use now expansion (
6.2.28 ) and perform the derivatives we can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we are finally ready to evaluate @xmath for different values of
@xmath .

###### The case @xmath

We will first consider the case where @xmath , which corresponds to
@xmath . From ( 6.2.33 ) it is clear that when @xmath the only
contribution is from the @xmath terms, that can be easily summed up,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Recalling now that the rapidities parametrize the momenta, @xmath ,
equation ( 6.2.22 ) can be written as

  -- -- -- ----------
           (6.2.35)
  -- -- -- ----------

where we have inserted the S-matrix,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and we have taken into account that @xmath . Using now the Bethe
equations @xmath , we find

  -- -- -- ----------
           (6.2.37)
  -- -- -- ----------

Note that although this result is only true as long as @xmath , we
already find that it corresponds to what we should have obtained from
the CBA up to the factor in front of the bracket. At the end of this
section we will see how the normalization proposed in section 5.3 allows
to get rid of this factor.

###### The case @xmath

Our next step is the calculation of @xmath , which must be identically
zero, because it corresponds to the case where both operators are
located at the same site, @xmath . If we take equation ( 6.2.33 ), we
find that this correlation function can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The second term is already known from the previous calculation.
Therefore we only have to substitute the special value we are interested
in and make use of the Bethe equations to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore @xmath , as we expected from the CBA.

###### The case @xmath

The last correlation functions that we will evaluate will be those with
@xmath . Obviously, because of periodicity of the spin chain, we expect
that @xmath should equal @xmath . In order to prove this we will first
show that the contribution from the @xmath terms is going to be @xmath .
Next we will demostrate that this coefficient cancels @xmath , and thus
we will conclude that @xmath . Let us see how it goes.

Recalling the expression for @xmath in ( 6.2.29 ) and performing the sum
we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In order to obtain the coefficient of a particular @xmath we have to set
@xmath in the previous expression. For instance, the coefficient of
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have taken @xmath because all terms with @xmath do not
contribute to @xmath . We can rewrite the sum and the binomial
coefficients in a way that will allow us to use the definition of the
hypergeometric function,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where in the last equality we have used Kummer’s first formula,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore there is no contribution from @xmath . But the rest of the
coefficients will contribute with @xmath . Now if we use that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

together with @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.2.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we now remove the @xmath factor by extracting a @xmath matrix,
expression ( 6.2.46 ) cancels exactly the contribution from the sum of
the @xmath ’s in ( 6.2.34 ). Finally we conclude that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.2.47)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

which agrees with ( 6.2.37 ), but with @xmath and @xmath exchanged
because now we are in the case @xmath .

We will end this section by normalizing properly the above correlation
functions. Following the discussion in section 5.3 ,

  -- -- -- ----------
           (6.2.48)
  -- -- -- ----------

On the other hand, the norm of the states in the ABA is given by ( 6.1.7
), while

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, we conclude that

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Now, as in the case of the form factor calculated in the previous
section, we can take into account the trace condition ( 5.1.24 ). When
we replace the rapidities from equation ( 6.1.14 ) in these expressions,
after some immediate algebra we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath . This result extends the analysis in reference [ 193 ] ,
where this correlation function was calculated for the cases @xmath and
@xmath (we have written the factor @xmath on the left hand side of (
6.2.51 ) to follow conventions in there).

###### Higher number of magnons

The method we have presented can still be applied to evaluate
correlation functions with more than 2 magnons. The next easiest case is
the correlation function with 1+3 magnons, that is, @xmath . However we
will see that this computation will require information about the @xmath
correlation function. Hence we are going to begin the computation here
by proving that statement.

We will start by using relation ( 5.2.38 ) on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where as before @xmath . The factor @xmath acts on @xmath to give @xmath
, and the factor @xmath acts on the three-magnon state to give @xmath ,
where in the last equality we have used the periodicity condition for
the Bethe roots. Therefore our main problem will be to find the
correlation function

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.2.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Following the procedure that we have developed in the previous section
this can be done by relating @xmath to @xmath . In order to do this let
us start by introducing

  -- -- -- ----------
           (6.2.54)
  -- -- -- ----------

Now we just need to apply the commutation relations ( 5.2.25 ) and (
5.2.26 ) two times in each step to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.2.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking the limit and applying the Bethe equation for the rapidity @xmath
we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.2.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where again @xmath and @xmath . The next step of the calculation is a
little bit more involved than in the previous cases because according to
( 6.2.56 ) information about both functions @xmath and @xmath is now
needed. This will turn the computation slightly more difficult but still
manageable. For convenience in the expressions below we will define
@xmath . This function @xmath has a nice interpretation because

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.2.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

This proves our previous statement. When computing correlation functions
having a magnon in the bra state some terms will have those magnons
changed into an inhomogeneity as a consequence of the commutation
relations, which makes difficult to perform computations.

We could think that, as form factors should satisfy the axioms presented
in section 5.5 , the crossing transformation will simplify these kind of
computations as shown in equation ( 5.5.9 ). However, this is not
possible for our computation because the crossing condition requires to
know the particle-antiparticle transformation, which is hidden in the
perturbative expansion ⁵ ⁵ 5 From the point of view of the AdS/CFT
correspondence, this can be seen as the degeneration of the torus that
uniformized the magnon dispersion relation at weak-coupling when one of
the periods becomes infinitely large, thus forbidding us the access to
the crossing transformation. .

#### 6.3 @xmath and correlation functions involving three operators

Extracting information about correlation functions becomes a challenge
as the number of magnons increases. The method that we have developed
along these sections can however still applied to evaluate correlations
functions involving any number of magnons but it might require to trade
higher number of magnons by higher number of operators, as seen in the
previous section. In this section we are going to compute the
correlation function @xmath and, with this information, finish the
computation of @xmath .

Our starting point is thus to find the recursive equation for @xmath .
This can be obtained setting @xmath in expression ( 6.2.55 ) and taking
the limit @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that although the first term in this expression seems divergent, it
vanishes because of the commutation of the @xmath operators, which makes
the two derivatives equal. However, this method of calculating
recursively @xmath is going to create more problem than it solves,
because it will imply calculating the recurrence equation of derivative
of @xmath with respect to either the first or the second argument.
Therefore we are going to give the recursion relation of @xmath but
without taking the limit @xmath . To obtain this recurrence relation we
only need to substitute @xmath in equation ( 6.2.56 ), but without
imposing @xmath , as now it is not a solution of the BAE,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . Note that if we take @xmath equation ( 6.3.2 ) gives (
6.3.1 ). Now in the recurrence relation we need to include @xmath , but
this quantity is obviously known once we know @xmath .

We also need a recurrence equation for the derivatives. For the case of
@xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The last two sums cancel themselves except for the terms with @xmath .
Therefore

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used that @xmath . In a similar way we can obtain an
expression for the derivatives of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At this point the problem is, at least formally, solved. We have found
the recursion relation for @xmath and its derivatives, with @xmath as
the initial condition. These functions can then be substituted in the
recursion relation for @xmath and thus we can obtain the desired
correlation function. However, we are not going to present the general
form for the correlation function @xmath as function of @xmath , @xmath
and their derivatives because, although straightforward, it becomes
rather lengthy. This is because when we substitute the expression for
the derivatives the recursion relations turn to depend on all the @xmath
with @xmath , even after taking the limit @xmath . Instead we can
present the case of correlation functions with @xmath small, to exhibit
the nested procedure needed to write the result in terms of the initial
functions @xmath and @xmath . In particular we are going to consider the
first three functions, with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Thus we can
safely assume that @xmath so that all the @xmath and @xmath factors can
be set to zero in the limit @xmath . The first of these correlation
functions is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where for convenience we have defined @xmath . For simplicity, if no
arguments of this functions are given, @xmath and @xmath must be
understood. The last step of the computation reduces to calculating some
initial conditions, which now are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

These functions can be easily computed using equations ( 5.2.44 ).
However we are not going to present the explicit expression for these
scalar products because of its length and because we want to show the
way to solve the recurrence relation rather than obtaining the explicit
value of the correlation function.

The functional dependence of @xmath on @xmath is repeated for a given
value of @xmath and the lower correlator. That is, in the limit @xmath
the recurrence relation for @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore for the second correlation function we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we already know @xmath , it only remains to find the other two
functions entering ( 6.3.10 ). This can be done using the previously
obtained equations. We get

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.3.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

which reduce again to some dependence on the initial conditions we have
described before.

An identical computation can be done for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now, besides @xmath , that has been calculated just above this lines, we
need

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (6.3.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The cases with higher values of @xmath can be obtained along similar
lines.

To conclude our analysis we will brief comment on the calculation of
correlation functions @xmath , with general values of @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . The initial condition we would obtain from the determinant
expression of the on-shell-off-shell scalar product ( 5.2.43 ) would be
@xmath . With the procedure explained in this section we can separate
the lattice point in which the second and the third operator act,
obtaining @xmath . Note that in this case the value of @xmath in @xmath
will be proportional to the separation between @xmath and @xmath .
However it still remains to separate the first and second operator. This
last step can be solved using the tools from section 6.2.3 , as now the
problem only involves commuting a set of monodromy matrices through the
first @xmath operator.

#### 6.4 The long-range Bethe ansatz

In this section we are going to apply the method that we have developed
along this paper to the long-range BDS spin chain [ 29 ] . This can be
done quite easily because in most of our previous expressions we have
kept general the homogeneous point. As we saw in section 5.4 , the
long-range BDS spin chain can be mapped into an inhomogeneous
short-range spin chain, with the inhomogeneities located at

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore it is rather simple to extend all computations above to the
inhomogeneous short-range version of the long-range BDS Bethe ansatz.
Let us start with the computations done in section 5.3 for the XXX spin
chain. The normalization factor for the operator @xmath is
straightforward to compute given the expressions from that section,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We conclude therefore that in the inhomogeneous Bethe ansatz the
difference in normalization between the ABA and the CBA depends on the
site where the spin operator acts. An analogous result follows for the
operator @xmath .

Another example of computation that we can readily extend to the BDS
Bethe ansatz is the calculation of scalar products. This is immediate
because the solution to the inverse scattering problem in expressions (
5.2.38 )-( 5.2.40 ) is valid for an inhomogeneous spin chain.
Furthermore equations ( 5.2.43 ) and ( 5.2.44 ) can be directly used
without modifications. An immediate example is the calculation of the
form factor of the single-magnon state,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which as in the case of the homogeneous spin chain should also be
divided by the norm

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The limit @xmath reduces to the result in section 5.3 . In an identical
way we can extend the analysis to the correlation functions obtained in
section 6.2 . For instance,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The norm is now given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We should stress that an important difference when comparing with the
homogeneous XXX Heisenberg spin chain in the previous sections is that
because all the inhomogeneities are different the commutation of factors
@xmath does not lead now to any of the apparent divergences we had to
deal with in previous sections. Therefore we do not have to make use of
the procedure we have developed along this chapter. For instance, the
correlation function @xmath can be calculated by direct use of the
commutation relations ( 5.2.27 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.4.7)
     @xmath      (6.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the correlation function @xmath can be computed using
expressions ( 5.2.43 ) and ( 5.2.44 ) for the scalar product. The factor
@xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

collects the contribution from the momenta, as it is easy to see that in
the limit @xmath becomes the @xmath factor. We can in fact extend rather
easily expression ( 6.4.8 ) to the case where the spin operators are
located at arbitrary sites, @xmath . As all factors @xmath have
different arguments, they can be trivially commuted. Therefore the
correlation function must be invariant under exchange of the
inhomogeneities, except for the factors coming from the correlators
@xmath . We find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

or using the recursion relations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This correlation function is the all-loop generalization of the one
computed in subsection 6.2.3 . This computation was simpler than the one
for the one-loop case because we did not have to remove the apparent
singularities from the commutation relations, as the remaining loop
corrections separate the inhomogeneities of the spin chain between
themselves and from the XXX point. The one-loop results can be recovered
by taking the @xmath limit, transforming this equation into equation (
6.2.32 ) after properly dealing with the residues.

A similar discussion holds in the case of higher order correlation
functions, involving a larger number of magnons, but we will not present
the resulting expressions in here.

### Chapter 7 Tailoring and hexagon form factors

I adhered scrupulously to the precept of that brilliant theoretical
physicist L. Boltzmann, according to whom matters of elegance ought to
be left to the tailor and to the cobbler.

– Albert Einstein, The Special and the General Theory-A Clear
Explanation that Anyone Can understand [ 208 ] .

In the rest of this part we are going to focus on the study of
three-point correlation functions. The first section will be devoted to
the weak-coupling method for computing three-point functions as
weak-coupling using the spin chain language called Tailoring [ 55 ] .
The main idea behind this method is to “cut” the operators/spin chains
in two, perform some operation to one of the halves (“flip”) and compute
scalar products between two half spin chains from different operators
(“sew”). A proposal for an all-loop version of the tailoring method,
called hexagon proposal [ 60 , 18 , 209 , 210 ] , will be presented in
the second section. In the last section a rewriting of this proposal
using the Zamolodchikov-Faddeev algebra [ 52 ] will be presented. The
results presented in the last section will be collected in [ 211 ] .

#### 7.1 Tailoring method

The tailoring method was proposed in a series of four papers [ 55 , 56 ,
57 , 58 ] as a method for computing the structure constants @xmath
defined as the non-trivial part of the correlation function of three
local operators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The structure constants have in the planar limit a perturbative
expansion in the ’t Hooft coupling of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of colors. Here we are only going to discuss
the zeroth-order term @xmath in the @xmath sector for non-extremal
cases, that is, when all bridges @xmath are strictly positive ¹ ¹ 1
These lengths are usually called bridge , because @xmath is the number
of Wick contractions between operator @xmath and @xmath . We must impose
this positivity condition because, for non-extremal correlators, the
operator mixing between single-trace operators and double-trace
operators is suppressed by a color factor @xmath and does not need to be
considered. , as was proposed in [ 55 ] . Each operator is a single
trace operator made out of products of two complex scalar and is mapped
to a spin chain state. As explained before, in the @xmath sector these
scalars are usually denoted @xmath and @xmath , where are going to
consider the first one as the vacuum and the second one as the
excitation. It is important to notice that the only setup of three
operators that is fully contained in the sector we are interested in is
the following one: @xmath is formed by @xmath and @xmath fields, @xmath
is formed by @xmath and @xmath fields and @xmath is formed by @xmath and
@xmath fields. The scalar products of spin chains are defined by the
basic rules @xmath and @xmath . This will have important consequences
when we proceed to compute the scalar products we are interested in.

The method to construct the zeroth-order term of the structure constant
can be summarised in the following steps:

1.  Fixed a cyclic ordering of the three closed chains, we will break
    the spin chain associated to operator @xmath into left and right
    open subchains of lenghts @xmath and @xmath . We will do similarly
    to the other two. We will express the closed chain state as an
    entangled state of the left an right subchains. This step is called
    cutting , as the basic idea is to divide a generic state with @xmath
    magnons into a left subchain of length @xmath and a right subchain
    of length @xmath . The original state can be represented as an
    entangled state in the tensor product of both subchains,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Here the first sum represents how to distribute the magnons between
    left and right chains and has @xmath terms. A Bethe state has the
    property that, after breaking it, the subchain states still have the
    same Bethe state form. This is a consequence of the Bethe states
    being the eigenstates of a local Hamiltonian, so magnons propagate
    in a local way and do not know what happens far away. Hence a Bethe
    states breaks in two as

      -- -- -- ---------
               (7.1.3)
      -- -- -- ---------

    where the sum is over all @xmath possible ways of splitting the
    rapidities into two groups @xmath and @xmath . This is a
    simplification with respect to the general case as @xmath if @xmath
    . The splitting factor @xmath depend on the normalization of the
    states. In particular, with the choices commented on section 5.3 ,
    we have

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1.4)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    where, using the notation from the previous chapter, c and a mean
    the normalization from the CBA and ABA respectively and we have used
    the following notation to simplify the different kinds of products

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.1.5)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

    The subindex in the @xmath and @xmath means the length of the chain
    in which they are defined.

2.  We will perform a Wick contraction of the left subchain associated
    with the operator @xmath with the flipped version of the right
    subchain associated with the operator @xmath . The idea behind the
    flipping operation is to transform a ket into a bra state in such
    way that the Wick contraction of two ket states gives the same
    answer as the scalar product of the flipped state with the other ket
    remaining unchanged. Of course the result should not depend on which
    of the two subchains we choose to flip. To be consistent we choose
    to always flip the right subchain. This process is not the usual
    conjugation, as this one flips the order of the field and their
    charges while the flipping operator should only do the first
    operation. For example, in the @xmath fields language they act as

      -- -------- -- -------- --
         @xmath      @xmath   
         @xmath      @xmath   
      -- -------- -- -------- --

    If we rewrite the action in the space basis we have

      -- -------- -- -------- --
         @xmath      @xmath   
         @xmath      @xmath   
         @xmath               
      -- -------- -- -------- --

    where @xmath stands for charge conjugation. For a Bethe state with
    two magnons the flipping operation will act as

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath      
                              (7.1.6)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    so applied to the split chain we are interested in we have

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (7.1.7)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where we have used that @xmath . We refer to [ 55 ] for the
    algebraic version.

3.  Now we only have to compute the scalar products ( sewing ). This
    procedure has already been already explained in section 5.2.3 . In
    the general case this computation would imply computing three
    off-shell-off-shell scalar products. However only very particular
    configurations contribute when we cut and sew operators @xmath and
    @xmath because of the way these operators are constructed. In
    particular only the partition defined by @xmath has a non-vanishing
    contribution, being that of @xmath the only non-trivial cut. Also
    the contractions between @xmath and @xmath are trivial, as we simply
    contract vacuum fields, being the contractions with @xmath the
    non-trivial ones.

4.  Finally we will divide by the norm of the three original spin chain.
    We can then write the three-point function as

      -- -- -- ---------
               (7.1.8)
      -- -- -- ---------

    where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the rapidities of the first,
    second and third operators respectively.

    Luckily this generic formula can be simplified if any of the
    operators is a BPS operator. All these simplification are detailed
    in [ 55 ] .

Although we are not going to present generalizations of this method
here, it has been also applied successfully to larger groups like @xmath
[ 56 ] , non-compact spin chains [ 59 ] and supersymmetric spin chains [
212 ] .

#### 7.2 BKV hexagon

The main idea behind the hexagon proposal [ 60 ] is to consider the pair
of pants that represent the three-string interaction/three-point
correlation function as two hexagonal fundamental polygons stitched
together at three of the sides. There are several similarities with the
tailoring procedure we have presented in the previous section and,
indeed, it is an all-loop generalization of it. This conjecture has been
checked in numerous papers like [ 213 , 214 , 215 ] , where an agreement
has been shown with other computation methods. The only exception is the
supersymmetric case, where further signs had to be included when gluing
the hexagon forms factor to find the correct result [ 216 ] .
Interesting generalizations of the conjecture to four-point functions
were proposed by an extension of the hexagon proposal [ 18 ] and by
using the operator product expansion [ 209 ] . A generalization
involving Wilson loops has been also proposed [ 217 ] . The
regularization of divergences appearing when gluing back the hexagons is
explained in [ 210 ] .

When we cut the pair of pants into two hexagons we also cut each closed
string into two open strings, which will carry some of the excitations
of the closed string. Because an excitation can end up on either half
after cutting, we should sum over all such possibilities with some
weight, as we did in the cutting step of the tailoring method. With this
cut we have also created three new segments (the pants’ seams). Hence,
when stitching back we should sum over all possible states living on
them. This involves integrating over the rapidities of any number of
mirror excitations and bound states of them.

This method reduces the computation of three-point functions to that of
form factors of hexagon operators. These form factors in general depend
on the physical rapidities of the three operators and on the mirror
rapidities of the virtual particles. However this can be simplified by
making use of mirror transformations which map excitations on one edge
of the hexagon to a neighbouring one [ 60 ] . The mirror transformation,
which we are going to represent by a @xmath superindex, is defined as
the transformation that swaps the roles of space and time, therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the energy @xmath and the momentum @xmath are real. Note that two
subsequent applications of this mirror transformations, a @xmath
transformation, gives a crossing transformation. By sequential use of
such transformations any generic hexagon can be related to one with all
excitations in a single physical edge. We denote such a form factor,
which we are going to call canonical hexagon , as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are @xmath bifundamental indices ² ² 2 We will sometimes
use @xmath and @xmath instead of @xmath when we want to differentiate
between bosonic an fermionic indices. parametrizing the polarization of
the i ^(th) excitation @xmath .

Combining symmetry argument and bootstrap considerations, a conjecture
for the @xmath -magnon hexagon amplitude was proposed [ 60 ] ,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (7.2.3)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath accommodates the grading, @xmath is a state in the
fundamental @xmath multiplet and @xmath is Beisert @xmath matrix [ 218 ]
with dressing phase set to one. The scalar factor @xmath can be
constrained by crossing symmetry to be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are shifted Zhukowsky variables (already introduced in
section 5.4 with a different normalization), defined as @xmath , and
@xmath is (half) the BES dressing phase [ 177 ] .

An equivalent way of thinking about the hexagon form factor is by
introducing a vertex @xmath which can be contracted with three
spin-chain states ³ ³ 3 The explicit expression for this vertex has not
been explicitly computed previously, being that the aim of this chapter.
. For example, for a single magnon on the first spin chain

  -- -- -- ---------
           (7.2.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

We are going to use an invariant notation where each state is thought as
being made out of excitations on top of the same BMN Z-vacuum, that is,
we will not add the rotations and translations of having the operators
at different points and R-charge conservation. We will talk about this
transformation below.

##### 7.2.1 Symmetry of the hexagon form factor. Twisted translation

To start working we will have to define the vacuum for the three-point
functions. For the two-point function the vacuum is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which breaks the @xmath down to @xmath , so the excitations over the
vacuum form a multiplet of the last. For three-point functions, the
“vacuum” configuration is provided by the 1/2-BPS operators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath ’s are the @xmath polarization (null complex vectors in
6-dimensions). We can use the R-symmetry to align all the polarizations
along a particular @xmath direction, and conformal symmetry to put the
three operators in a line. Therefore we will only have to worry about
operators of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is called twisted-translated scalar , defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a quantity with mass dimension 1, and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is the twisted translation operator. This choice of vacuum further
breaks the symmetry to the diagonal part of the @xmath . In particular
only the generators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

commute with the twisted translation @xmath . Dotted and undotted
generators and indices represent the two different @xmath .

Non-BPS three-point functions are obtained by performing the twisted
translation to the non-BPS operators constructed on the Z-vacuum at the
origin,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the symmetry group of each state on each side of the hexagon
is the usual @xmath we are familiar with [ 218 ] , and the intersection
of the three symmetry groups is a single @xmath (actually it can be
centrally extended to @xmath ).

Let us examine a little bit more this @xmath subgroup and how it acts on
the @xmath magnons @xmath . The generators defined in eq. ( 7.2.11 ) act
exactly in the same way as the usual @xmath generators over the left
part of the magnon, thus we can identify both quantum numbers. The only
thing preventing a direct identification is that the generators act in a
non-standard way over the right part of the magnon since the roles of
@xmath ’s and @xmath ’s are exchanged. Luckily, it can be checked that
the quantum numbers agree with the ones with crossed rapidity @xmath [
60 ] . Therefore each magnon transforms in the tensor representation of
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This gives us a recipe on how to analytically continue magnon
excitations under a crossing transformation @xmath . Another interesting
way of understanding the origin of crossing is from a change of frames
that modifies which operator is inserted at the origin [ 18 ] .

##### 7.2.2 Hexagon form factors for 1 and 2 particles from symmetry

To compute simple hexagon form factors we are going to make use of the
@xmath invariance. To do that first we will centrally extend @xmath to
@xmath . This central extension can be defined from the central
extension @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This central element will appear in the anticommutators @xmath . With
this central charge we can enforce the diagonal @xmath symmetry by
imposing that the hexagon vertex is killed by the central element,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for a generic spin chain state @xmath . However there is a mild
non-locality in the chain of fundamentals used for describing the state.
This can be addressed in various ways but we are going to choose the
twisted notation of [ 219 ] , also called spin chain frame . In this
picture our previous equation is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath stands for the total momentum of the state, @xmath creates
or destroys one vacuum site in the chain, and @xmath is a parameter
common to the left and right representations. If we assume that the
@xmath maker is diagonalized by the vertex, such that @xmath , this
eigenvalue can be fixed to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath can be seen as the supersymmetrization of the @xmath group
that preserves 3 points in space-time and 3 (generic) null vectors in
R-charge space. Using this @xmath symmetry we can fix the one particle
hexagon form factors to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath         (7.2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -- ----------

If we choose the normalization in such a way that @xmath and use that
@xmath is annihilated by the right action of the supercharges, we can
relate @xmath and @xmath imposing

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are free parameters associated to relative
normalization between boson and fermions in the left/right multiplet, as
in [ 219 ] . For unitary representations @xmath and thus @xmath by a
proper choose of the phases.

The same analysis can be applied to two magnon form factors. By the
@xmath symmetry and the equations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the form factors take the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the elements of the Beisert @xmath -matrix [ 219 ] with
the dressing phase set to 1. @xmath and @xmath are defined as in the 1
magnon case, but with @xmath . It is important to emphasize that the
conjecture proposed ( 7.2.3 ) is in agreement with the symmetry
considerations we have presented, as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is related with the fact that only the diagonal part of both
@xmath groups is involved.

We want to end this section proving that this form factor indeed fulfils
the Watson equation ( 5.5.4 ) and the decoupling condition ( 5.5.7 ).
The Watson equation is satisfied because the hexagon vertex @xmath is
preserved by the action of the @xmath -matrix

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath the @xmath @xmath -matrix. Because the S-matrix is given by
a left and right S-matrices, we can use Yang-Baxter and unitarity to
cancel them. The scalar factor @xmath is compensated by the quotient

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The decoupling condition ( 5.5.7 ) is easily implemented and almost
immediately satisfied as the ansatz is written in terms of the @xmath
-matrix

  -- -- -- ----------
           (7.2.30)
  -- -- -- ----------

where the equation holds at the level of the pole in the @xmath channel
and @xmath is Beisert’s singlet [ 219 ] built out of the
particle-antiparticle pair @xmath . This condition is the same as
Janik’s crossing equation for the @xmath -matrix [ 220 ] as derived by
Beisert in [ 219 ] , except that the scalar factor in there should now
be replaced by @xmath . Thus the decoupling condition for this ansatz
boils down to the crossing equation,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is fulfilled by our choice of @xmath factor.

##### 7.2.3 Gluing the hexagons

As happens in the cutting of operators in the tailoring procedure, when
cutting the pair of pants into two hexagons we should keep record of the
structure of the Bethe wave function. This means that, when we construct
the three-point function from the hexagon form factor, for each physical
operator we have to sum over all possible bipartite partitions of the
set of magnons with some weight. The function @xmath that weights each
term can be understood in two as the product of two pieces. First, the
piece that takes into account the propagation of magnons to the second
hexagon and the interaction with all the magnons of the first hexagon

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Secondly, a part that for the three-point function is only a @xmath
factor for each magnon in the second hexagon

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This (originally mysterious) sign was understood in the nearly
simultaneous articles [ 18 , 221 ] . This sign takes into account the
explicit dependence on the coordinates of the hexagon form factors.
Hence we can write the complete weight as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using this weights, the asymptotic three-point function is written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This formula is only asymptotic as it does not include magnons in the
mirror chanels (the “seams”), so it can be systematically improved to
incorporate finite-size corrections by adding them, with the leading
correction corresponding to having a single particle passing through one
of the three mirror channels (see references [ 60 ] and [ 210 ] for a
more complete explanation of this subject).

#### 7.3 The algebraic hexagon

In this section we are going to try to give a motivation for the origin
of the matrix elements that appear inside the hexagon form factors. To
do that we are going to rewrite the proposal in a way more inspired by
the ABA by using Zamolodchikov-Faddeev (ZF) operators as building
blocks. First we are going to define the ZF algebra, which allows us to
directly write form factors that fulfil the Watson equation ( 5.5.4 ) by
construction, together with the Fock space that we are going to use
throughout this section; after that we will construct the
Wick-contracting vertex taking inspiration from how the identity
operator is constructed. With these tools at hand we can then check our
proposal for some simple examples. Finally we will try to generalize
this version of the proposal to more general hexagons and compute the
weights in front of the hexagon form factors.

##### 7.3.1 The algebraic hexagon recipe

###### Constructing the state

The first step will be the construction of the Fock space. For the
moment we will consider only the case of canonical hexagons ( 7.2.2 ).
Therefore we will put excitations only on one of the edges. In
consequence we can define the Fock Space as @xmath where ⁴ ⁴ 4 Actually
we should write @xmath and specify in which of the vacuums we apply our
operators. However, as we are going to work mostly with the canonical
hexagon, all operators will be applied to the same edge. Hence, instead
of writing the whole vacuum hexagon, we are going to write only the edge
in which all operators will act and drop the label on the operators to
alleviate notation.

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Instead of this Fock space, we are going to construct an equivalent one
but that will simplify our computations. The way we are going to proceed
is by breaking the original generators into generators of the left and
right @xmath representations ⁵ ⁵ 5 One way to formally do this breaking
is to introduce two non-dynamical fields @xmath and @xmath with a
coupling with the original operators given by @xmath . , @xmath and
@xmath . This will imply also breaking the original vacuum hexagon into
two hexagons, @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 Of which we are only going to conserve the
two edges on which the operators are going to act, @xmath , to alleviate
notation. We are going to define these operators in a way that they form
a ZF algebra with the Beiser @xmath @xmath -matrix as defined in [ 52 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Where the indices @xmath and @xmath are both dotted or undotted. This
imposes the same Zamolodchikov-Faddeev algebra to both @xmath
generators. We do not have to worry about the commutation between dotted
and undotted operators as they are applied to different vacua.

However, the naïve construction has a problem as it has two degrees of
freedom for each one we originally had. This is easily seen when we
compute the commutation relation of our original operators in terms of
this separated construction,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We get two delta functions instead of only one as an indication that we
have to kill one of the degrees of freedom as they will generate @xmath
terms. A similar problem was encounter by [ 222 ] although in that case
is a consequence of boundary states living in an infinite volume. Our
way to solve the problem is to divide the form factors by the square
root of the norm of the state, after some regularization. The way we are
going to proceed is to multiply the operators by an smearing function
and regularize both in the same way

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath if @xmath .

This decomposition generates also another problem: if both algebras
transform in a representation of @xmath , the generator @xmath do not
transform in @xmath . A solution to that problem has been already
commented at the end of section 7.2.1 , where it was suggest to change
the rapidity from the generator of dotted indices from @xmath to @xmath
.

There is still one last step in the construction of the Fock space.
Because our generators form a ZF algebra, they do not commute and the
ordering in which we apply them is important. Our choice is going to be
from left to right. To sum up,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.8)
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (7.3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath .

We have to define also other kinds of operators, which we are going to
call “Cartan Generating Functions”. These will be a Yangian current
associated to the Cartan elements of the algebra. We will assume that
they behave like

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath will depend on the edge of the hexagon we are applying the
operator to, and @xmath is the momentum associated with the magnon.

###### Construction of the vertex

Now that we have defined the Fock space we can start thinking about the
vertex we are going to apply to a state to obtain the hexagon amplitude.
To do that first we are going to construct the identity operator, as
both will have similarities.

###### Identity operator

First we can see that the identity operator can be constructed using the
ZF operators we have defined in the previous section as

  -- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath         (7.3.13)
     @xmath         (7.3.14)
  -- -------- -- -- ----------

where @xmath means the exponential defined as its formal series arranged
in the following way: the terms on the left side of the tensor product
are ordered from left to right, and the terms on the right side of the
tensor product are ordered from right to left. It is easy to check that
the operators defined in this way are @xmath and @xmath invariant,
respectively. Expanding the exponential and applying the definition of
the ZF algebra we can see that the first non-trivial case,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

is invariant, and so it is well defined. The same happens for dotted
indices. The generalization to higher terms of the expansion is trivial.
Note that the choice of the ZF algebra commented in the footnote of
section 5.5 is important here: If we choose @xmath instead (note the
different ordering of upper indices in the @xmath -matrix) we cannot
exponentiate the identity because the invariant combination is @xmath ,
where operators in each side of the tensor product are not the same.

We still have to prove that this is the identity operator. For the cases
of 0 and 1 (tensor products of) ZF operators it is trivial to prove. The
first non trivial case is again the one with two operators, which we are
going to prove it only for the dotted identity, as the undotted one is
proven in exactly the same way

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The case of higher terms in the expansion is similarly proven.

###### Constructing the vertex

We are going to construct a vertex that contracts a dotted index and an
undotted index with an @xmath symbol. Drawing inspiration from the
construction of this identity operators, the vertex that gives the
correct result is ⁷ ⁷ 7 Note that, as @xmath , the interpretation of
this vertex as a boundary operator becomes very appealing.

  -- -- -- ----------
           (7.3.16)
  -- -- -- ----------

Where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

First we are going to prove that it indeed acts on a general product of
@xmath operators in the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the same for undotted

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The proof is very similar to the one for the identity operator. For the
case of 0 and 1 operators the proof is trivial. The first non-trivial
case is again the one with two operators, being the rest an easy
generalization of this one. We are also going to do it for one
combination, because the rest of the combination can be done exactly in
the same way.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The first factor is a scalar product that can be computed using the
Zamolodchikov-Faddeev algebra. The final result is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Where we have not added the @xmath over the rapidities to alleviate
notation. At this point we cannot do further unless we define a relation
between the S-matrices of the two @xmath factors, which we are going to
fix to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The reasoning behind this definition is that the contraction of a state
with this vertex @xmath should be independent of on which set of
operators (dotted or undotted) we act on first. This can also be related
with the fact that we are selecting the diagonal part of the @xmath
group of both generators. With this relationship at hand, the term with
the @xmath -matrix inverts the ordering of the dotted operators which
gives the final result

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The transformation of undotted creation operators into dotted
annihilation operators is proven in a similar way.

The invariance of this vertex with respect to the @xmath group can be
derived in a similar way we did for the identity operator, because one
of the the @xmath component can be related to the opposite components
via a @xmath transformation, which is a particle-antiparticle
transformation, replacing the operator @xmath by an annihilation
operator of the other component does not alter the invariance properties
of the vertex.

###### Computing simple examples and checking the proposal

To alleviate notation, from now on all the rapidities associated to an
operator with dotted indices will be understood to be transformed by
@xmath .

Let us first check that the @xmath symbol is our metric, as we intended.
We need to check that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we substitute directly the ZF operators without the smearing we get
the right answer multiplied by a delta evaluated at zero

  -- -------- -- ----------
                 
     @xmath      (7.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the first term in the third line is canceled because the right
(left) vacuum is annihilated by the @xmath ( @xmath ) operators. If
instead we choose to act with the proposed vertex on the dotted one the
steps are the same mutatis mutandis, giving exactly the same answer.

If we introduce the smearing functions and divide by the square root of
the norm we have to compute and regularize

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which eliminates the @xmath multiplying the form factor we are
interested in.

The case of two magnons is a little more involved

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Before we perform the integration with the smearing functions we are
going to take a look at this structure. We can identify two terms, a
terms that is going to give us the desired result and a second term that
can be considered a disconnected contribution. This last term, after the
regularization, would be multiplied by @xmath . This factor does not
contribute as no two rapidities are equal in a general on-shell state ⁸
⁸ 8 A couples of reasons for that statement are that equal rapidities do
not yield proper Bethe wavefunctions [ 223 ] and that strings (in the
thermodynamical limit the solutions of the Bethe equation cluster around
lines called strings ) with two equal rapidities have no weight in
equilibrium problems [ 224 ] . Appart from that, ZF operators with equal
rapidities behave like fermionic operators if the S-matrix behaves like
@xmath , which is our case. . However it is important to talk about it
because, by transferring excitations from a different edge, we could end
with excitations with the same rapidity.

If we repeat the same regularization procedure as before, we can see
that the final result is @xmath . It is the same that [ 60 ] obtained
but with a different ordering of the indices of the @xmath -matrix as a
consequence of our different definitions of the @xmath -matrix.

Let us move now to the case of three magnons. After applying the same
kind of commutation relation the final expression for the three magnons
form factor is, schematically

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (7.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here we can identify three different kinds of terms: the first kind (red
term) is the term we want and, as in the other two cases, is the same
that the authors of [ 60 ] obtained but with a different definition of
the indices of the @xmath -matrix. The second kind of terms (green
terms) will be proportional to the square of a delta function of two
rapidities times @xmath , making these factors irrelevant unless two
rapidities are the same, as happens in the case of two magnons. Terms of
the third kind (dark yellow terms) are a little different from the green
terms but the regularization is very similar, giving us at the end a
factor @xmath .

Note that we can also classify the terms we have obtained by the number
of S-matrices they contain: one term with no @xmath -matrix, two with
one @xmath -matrix, two with two S-matrices and one with three
S-matrices. This sequence can be generalized to any number of magnons,
and it matches the sequence of the Mahonian numbers [ 225 ] .

If we move now to the case of four magnons we will find a similar
situation: one contribution which is equal to the one obtained by [ 60 ]
, and contributions that after integration will have from two to four
delta functions. It might seems that some of these contributions are not
disconnected, but it can be shown that they actually are disconnected
after a reordering of the rapidities of the diagram by including @xmath
-matrices, see figure 7.1 .

Therefore we have a method to compute the canonical hexagon form factor
just by defining a Fock space and a “boundary operator”.

##### 7.3.2 Generalizations of the recipe. Computations for
non-canonical hexagons

Now that we have a formal recipe for computing the canonical hexagon, in
this subsection we are going to deal with the generalization of the
framework. The first part of the subsection will be an explanation on
how to deal with a hexagon with excitations applied to all of the edges.
The second part will deal with the cutting of the pant into two
hexagons.

###### Transforming a general hexagon into the canonical hexagon

We will first explain the recipe for computing non-canonical hexagons,
that is, hexagons with excitations in all six edges.

An operator that transfers excitations from the physical sides of the
hexagon (which are the third and the fifth if we count the canonical one
as the first side) to the canonical side can be constructed in a similar
way as we construct the identity operator,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.27)
     @xmath      (7.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the choice of indices comes from the properties of our
representation of @xmath , eq. ( 7.2.13 ), which imply that @xmath as we
explained in section 7.2.1 . We refer to [ 60 ] for a more detailed
explanation.

We also have to add excitations on the three mirror sides of the
hexagon. However the transformation of the indices is more involved in
this case. Despite that problem, we can still add some operators to take
that effect into account because, in the final formula, we have to sum
over all possible excitations in the mirror edges (and over all possible
number of excitations and integrate over all possible rapidities).
Therefore we can forget about the transformation and directly put the
sum over the already transformed indices,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.3.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a measure. Obviously, when we take into account all of
the transformations, we have to add them as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

because, as we have already stated, the order in which we move the
excitations is important.

###### Computations with two hexagons. The Drinfeld coproduct

In this part of the subsection we are going to see how to deal at the
same time with the two hexagons we get when we cut the pair of pants and
how to compute the weights for each of the partitions of the
excitations. To do it we are going to start with some definitions.

The coproduct (or comultiplication) is an operation defined in a Hopf
algebra @xmath such that @xmath . The physical meaning of this operation
is the construction of two-particle operators from one-particle
operators. One of the main properties we would like our coproduct to
have is called co-associativity, defined as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which physically means that the three-particle operators are well
defined. This relation still leaves space for some twisting of a given
coproduct by an algebra automorphism @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In particular, we are interested in the so-called Drinfeld coproduct. A
definiton of this coproduct in the Yangian double of @xmath that can be
found, for example, in eq. (3.5) of [ 171 ] ⁹ ⁹ 9 The operators they
propose do not exactly form a ZF algebra because the commutation
relations with the annihilation operators @xmath are no exactly the
correct ones, as they have an extra Cartan generating function. Note
that their definition of Cartan generating function is different from
ours, being the equivalence between notations @xmath . However the
algebra generated by @xmath actually form a ZF algebra. The same happens
with the algebra generated by @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are some creation operators that commute up to an @xmath
-matrix, with commutation relations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as we can see, they commute up to a canonical @xmath -matrix.

We can take this definition of coproduct and apply it to our original
creation operators @xmath in the @xmath bifundamental representation ¹⁰
¹⁰ 10 Note that this coproduct only works for the canonical S-matrix. A
coproduct for the Beisert S-matrix would need more structure.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we do that we get that the coproduct of two creation operators is,
schematically,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We recall here that our Cartan generating functions act on the vacuum
hexagon in the following way @xmath . Therefore if we commute @xmath and
use the previous fact, we get the @xmath part of the weight ( 7.2.35 ).

One way to get the missing signs is to add by hand a minus sign to the
second factor of the coproduct

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can check that this choice reproduces the weights( 7.2.35 ) from [ 60
] . However this “twisting” completely breaks the co-associativity
property of the coproduct. It would be interesting to see if a twisting
by an automorphism given by equation ( 7.3.32 ) can be used to obtain
this sign and the conformal cross ratios in the hexagonalization
proposal presented in [ 18 , 221 ] .

Now we have all the tools we need to give a final construction of the
complete hexagon vertex. Adding all the constructions from last two
sections in top of our canonical hexagon, we can write

  -- -- -- ----------
           (7.3.38)
  -- -- -- ----------

where we have to modify the operators for odd @xmath translations. We
still do not know how to modify the operators for @xmath and @xmath
because of the mixing between the two hexagons, but the one for @xmath
is related only with its counterpart in the other hexagon, so we can
write it as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.3.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where each of the operators act in a different hexagon.

Then we conclude that the vertex @xmath provides us equivalent results
as the vertex defined in [ 60 ] , both for hexagons in the canonical
configuration (as we have proved in the previous section) and general
hexagons (except for the problems to define the operators @xmath and
@xmath ). Therefore we can consider @xmath as a rewriting of the
original proposal as a sum of products of Zamolodchikov-Faddeev
operators, so it can be considered as an “algebraic hexagon proposal”.

## Part IV Conclusions and appendices

### Chapter 8 Summary and conclusions

The practical implications of these results are completely unknown, but
are discussed at length anyway.

– C. Bowers, Calculating the Velocity of Darkness and its Possible
Relevance to Lawn Maintenance , Journal of Irreproducible Results, 1995.

The bulk of this thesis, formed by Part II and Part III, is divided in
two halves that collect the results obtained in both sides of the
AdS/CFT conjecture during my Ph.D. degree. The first half presents the
computation of dispersion relations in different deformed backgrounds of
@xmath , which is interesting as its dual has to be a CFT in two
dimensions, so it would have the full Virasoro symmetry. The second half
presents different methods of computing of two and three-point
correlation function in @xmath SYM. The method for computing two-point
function was obtained from the direct application of the QISM for the
ABA, while the method for three-point functions is an alternative
rewriting of the successful hexagon proposal.

In Part II of thesis we have studied closed string solutions rotating
and pulsating in @xmath with NS-NS and R-R three-form flux. The
corresponding string sigma models are equivalent to a deformed
Neumann-Rosochatius integrable system. This background was chosen
because it was already known to be integrable [ 66 ] but the dispersion
relation of spinning string had not been analysed. We have considered
five different cases: strings rotating in @xmath , strings rotating in
@xmath , string rotating in the full @xmath , strings pulsating in
@xmath and string pulsating in @xmath . The equations of motion can be
integrated and expressed in terms of Jacobi elliptic functions, reducing
to trigonometric functions in the limit of pure NS-NS flux, that is, the
limit @xmath . With this solution of the equations of motion we were
able to compute the classical energy as a function of the angular
momenta and the windings as either a power series in the total angular
momentum @xmath or as a power series around the pure NS-NS point @xmath
.

The simplification in the limit of pure NS-NS flux is an appealing
result present both in the case of constant radii and elliptic
solutions. From our point of view it appears as a consequence of the
degeneration of the elliptic curve governing the dynamics of the
problem. The deep reason behind this simplification is the equivalence
of the Lagrangian with a WZW model in the pure NS-NS flux limit. This
limit was explored in some particular cases, for example in [ 91 ] ,
using conformal field theory techniques. It would be interesting to see
if these approaches can be used to get information on the neighbour of
@xmath .

Another important question is the study of the conditions of stability
of our solutions and to find the spectrum of excited string states. It
would also be interesting to address the question of the spectrum of
small quadratic fluctuations around the solutions we have constructed,
as done for the @xmath spinning string [ 226 , 47 , 53 ] and the @xmath
with R-R flux [ 227 , 228 ] . These quadratic fluctuations of the
Lagrangian can be computed by substituting the parametrization ( 3.1.2 )
by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and similarly for the AdS coordinates. The coordinates @xmath and @xmath
will represent the two different kind of fluctuations we can have, and
@xmath are fixed to the solutions we already have obtained in chapter 3.

We also studied closed string solutions rotating in @xmath -deformed
@xmath . This second background was chosen because it was already
studied for the simplest of the ansatz, presented in equation ( 3.1.12
), so the deformed Uhlenbeck constants for the Neumann model were known.
We studied the string sigma model for the more general asantz ( 3.1.24
), which in this background reduces to a deformation of the
Neumann-Rosochatius system different from the one obtained for the
flux-deformed Lagrangian. Thankfully the method used in the
flux-deformed case can be applied in the same way, so we were able to
compute the classical energy as a power series in the total angular
momentum for the constant radii case.

In this case simplifications where found in the @xmath and @xmath
limits, where we can find analytical expressions for the dispersion
relation. It would be interesting a deeper study of these limits.
Similarly to the case of the flux deformation, we could compute
quadratic fluctuations in this background using the same strategy.

Another possible way to continue this work is to apply resurgence
methods. Resurgence theory deal with the summation of the asymptotic
series involved in perturbation theory and it is a window to
non-perturbative physics. Resurgence tools have already been applied to
the Principal Chiral Model and the @xmath -deformed Principal Chiral
Model for some particular groups [ 229 , 230 ] , so it would be
interesting to see if they can be applied to the backgrounds studied in
this thesis: the flux-deformed @xmath background and the @xmath
background.

The two studied deformations are very different. The flux deformation
only appears in the B-field, leaving the background geometry unchanged,
while the @xmath -deformation only affects the geometry and do not have
contribution to the B-field (for the @xmath case, as the contribution is
a total derivative and, hence, trivial to the equations of motion. In
contrats, the complete @xmath -deformed @xmath background has a
non-trivial contribution to the B-field). Therefore it would be
interesting to apply our method to a deformation that affects both. An
interesting example would be the Lunin-Maldacena background [ 122 ] ,
which is dual to the Leigh-Strassler deformation of @xmath SYM, whose
geometry is a deformation of the @xmath space and has B-field, both of
which survive when we truncate the space to @xmath or @xmath . This
background has been partialy analysed in [ 231 ] , but a computation of
the Uhlenbeck constants and the dispersion relation of general spinning
strings has not been carried out.

In Part III of this thesis we have studied two-point and three-point
correlation functions using the spin chain interpretation of the @xmath
Supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory. Concerning the two-point correlation
functions we have presented a systematic approach to the case of spin
operators located at arbitrary sites of the spin chain. This is done
both at the one-loop level, as the problem amounts to the calculation
using the XXX spin chain, and at the all-loop level without including
wrapping effects, as the BDS spin chain can be mapped to an
inhomogeneous version of the XXX spin chain. We have found that the
general case of correlation functions in a homogeneous chain is much
more involved than in the BDS spin chain. This is because one needs to
face apparent singular behaviour of the algebra of the elements of the
monodromy matrix. The approach we used to deal with this problem was to
show that the residue arising each time we commute the operators
vanishes.

Our computations using the ABA are compared with results obtained using
the CBA, taking special care with the normalization of the states. A
good procedure to handle this is the use of Zamolodchikov-Faddeev
operators instead of the usual monodromy matrix operators, which makes
the agreement with the CBA immediate. The use of Zamolodchikov-Faddeev
operators also allows the direct implementation of Smirnov’s form factor
axioms. An interesting continuation of our work in this paper would be
to understand what other constraints are imposed by the remaining axioms
in Smirnov’s form factor program [ 54 ] . In particular it would be very
interesting to understand the behavior under crossing transformations of
form factors evaluated using algebraic Bethe ansatz techniques. The
crossing transformation corresponds to a shift in the rapidity by half
the imaginary period of the torus that uniformizes the magnon dispersion
relation in the AdS/CFT correspondence [ 220 ] . However at weak
coupling one of the periods of the rapidity torus becomes infinitely
large and thus both periodicity and the crossing transformation become
invisible. In order to be able to impose periodicity most likely the
dressing phase factor needs to be included. A natural question is
therefore the extension of the method that we have developed in this
paper to include the dressing phase factor. The extension of Smirnov’s
program for relativistic integrable theories to worldsheet form factors
for @xmath strings was discussed in [ 184 , 185 ] .

Another interesting extension of our work is the analysis of the
thermodynamical limit where both the number of magnons and the number of
sites are large and comparable. In this limit the determinant
expressions for the scalar product of Bethe states can be expressed as
contour integrals. We hope our method can be combined with the
semiclassical analysis of contour integrals in [ 204 , 205 , 206 ] .

Concerning the three-point correlation functions we have presented a
review of the Tailoring method and of the hexagon framework as an
introduction for our proposal. This proposal can be considered as a
rewriting of the original hexagon form factor in the language similar to
the ABA. This is done by first identifying our Fock space and identity
operator. The information obtained from it allows to construct an
expression for the hexagon vertex @xmath for a canonical hexagon
presented in [ 60 ] but not explicitly constructed. After this
construction we have checked some simple hexagon form factor, confirming
that both proposals generate the same result for one and two
excitations, although at two excitations we can already see a
non-connected contribution that can be safely removed. However for three
excitations or more the structure becomes more involved and the
non-connected contributions do not decouple so easily. A recipe is given
to safely decouple them and the form factors agree with the original
“coordinate” ones.

After confirming the agreement between both techniques, we propose
generalizations of the hexagon vertex. First we show how it can be
generalized to non-canonical hexagons via the introduction of operators
that transport the excitations around the hexagon using mirror
transformations. The second generalization we propose is the explicit
computation of the weight factors that have to be added when summing
over the different distribution of excitations between two hexagons when
the pair of pants is cut.

One possible continuation of this work would be a better understanding
of the weight factors. Here we have proposed its appearance from the
presence of Cartan generating functions in the coproduct, which explains
them up to a sign for the three-point functions and up to the conformal
cross ratios for the hexagonalization proposal. The sign can easily be
included, although this modified coproduct breaks the co-associativity
property, which implies that we no longer have a Hopf algebra. It would
be interesting to see if a twisting of the coproduct can reproduce the
terms related with the cross ratios of the operators, explained for the
original proposal in [ 18 , 221 ] . Another interesting possibility
would be the study of the symmetry of the @xmath vertex. Our writing of
the vertex in terms of ZF operators suggest that the explicit @xmath
symmetry might be uplifted to a Yangian one.

Now this is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. But it
is, perhaps, the end of the beginning.

– Sir Winston Churchill, just after the second battle of El Alamein

### Appendix A Analysis of the @xmath and @xmath Lagrangians

In this Appendix we will analyse the solutions that we have constructed
in section 4.3 in the cases where @xmath and @xmath by performing the
corresponding limit at the level of the Lagrangian. In order to deal
with this problem it will be useful to think of the change of variables
that brings the kinetic term in the deformed Lagrangian to canonical
form, which is given by @xmath . In the variable @xmath the Lagrangian
is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the limit @xmath the change of variables reduces to @xmath , together
with @xmath , and thus the Lagrangian becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have shifted the Lagrangian by a constant to rewrite the term
associated with @xmath with a hyperbolic secant instead of a hyperbolic
cotangent. To find the limit @xmath we need to transform the elliptic
sine because its fundamental domain is defined when the elliptic modulus
is between @xmath and @xmath . We will write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore the change of variables is given by @xmath , which leads to ¹
¹ 1 The extra term @xmath accompanying @xmath comes from the expansion
of the Jacobi cosine. Also, although not obvious, taking this limit
implicitly assumes @xmath . That is the reason why the @xmath factor
dividing the kinetic term disappears as, by direct substitution of the
change of variables, it is subleading in @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Both cases lead then to the same kind of Lagrangian, although with
different coefficients in front of the terms in the potential. In what
follows we will treat both of them simultaneously. However, even in
these limiting cases the Lagrangian is not easy to handle unless some
additional simplifications are performed. There simplifications will
come from the choices of physical parameters entering the problem. We
will first consider the easiest choice of parameters on the Lagrangian,
which is that where only the potential with the square of the hyperbolic
sine survives. Then

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.5)
  -- -- -- -------

with @xmath a constant which will depend on which of the two limits we
are taking. The equation of motion is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and can be solved in terms of the Jacobi amplitude,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant that has to be fixed using periodicity of
@xmath (we have made use of our freedom in the choice of @xmath to
eliminate an additional integration constant). Note that in general
depending on the sign of @xmath we will have two different solutions.

We will now focus on the limit @xmath . In this case the solutions are
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Relation ( A.8 ) corresponds to equation ( 4.3.4 ) once we set @xmath .
Note that in both cases we have to analytically continue to hyperbolic
space. This is in agreement with the results obtained in [ 130 ] , where
in the limit @xmath the deformed sphere becomes a hyperboloid. We must
however stress that the periodicity condition for each solution is
different. This is because the real periodicity of the sn @xmath
function is given by @xmath while its imaginary periodicity is @xmath ,
where @xmath is the elliptic integral of first kind. Furthermore, the
presence of the Jacobi sc function in the case where @xmath leads to a
divergence when evaluating the angular momentum, so from now on we will
only consider the case where @xmath . The periodicity condition implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general this equation has no analytical solution. However, as @xmath
grows like @xmath we can assume that @xmath is small enough to perform a
series expansion in both sides of the equality. Then if we recall now
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Lambert W function. In fact, it is easy to check
that our assumption becomes true very fast, because when @xmath and
@xmath we already have @xmath . Now, as we have set @xmath to bring the
Lagrangian to the form ( A.5 ), we have @xmath and therefore we only
need to compute the angular momentum,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the winding,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the periodicity condition to simplify the
expressions. If we take now the large @xmath limit, we conclude that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used that the first elliptic integral diverges at 1 while
the second elliptic integral goes to 1. The winding can also be expanded
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only thing left is to find the dispersion relation,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

that can be easily expanded to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is interesting to notice that the energy we have obtained is purely
imaginary. This is again a consequence of how the space is deformed by
the @xmath parameter. In particular it can be shown [ 130 ] that the
@xmath space becomes a @xmath space in the @xmath limit. In particular
the time coordinate is analytically continued (making @xmath ), which
explains the wrong sign of the square of the energy.

We will next move to the choice of parameters that brings the Lagrangian
to the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Instead of writing the equations of motion for this Lagrangian and
trying to integrate them it is more convenient to write the Hamiltonian
associated to it,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and make use that is is a conserved quantity to directly integrate it.
We conclude that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

However we can see that this solution is not the same as the one we
obtained by analysing the roots of the quartic polynomial, eq. ( 4.3.6
). The reason for this mismatch is that, as we have previously
discussed, the Lagrangian we have written implicitly ignores the @xmath
term in the kinetic energy as it is subleading in @xmath . If we restore
it the modified Hamiltonian reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be integrated to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact the solution ( A.21 ) can be recovered from this one by taking
the @xmath limit after using the transformation sn @xmath sn @xmath .

From the point of view of the Uhlenbeck constant and eq. ( 4.3.6 ),
ignoring the @xmath term in the kinetic energy can be understood as
explicitly taking the limit @xmath , giving us

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . In both interpretations we can match the solutions
obtained from the Uhlenbeck constants and the solutions obtained from
the equation of motion by identifying @xmath and @xmath .

We can now easily find the solutions to the equations of motion for the
@xmath , @xmath limit. To do that we only have to use the transformation
@xmath in the solution ( A.21 ) and use that @xmath . With that we find

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have used a redefinition of @xmath by a @xmath shift from the
first to the second line. We can see that this solution can be related
with eq. ( 4.3.9 ) if we perform the substitution @xmath and @xmath .
Note that for the formula to have the correct sign we need @xmath ,
which is equivalent to the condition that the roots of the elliptic
curve have to be @xmath .

To end this appendix we want to address a third simplified Lagrangian.
This has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

So it is obvious that we can get all the solutions for this Lagrangian
from the solutions of Lagrangian ( A.19 ) after substituting @xmath and
@xmath . Let us exam one of the solutions, the limit @xmath and @xmath .
If we choose the solution with the hyperbolic cosine we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be proven to be equivalent to eq. ( 4.3.12 ) with the
identification @xmath and @xmath .

### Appendix B General form of @xmath

In this appendix we are going to obtain the general expression of the
function @xmath discussed in subsections 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 . All along the
calculation the limit @xmath will be assumed. Using the first recurrence
relation in ( 6.2.18 ) and setting both @xmath and @xmath to zero we
find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we assume that @xmath , the second recurrence equation gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore we need to sum the series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a first step, we can commute the two sums as @xmath , because the
@xmath only appears in the limit of the sum and in the binomial
coefficient, so is easy to perform first the sum over @xmath . The
second sum is easy to perform because we only have to calculate @xmath .
The sum over @xmath of the other term can be evaluated using the
properties of the binomial coefficients @xmath . Then the whole sum can
be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This equation is true @xmath . If we want to calculate it for @xmath we
have to take into account derivatives of @xmath of order greater or
equal to @xmath , which can be done independently of the calculation we
have already done, because

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the dots stand for the part that we have already taken into
account. Therefore the @xmath -contribution to @xmath will be of the
form

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and the derivative of @xmath can be calculated using Leibniz’s rule,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because we are going to evalute it at @xmath , the only non-zero
contribution is that of @xmath derivatives in the first term, so that
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we substitute that we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we perform the sum in @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Properties of the binomial coefficients say that the
first sum is zero (unless there is a single term, that is, if @xmath )
and the second sum is also zero (except if there are two terms, so that
@xmath ). Then the total contribution of this terms will be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which telescopes, so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, the most general form of the correlation function @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Heaviside step function, with @xmath if @xmath and
@xmath if @xmath .
