This thesis is about the study of Diophantine equations involving binary
recurrent sequences with arithmetic functions. Various Diophantine
problems are investigated and new results are found out of this study.
Firstly, we study several questions concerning the intersection between
two classes of non-degenerate binary recurrence sequences and provide,
whenever possible, effective bounds on the largest member of this
intersection. Our main study concerns Diophantine equations of the form
@xmath where @xmath is the Euler totient function, @xmath and @xmath are
two non-degenerate binary recurrence sequences and @xmath some positive
integers. More precisely, we study problems involving members of the
recurrent sequences being rep-digits, Lehmer numbers, whose Euler’s
function remain in the same sequence. We particularly study the case
when @xmath is the Fibonacci sequence @xmath , the Lucas sequences
@xmath or the Pell sequence @xmath and its companion @xmath . Secondly,
we look of Lehmer’s conjecture on some recurrence sequences. Recall that
a composite number @xmath is said to be Lehmer if @xmath . We prove that
there is no Lehmer number neither in the Lucas sequence @xmath nor in
the Pell sequence @xmath . The main tools used in this thesis are lower
bounds for linear forms in logarithms of algebraic numbers, the
so-called Baker-Davenport reduction method, continued fractions,
elementary estimates from the theory of prime numbers and sieve methods.
