The XX century witnessed the quantum and relativistic revolutions in
physics. The development of these two theories, namely, Quantum
Mechanics and Relativity, was the inception of many crucial discoveries
and technological advances. Among them, one stands out due to its
uniqueness, the neutrino discovery. However, several neutrino properties
are still obscure. Neutrinos are the only fundamental particles whose
nature is currently unknown. Such fermions can either be different from
their antiparticles, i.e., Dirac fermions, or be their own
antiparticles, that is, Majorana fermions. On the other hand, the
smallness of neutrino masses is a problem seemingly related to the
neutrino nature; thus, as essential task consists in addressing the
phenomenologically viable models in both cases. Furthermore, it is
important to search for other physical process in which the neutrino
nature may manifest through different experimental signatures. A rather
difficult but promising method corresponds to the detection of the
cosmic neutrino background, viz.Â neutrinos which are relics from the Big
Bang. Previous works have shown that detection rates for Dirac and
Majorana neutrinos can give different results. Nevertheless, this
distinction was obtained considering the Standard Model framework only.
Therefore, it is important to understand the consequences of having
Non-Standard Interactions contributing to the detection of neutrinos
from the cosmic background. Another remarkable relic predicted by
Cosmology is the unidentified Dark Matter, composing @xmath of the
Universe. All searches regarding the Weakly Interacting Massive
Particle, one of the principal candidates for Dark Matter, have given
negative results; this has compelled experiments to increase their
sensitivity. Notwithstanding, neutrinos may stand in the way of such
experimental searches given that they may constitute an irreducible
background.

In this thesis, we will address these three different phenomena,
neutrino mass models, detection of the cosmic neutrino background and
the neutrino background in Dark Matter searches, by considering the
different characteristics in each case. In the study of neutrino mass
models, we will consider models for both Majorana and Dirac neutrinos;
specifically, we will probe the neutrinophilic two-Higgs-doublet model.
Regarding the detection of relic neutrinos, we will analyse the
consequences of the existence of the beyond Standard Model physics in
the capture rate by tritium. Finally, we will scrutinize the impact of
neutrinos in Direct Detection WIMP searches, by considering Standard
Model plus additional interactions in the form of simplified models.
