##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Foundations of Quantum Mechanics and Statistical Mechanics
    -    2.1 Quantum Mechanics
    -    2.2 Quantum Statistical Mechanics
-    3 Density Matrix Realism
    -    3.1 W-Bohmian Mechanics
    -    3.2 W-Everettian and W-GRW Theories
    -    3.3 Field Intepretations of @xmath
-    4 The Initial Projection Hypothesis
    -    4.1 The Past Hypothesis
    -    4.2 Introducing the Initial Projection Hypothesis
    -    4.3 Connections to the Weyl Curvature Hypothesis
-    5 Theoretical Payoffs
    -    5.1 Harmony between Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Mechanics
    -    5.2 Descriptions of the Universe and the Subsystems
-    6 The Nomological Thesis
    -    6.1 The Classical Case
    -    6.2 The Quantum Case
    -    6.3 Humean Supervenience
-    7 Conclusion

## 1 Introduction

In the foundations of quantum mechanics, it has been argued that the
wave function (pure state) of the universe represents something
objective and not something merely epistemic. Let us call this view Wave
Function Realism . There are many realist proposals for how to
understand the wave function. Some argue that it represents things in
the ontology, either a physical field propagating on a fundamental
high-dimensional space, or a multi-field propagating on the
three-dimensional physical space. Others argue that it is in the
‘‘nomology’’---having the same status as laws of nature. Still others
argue that it might belong to a new ontological category. ¹ ¹ 1 See
Albert ( 1996 ), Loewer ( 1996 ), Wallace and Timpson ( 2010 ), Ney (
2012 ), North ( 2013 ), Maudlin ( 2013 ), Goldstein and Zanghì ( 2013 ),
Miller ( 2014 ), Esfeld ( 2014 ), Bhogal and Perry ( 2015 ), Callender (
2015 ), Esfeld and Deckert ( 2017 ), Chen ( 2017a , b , 2016 ), Hubert
and Romano ( 2018 ) . For a survey on this literature, see Chen ( 2018a
) . Notice that this is not how Albert, Loewer, or Ney characterizes
wave function realism. For them, to be a wave function realist is to be
a realist about the wave function and a fundamental high-dimensional
space—the “configuration space.” For the purpose of this paper, let us
use Wave Function Realism to designate just the commitment that the wave
function represents something objective.

Wave Function Realism has generated much debate. In fact, it has been
rejected by many people, notably by quantum Bayesians, and various
anti-realists and instrumentalists. As a scientific realist, I do not
find their arguments convincing. In previous papers, I have assumed and
defended Wave Function Realism. Nevertheless, in this paper I want to
argue for a different perspective, for reasons related to the origin of
time-asymmetry in a quantum universe.

To be sure, realism about the universal wave function is highly natural
in the context of standard quantum mechanics and various realist quantum
theories such as Bohmian mechanics (BM), GRW spontaneous collapse
theories, and Everettian quantum mechanics (EQM). In those theories, the
universal wave function is indispensable to the kinematics and the
dynamics of the quantum system. However, as I would like to emphasize in
this paper, our world is not just quantum-mechanical. We also live in a
world with a strong arrow of time (large entropy gradient). There are
thermodynamic phenomena that we hope to explain with quantum mechanics
and quantum statistical mechanics. A central theme of this paper is to
suggest that quantum statistical mechanics is highly relevant for
assessing the fundamentality and reality of the universal wave function.

We will take a close look at the connections between the foundations of
quantum statistical mechanics and various solutions to the quantum
measurement problem. When we do, we realize that we do not need to
postulate a universal wave function. We need only certain
“coarse-grained” information about the quantum macrostate, which can be
represented by a density matrix. A natural question is: can we
understand the universal quantum state as a density matrix rather than a
wave function? That is, can we take an “ontic” rather than an
“epistemic” attitude towards the density matrix?

The first step of this paper is to argue that we can. I call this view
Density Matrix Realism , the thesis that the actual quantum state of the
universe is objective (as opposed to subjective or epistemic) and impure
(mixed). This idea may be unfamiliar to some people, as we are used to
take the mixed states to represent our epistemic uncertainties of the
actual pure state (a wave function). The proposal here is that the
density matrix directly represents the actual quantum state of the
universe; there is no further fact about which is the actual wave
function. In this sense, the density matrix is ‘‘fundamental.’’ In fact,
this idea has come up in the foundations of physics. ² ² 2 See, for
example, Dürr et al. ( 2005 ), Maroney ( 2005 ) , Wallace ( 2011 , 2012
) , and Wallace ( 2016 ) . In the first step, we provide a systematic
discussion of Density Matrix Realism by reformulating Bohmian mechanics,
GRW theories, and Everettian quantum mechanics in terms of a fundamental
density matrix.

The second step is to point out that Density Matrix Realism allows us to
combine quantum ontology with time-asymmetry in a new way. In classical
and quantum statistical mechanics, thermodynamic time-asymmetry arises
from a special boundary condition called the Past Hypothesis. ³ ³ 3 For
an extended discussion, see Albert ( 2000 ) . I suggest that the
information in the Past Hypothesis is sufficient to determine a natural
density matrix. I postulate the Initial Projection Hypothesis : the
quantum state of the universe at @xmath is given by the (normalized)
projection onto the Past Hypothesis subspace, which is a particular
low-dimensional subspace in the total Hilbert space. The conjunction of
this hypothesis with Density Matrix Realism pins down a unique initial
quantum state. Since the Initial Projection Hypothesis is as simple as
the Past Hypothesis, we can use arguments for the simplicity of the
latter (which is necessary for it to be a law of nature) to argue for
the simplicity of the former. We can thus infer that the initial quantum
state is very simple .

The third step is to show that, because of the simplicity and the
uniqueness of the initial quantum state (now given by a fundamental
density matrix), we have a strong case for the Nomological Thesis : the
initial quantum state of the world is on a par with laws of nature. It
is a modal thesis. It implies that the initial quantum state of our
world is nomologically necessary; it could not have been otherwise.

As we shall see, this package of views has interesting implications for
the reduction of statistical mechanical probabilities to quantum
mechanics, the dynamic and kinematic unity of the universe and the
subsystems, the nature of the initial quantum state, and Humean
supervenience in a quantum world.

Here is the roadmap of the paper. First, in §2, I review the foundations
of quantum mechanics and quantum statistical mechanics. In §3, I
introduce the framework of Density Matrix Realism and provide some
illustrations. In §4, I propose the Initial Projection Hypothesis in the
framework of Density Matrix Realism. In §5, I discuss their implications
for statistical mechanics, dynamic unity, and kinematic unity. In §6, I
suggest that they provide a strong case for the Nomological Thesis and a
new solution to the conflict between quantum entanglement and Humean
supervenience.

## 2 Foundations of Quantum Mechanics and Statistical Mechanics

In this section, we first review the foundations of quantum mechanics
and statistical mechanics. As we shall see in the next section, they
suggest an alternative to Wave Function Realism.

### 2.1 Quantum Mechanics

Standard quantum mechanics is often presented with a set of axioms and
rules about measurement. Firstly, there is a quantum state of the
system, represented by a wave function @xmath . For a spin-less @xmath
-particle quantum system in @xmath , the wave function is a
(square-integrable) function from the configuration space @xmath to the
complex numbers @xmath . Secondly, the wave function evolves in time
according to the the Schrödinger equation:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

Thirdly, the Schrödinger evolution of the wave function is supplemented
with collapse rules. The wave function typically evolves into
superpositions of macrostates, such as the cat being alive and the cat
being dead. This can be represented by wave functions on the
configuration space with disjoint macroscopic supports @xmath and @xmath
. During measurements, which are not precisely defined processes in the
standard formalism, the wave function undergoes collapses. Moreover, the
probability that it collapses into any particular macrostate @xmath is
given by the Born rule:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

As such, quantum mechanics is not a candidate for a fundamental physical
theory. It has two dynamical laws: the deterministic Schrödinger
equation and the stochastic collapse rule. What are the conditions for
applying the former, and what are the conditions for applying the
latter? Measurements and observations are extremely vague concepts. Take
a concrete experimental apparatus for example. When should we treat it
as part of the quantum system that evolves linearly and when should we
treat it as an ‘‘observer,’’ i.e. something that stands outside the
quantum system and collapses the wave function? That is, in short, the
quantum measurement problem. ⁴ ⁴ 4 See Bell ( 1990 ) and Myrvold ( 2017
) for introductions to the quantum measurement problem.

Various solutions have been proposed regarding the measurement problem.
Bohmian mechanics (BM) solves it by adding particles to the ontology and
an additional guidance equation for the particles’ motion.
Ghirardi-Rimini-Weber (GRW) theories postulate a spontaneous collapse
mechanism. Everettian quantum mechanics (EQM) simply removes the
collapse rules from standard quantum mechanics and suggest that there
are many (emergent) worlds, corresponding to the branches of the wave
function, which are all real. My aim here is not to adjudicate among
these theories. Suffice it to say that they are all quantum theories
that remove the centrality of observations and observers.

To simplify the discussions, I will use BM as a key example. ⁵ ⁵ 5 See
Dürr et al. ( 1992 ) for a rigorous presentation of BM and its
statistical analysis. In BM, in addition to the wave function that
evolves unitarily according to the Schrödinger equation, particles have
precise locations, and their configuration @xmath follows the guidance
equation:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

Moreover, the initial particle distribution is given by the quantum
equilibrium distribution:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

By equivariance, if this condition holds at the initial time, then it
holds at all times. Consequently, BM agrees with standard quantum
mechanics with respect to the Born rule predictions (which are all there
is to the observable predictions of quantum mechanics). For a universe
with @xmath particles, let us call the wave function of the universe the
universal wave function and denote it by @xmath .

### 2.2 Quantum Statistical Mechanics

Statistical mechanics concerns macroscopic systems such as gas in a box.
It is an important subject for understanding the arrow of time. For
concreteness, let us consider a quantum-mechanical system with @xmath
fermions (with @xmath ) in a box @xmath and a Hamiltonian @xmath . I
will first present the ‘‘individualistic’’ view followed by the
‘‘ensemblist’’ view of quantum statistical mechanics (QSM). ⁶ ⁶ 6 Here I
follow the discussions in Goldstein et al. ( 2010a ) and Goldstein and
Tumulka ( 2011 ) . I will include some brief remarks comparing QSM to
classical statistical mechanics (CSM), the latter of which may be more
familiar to some readers.

1.  Microstate: at any time @xmath , the microstate of the system is
    given by a normalized (and anti-symmetrized) wave function:

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (5)
      -- -------- -- -----

    where @xmath is the total Hilbert space of the system. (In CSM, the
    microstate is given by the positions and the momenta of all the
    particles, represented by a point in phase space.)

2.  Dynamics: the time dependence of @xmath is given by the Schrödinger
    equation:

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (6)
      -- -------- -- -----

    (In CSM, the particles move according to the Hamiltonian equations.)

3.  Energy shell: the physically relevant part of the total Hilbert
    space is the subspace (“the energy shell”):

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (7)
      -- -------- -- -----

    This is the subspace (of the total Hilbert space) spanned by energy
    eigenstates @xmath whose eigenvalues @xmath belong to the @xmath
    range. Let @xmath , the number of energy levels between @xmath and
    @xmath .

    We only consider wave functions @xmath in @xmath .

4.  Measure: the measure @xmath is given by the standard Lebesgue
    measure on the unit sphere in the energy subspace @xmath .

5.  Macrostate: with a choice of macro-variables (suitably “rounded” à
    la Von Neumann ( 1955 ) ), the energy shell @xmath can be
    orthogonally decomposed into macro-spaces:

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (8)
      -- -------- -- -----

    Each @xmath corresponds more or less to small ranges of values of
    macro-variables that we have chosen in advance. (In CSM, the phase
    space can be partitioned into sets of phase points. They will be the
    macrostates.)

6.  Non-unique correspondence: typically, a wave function is in a
    superposition of macrostates and is not entirely in any one of the
    macrospaces. However, we can make sense of situations where @xmath
    is (in the Hilbert space norm) very close to a macrostate @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (9)
      -- -------- -- -----

    where @xmath is the projection operator onto @xmath . This means
    that almost all of @xmath lies in @xmath . (In CSM, a phase point is
    always entirely within some macrostate.)

7.  Thermal equilibrium: typically, there is a dominant macro-space
    @xmath that has a dimension that is almost equal to D:

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (10)
      -- -------- -- ------

    A system with wave function @xmath is in equilibrium if the wave
    function @xmath is very close to @xmath in the sense of ( 9 ):
    @xmath

    Simple Example. Consider a gas consisting of @xmath atoms in a box
    @xmath The system is governed by quantum mechanics. We orthogonally
    decompose the Hilbert space @xmath into 51 macro-spaces: @xmath
    where @xmath is the subspace corresponding to the macrostate such
    that the number of atoms in the left half of the box is between
    @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . In this example, @xmath has the
    overwhelming majority of dimensions and is thus the equilibrium
    macro-space. A system whose wave function is very close to @xmath is
    in equilibrium (for this choice of macrostates).

8.  Boltzmann Entropy: the Boltzmann entropy of a quantum-mechanical
    system with wave function @xmath that is very close to a macrostate
    @xmath is given by:

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (11)
      -- -------- -- ------

    where @xmath denotes the subspace containing almost all of @xmath in
    the sense of ( 9 ). The thermal equilibrium state thus has the
    maximum entropy:

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (12)
      -- -------- -- ------

    where @xmath denotes the equilibrium macrostate. (In CSM, Boltzmann
    entropy of a phase point is proportional to the logarithm of the
    volume measure of the macrostate it belongs to.)

9.  Low-Entropy Initial Condition: when we consider the universe as a
    quantum-mechanical system, we postulate a special low-entropy
    boundary condition on the universal wave function—the
    quantum-mechanical version of the Past Hypothesis :

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (13)
      -- -------- -- ------

    where @xmath is the Past Hypothesis macro-space with dimension much
    smaller than that of the equilibrium macro-space. ⁷ ⁷ 7 We should
    assume that @xmath is finite-dimensional, in which case we can use
    the Lebesgue measure on the unit sphere as the typicality measure
    for # 10. It remains an open question in QSM about how to formulate
    the low-entropy initial condition when the initial macro-space is
    infinite-dimensional. Hence, the initial state has very low entropy
    in the sense of ( 11 ). (In CSM, the Past Hypothesis says that the
    initial microstate is in a low-entropy macrostate with very small
    volume.)

10. A central task of QSM is to establish mathematical results that
    demonstrate (or suggest) that @xmath most (maybe even all) wave
    functions of small subsystems, such as gas in a box, will approach
    thermal equilibrium.

Above is the individualistic view of QSM in a nutshell. In contrast, the
ensemblist view of QSM differs in several ways. First, on the ensemblist
view, instead of focusing on the wave function of an individual system,
the focus is on an ensemble of systems that have the same statistical
state @xmath , a density matrix. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Ensemblists would further insist
that it makes no sense to talk about the thermodynamic state of an
individual system. It evolves according to the von Neumann equation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

The crucial difference between the individualistic and the ensemblist
views of QSM lies in the definition of thermal equilibrium. On the
ensemblist view, a system is in thermal equilibrium if:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the microcanonical ensemble and @xmath is the canonical
ensemble. ⁹ ⁹ 9 The microcanonical ensemble is the projection operator
onto the energy shell @xmath normalized by its dimension. The canonical
ensemble is:

@xmath (16)

where @xmath , and @xmath is the inverse temperature of the quantum
system.

For the QSM individualist, if the microstate @xmath of a system is close
to some macro-space @xmath in the sense of ( 9 ), we can say that the
macrostate of the system is @xmath . The macrostate is naturally
associated with a density matrix:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the projection operator onto @xmath . @xmath is thus a
representation of the macrostate. It can be decomposed into wave
functions, but the decomposition is not unique. Different measures can
give rise to the same density matrix. One such choice is @xmath , the
uniform distribution over wave functions:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

In ( 18 ), @xmath is defined with a choice of measure on wave functions
in @xmath . However, we should not be misled into thinking that the
density matrix is derivative of wave functions. What is intrinsic to a
density matrix is its geometrical meaning in the Hilbert space. In the
case of @xmath , as shown in the canonical description ( 17 ), it is
just a normalized projection operator. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Thanks to Sheldon
Goldstein for helping me appreciate the intrinsic meaning of density
matrices. That was instrumental in the final formulation of the Initial
Projection Hypothesis in §4.2.

## 3 Density Matrix Realism

According to Wave Function Realism, the quantum state of the universe is
objective and pure. On this view, @xmath is both the microstate of QSM
and a dynamical object of QM.

Let us recall the arguments for Wave Function Realism. Why do we
attribute objective status to the quantum state represented by a wave
function? It is because the wave function plays crucial roles in the
realist quantum theories. In BM, the wave function appears in the
fundamental dynamical equations and guides particle motion. In GRW, the
wave function spontaneously collapses and gives rise to macroscopic
configurations of tables and chairs. In EQM, the wave function is the
whole world. If the universe is accurately described by BM, GRW, or EQM,
then the wave function is an active “agent” that makes a difference in
the world. The wave function cannot represent just our ignorance. It has
to be objective, so the arguments go. But what is the nature of the
quantum state that it represents? As mentioned in the beginning of this
paper, there are several interpretations: the two field interpretations,
the nomological interpretation, and the sui generis interpretation.

On the other hand, we often use @xmath , a density matrix, to represent
our ignorance of @xmath , the actual wave function of a quantum system.
@xmath can also represent a macrostate in QSM. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 In some cases,
@xmath is easier for calculation than @xmath , such as in the case of
GRW collapse theories where there are multiple sources of randomness.
Thanks to Roderich Tumulka for discussions here.

Is it possible to be a realist about the density matrix of the universe
and attribute objective status to the quantum state it represents? That
depends on whether we can write down realist quantum theories directly
in terms of @xmath . Perhaps @xmath does not have enough information to
be the basis of a realist quantum theory. However, if we can formulate
quantum dynamics directly in terms of @xmath instead of @xmath such that
@xmath guides Bohmian particles, or @xmath collapses, or @xmath realizes
the emergent multiverse, then we will have good reasons for taking
@xmath to represent something objective in those theories. At the very
least, the reasons for that will be on a par with those for Wave
Function Realism in the @xmath -theories.

However, can we describe the quantum universe with @xmath instead of
@xmath ? The answer is yes. Dürr et al. ( 2005 ) has worked out the
Bohmian version. In this section, I describe how. Let us call this new
framework Density Matrix Realism . ¹² ¹² 12 The possibility that the
universe can be described by a fundamental density matrix (mixed state)
has been suggested by multiple authors and explored to various extents
(see Footnote #2). What is new in this paper is the combination of
Density Matrix Realism with the Initial Projection Hypothesis (§4) and
the argument for the Nomological Thesis (§6) based on that. However,
Density Matrix Realism is unfamiliar enough to warrant some
clarifications and developments, and the GRW versions are new. I will
use W-Bohmian Mechanics as the main example and explain how a
fundamental density matrix can be empirically adequate for describing a
quantum world. We can also construct W-Everett theories and W-GRW
theories (which have not appeared in print so far). Similar to Wave
Function Realism, Density Matrix Realism is open to several
interpretations. At the end of this section, I will provide three field
interpretations of @xmath . In §6, I discuss and motivate a nomological
interpretation.

### 3.1 W-Bohmian Mechanics

First, we illustrate the differences between Wave Function Realism and
Density Matrix Realism by thinking about two different Bohmian theories.

In standard Bohmian mechanics (BM), an @xmath -particle universe at a
time @xmath is described by ( @xmath , @xmath ). The universal wave
function guides particle motion and provides the probability
distribution of particle configurations. Given the centrality of @xmath
in BM, we take the wave function to represent something objective (and
it is open to several realist interpretations).

It is somewhat surprising that we can formulate a Bohmian theory with
only @xmath and @xmath . This was introduced as W-Bohmian Mechanics
(W-BM) in Dürr et al. ( 2005 ) . The fundamental density matrix @xmath
is governed by the von Neumann equation ( 14 ). Next, the particle
configuration @xmath evolves according to an analogue of the guidance
equation (W-guidance equation):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

(Here we have set aside spin degrees of freedom. If we include spin, we
can add the partial trace operator @xmath before each occurrence of “
@xmath .”) Finally, we can impose an initial probability distribution
similar to that of the quantum equilibrium distribution:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

The system is also equivariant: if the probability distribution holds at
@xmath , it holds at all times. ¹³ ¹³ 13 Equivariance holds because of
the following continuity equation:

@xmath

where @xmath denotes the velocity field generated via ( 19 ). See Dürr
et al. ( 1992 , 2005 ) .

With the defining equations—the von Neumann equation ( 14 ) and the
W-guidance equation ( 19 )—and the initial probability distribution ( 20
), we have a theory that directly uses a density matrix @xmath to
characterize the trajectories @xmath of the universe’s @xmath particles.
If a universe is accurately described by W-BM, then @xmath represents
the fundamental quantum state in the theory that guides particle motion;
it does not do so via some other entity @xmath . If we have good reasons
to be a wave function realist in BM, then we have equally good reasons
to be a density matrix realist in W-BM.

W-BM is empirically equivalent to BM with respect to the observable
quantum phenomena, that is, pointer readings in quantum-mechanical
experiments. By the usual typicality analysis ( Dürr et al. ( 1992 ) ),
this follows from ( 20 ), which is analogous to the quantum equilibrium
distribution in BM. With the respective dynamical equations, both BM and
W-BM generate an equivariant Born-rule probability distribution over all
measurement outcomes. ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Here I am assuming that two theories are
empirically equivalent if they assign the same probability distribution
to all possible outcomes of experiments. This is the criterion used in
the standard Bohmian statistical analysis ( Dürr et al. ( 1992 ) ).
Empirical equivalence between BM and W-BM follows from the equivariance
property plus the quantum equilibrium distribution. Suppose W-BM is
governed by a universal density matrix @xmath and suppose BM is governed
by a universal wave function chosen at random whose statistical density
matrix is @xmath . Then the initial particle distributions on both
theories are the same: @xmath . By equivariance, the particle
distributions will always be the same. Hence, they always agree on what
is typical. See Dürr et al. ( 2005 ) . This is a general argument. A
more detailed subsystem statistical analysis, in terms of conditional
density matrices, would be illuminating. I leave it for future work.

### 3.2 W-Everettian and W-GRW Theories

W-BM is a quantum theory in which the density matrix is objective. In
this theory, realism about the universal density matrix is based on the
central role it plays in the laws of a W-Bohmian universe: it appears in
the fundamental dynamical equations and it guides particle motion. (In
§3.3, we will provide three concrete physical interpretations of @xmath
.) What about other quantum theories, such as Everettian and GRW
theories? Is it possible to ‘‘replace’’ their universal wave functions
with universal density matrices? We show that such suggestions are also
possible. ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Thanks to Roderich Tumulka for suggesting the three
equations below and to Sheldon Goldstein and Matthias Lienert for
discussions. The W-GRW formalism, I believe, has not appeared elsewhere
in print. First, let us define local beables (à la Bell ( 2004 ) ).
Local beables are the part of the ontology that is localized (to some
bounded region) in physical space. Neither the total energy function nor
the wave function is a local beable. Candidate local beables include
particles, space-time events (flashes), and matter density ( @xmath ).

For the Everettian theory with no local beables (S0), we can postulate
that the fundamental quantum state is represented by a density matrix
@xmath that evolves unitarily by the von Neumann equation ( 14 ). Let us
call this theory W-Everett theory (W-S0). Since there are no additional
variables in the theory, the density matrix represents the entire
quantum universe. The density matrix will give rise to many branches
that (for all practical purposes) do not interfere with each other. The
difference is that there will be (in some sense) more branches in the
W-Everett quantum state than in the Everett quantum state. In the
W-Everett universe, the world history will be described by the
undulation of the density matrix. ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 W-S0 is a novel version of
Everettian theory, one that will require more mathematical analysis to
fully justify the emergence of macroscopic branching structure. It faces
the familiar preferred-basis problem as standard Everett does. In
addition, on W-S0 there will be some non-uniqueness in the
decompositions of the Hilbert space into macrospaces. I leave the
analysis for future work.

It is difficult to find tables and chairs in a universe described only
by a quantum state. One proposal is to add “local beables” to the theory
in the form of a mass-density ontology @xmath . The wave-function
version was introduced as Sm by Allori et al. ( 2010 ) . The idea is
that the wave function evolves by the Schrödinger equation and
determines the shape of the mass density. This idea can be used to
construct a density-matrix version (W-Sm). In this theory, @xmath will
evolve unitarily by the von Neumann equation. Next, we can define the
mass-density function directly in terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a physical space variable, @xmath is the mass-density
operator, which is defined via the position operator @xmath . This
allows us to determine the mass-density ontology at time @xmath via
@xmath .

For the density-matrix version of GRW theory with just a quantum state
(W-GRW0), we need to introduce the collapse of a density matrix. Similar
to the wave function in GRW0, between collapses, the density matrix in
W-GRW0 will evolve unitarily according to the von Neumann equation. It
collapses randomly, where the random time for an @xmath -particle system
is distributed with rate @xmath , where @xmath is of order @xmath s
@xmath . At a random time when a collapse occur at “particle” @xmath ,
the post-collapse density matrix is the following:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath distributed by the following probability density:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the post-collapse density matrix, @xmath is the
pre-collapse density matrix, @xmath is the center of the actual
collapse, and @xmath is the collapse rate operator. ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 A collapse
rate operator is defined as follows:

@xmath

where @xmath is the position operator of “particle” @xmath , and @xmath
is a new constant of nature of order @xmath m postulated in current GRW
theories. Compare W-GRW to @xmath -GRW, where collapses happen at the
same rate, and the post-collapse wave function is the following:

@xmath (24)

with the collapse center @xmath being chosen randomly with probability
distribution @xmath .

For the GRW theory (W-GRWm) with both a quantum state @xmath and a
mass-density ontology @xmath , we can combine the above steps: @xmath
evolves by the von Neumann equation that is randomly interrupted by
collapses ( 22 ) and @xmath is defined by ( 21 ). We can define GRW with
a flash-ontology (W-GRWf) in a similar way, by using @xmath to
characterize the distribution of flashes in physical space-time. The
flashes are the space-time events at the centers ( @xmath ) of the W-GRW
collapses.

To sum up: in W-S0, the entire world history is described by @xmath ; in
W-Sm, the local beables (mass-density) is determined by @xmath ; in
W-GRW theories, @xmath spontaneously collapses. These roles were
originally played by @xmath , and now they are played by W. In so far as
we have good reasons for Wave Function Realism based on the roles that
@xmath plays in the @xmath -theories, we have equally good reasons for
Density Matrix Realism if the universe is accurately described by
W-theories.

### 3.3 Field Intepretations of @xmath

Realism about the density matrix only implies that it is objective and
not epistemic. Realism is compatible with a wide range of concrete
interpretations of what the density matrix represents. In this section,
I provide three field interpretations of the density matrix. But they do
not exhaust all available options. In §6, I motivate a nomological
interpretation of the density matrix that is also realist.

In debates about the metaphysics of the wave function, realists have
offered several interpretations of @xmath . Wave function realists, such
as Albert and Loewer, have offered a concrete physical interpretation:
@xmath represents a physical field on the high-dimensional configuration
space that is taken to be the fundamental physical space. ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 In
Chen ( 2017b ) , I argue against this view and suggest that there are
many good reasons—internal and external to quantum mechanics—for taking
the low-dimensional physical space-time to be fundamental.

Can we interpret the density matrix in a similar way? Let us start with
a mathematical representation of the density matrix @xmath . It is
defined as a positive, bounded, self-adjoint operator @xmath with @xmath
. For W-BM, the configuration space @xmath , and a density operator
@xmath , the relevant Hilbert space is @xmath , which is a subspace of
the total Hilbert space, i.e. @xmath . Now, the density matrix @xmath
can also be represented as a function

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

(If we include spin, the range will be the endomorphism space @xmath of
the space of linear maps from @xmath to itself. Notice that we have
already used the position representation in ( 19 ) and ( 20 ).)

This representation enables three field interpretations of the density
matrix. Let us use W-BM as an example. First, the fundamental space is
represented by @xmath , and @xmath represents a field on that space that
assigns properties (represented by complex numbers) to each point in
@xmath . In the Bohmian version, @xmath guides the motion of a “world
particle” like a river guides the motion of a ping pong ball. (However,
the world particle only moves in a @xmath subspace.) Second, the
fundamental space is @xmath , and @xmath represents a multi-field on
that space that assigns properties to every ordered pair of points
@xmath in @xmath . The world particle moves according to the gradient
taken with respect to the first variable of the multi-field. Third, the
fundamental space is the physical space represented by @xmath , and the
density matrix represents a multi-field that assigns properties to every
ordered pair of @xmath -regions, where each @xmath -region is composed
of @xmath points in physical space. On this view, the density matrix
guides the motion of @xmath particles in physical space. ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 For
discussions about the multi-field interpretation, see Forrest ( 1988 ),
Belot ( 2012 ) , Chen (2017), Chen (ms.) section 3, and Hubert and
Romano ( 2018 ) .

These three field interpretations are available to the density matrix
realists. In so far as we have good grounds for accepting the field
interpretations of wave function realism, we have equally good grounds
for accepting these interpretations for the W-theories. These physical
interpretations, I hope, can provide further reasons for wave function
realists to take seriously the idea that density matrices can represent
something physically significant. In §6, we introduce a new
interpretation of @xmath as something nomological, and we will motivate
that with the new Initial Projection Hypothesis. That, I believe, is the
most interesting realist interpretation of the universal density matrix
all things considered.

## 4 The Initial Projection Hypothesis

W-quantum theories are alternatives to @xmath -quantum theories.
However, all of these theories are time-symmetric, as they obey
time-reversal invariance @xmath .

In statistical mechanics, a fundamental postulate is added to the
time-symmetric dynamics: the Past Hypothesis, which is a low-entropy
boundary condition of the universe. In this section, we will first
discuss the wave-function version of the Past Hypothesis. Then we will
use it to pick out a special density matrix. I call this the Initial
Projection Hypothesis . Finally, we point out some connections between
the Initial Projection Hypothesis and Penrose’s Weyl Curvature
Hypothesis.

### 4.1 The Past Hypothesis

The history of the Past Hypothesis goes back to Ludwig Boltzmann. ²⁰ ²⁰
20 For an extended discussion, see Boltzmann ( 2012 ) , Albert ( 2000 )
, and Callender ( 2011 ) . To explain time asymmetry in a universe
governed by time-symmetric equations, Botlzmann’s solution is to add a
boundary condition: the universe started in a special state of very
low-entropy. Richard Feynman agrees, ‘‘For some reason, the universe at
one time had a very low entropy for its energy content, and since then
the entropy has increased.’’ ²¹ ²¹ 21 Feynman et al. ( 2015 ) , 46-8.
Such a low-entropy initial condition explains the arrow of time in
thermodynamics. ²² ²² 22 See Lebowitz ( 2008 ), Ehrenfest and Ehrenfest
( 2002 ) and Penrose ( 1979 ) for more discussions about a low-entropy
initial condition. See Earman ( 2006 ) for worries about the Past
Hypothesis as an initial condition for the universe. See Goldstein
et al. ( 2016 ) for a discussion about the possibility, and some recent
examples, of explaining the arrow of time without the Past Hypothesis.

David Albert (2000) has called this condition the Past Hypothesis (PH).
However, his proposal is stronger than the usual one concerning a
low-entropy initial condition. The usual one just postulates that the
universe started in some low-entropy macrostate. It can be any of the
many macrostates, so long as it has sufficiently low entropy. Albert’s
PH postulates that there is a particular low-entropy macrostate that the
universe starts in---the one that underlies the reliability of our
inferences to the past. It is the task of cosmology to discover that
initial macrostate. In what follows, I refer to the strong version of PH
unless indicated otherwise. ²³ ²³ 23 In Chen ( 2018b ) , a companion
paper, I discuss different versions of the Past Hypothesis—the strong,
the weak, and the fuzzy—as well as their implications for the uniqueness
of the initial quantum state that we will come to soon. The upshot is
that in all cases it will be sufficiently unique for eliminating
statistical mechanical probabilities.

In QSM, PH takes the form of §2.2 #9. That is, the microstate (a wave
function) starts in a particular low-dimensional subspace in Hilbert
space (the PH-subspace). However, it does not pin down a unique
microstate. There is still a continuous infinity of possible microstates
compatible with the PH-subspace.

It is plausible to think that, for PH to work as a successful
explanation for the Second Law, it has to be on a par with other
fundamental laws of nature. That is, we should take PH to be a law of
nature and not just a contingent initial condition, for otherwise it
might be highly unlikely that our past was in lower entropy and that our
inferences to the past are reliable. Already in the context of a weaker
version of PH, Feynman ( 2017 ) suggests that the low-entropy initial
condition should be understood as a law of nature. However, PH by itself
is not enough. Since there are anti-thermodynamic exceptions even for
trajectories starting from the PH-subspace, it is crucial to impose
another law about a uniform probability distribution on the subspace.
This is the quantum analog of what Albert (2000) calls the Statistical
Postulate (SP). It corresponds to the Lebesgue measure we specified in
§2.2 #4. We used it to state the typicality statement in #10. Barry
Loewer calls the joint system---the package of laws that includes PH and
SP in addition to the dynamical laws of physics---the Mentaculus Vision.
²⁴ ²⁴ 24 For developments and defenses of the nomological account of the
Past Hypothesis and the Statistical Postulate, see Albert ( 2000 ),
Loewer ( 2007 ), Wallace ( 2011 , 2012 ) and Loewer ( 2016 ) . Albert
and Loewer are writing mainly in the context of CSM. The Mentaculus
Vision is supposed to provide a “probability map of the world.” As such,
it requires one to take the probability distribution very seriously. To
be sure, the view that PH is nomological has been challenged. See, for
example, Sklar ( 1995 ) and Callender ( 2004 ) . However, these
arguments are no more threatening to IPH being a law than PH being a
law. We will come back to this point after introducing IPH.

### 4.2 Introducing the Initial Projection Hypothesis

The Past Hypothesis uses a low-entropy macrostate (PH-subspace) to
constrain the microstate of the system (a state vector in QSM). This is
natural from the perspective of Wave Function Realism, according to
which the state vector (the wave function) represents the physical
degrees of freedom of the system. The initial state of the system is
described by a normalized wave function @xmath . @xmath has to lie in
the special low-dimensional Hilbert space @xmath with @xmath . Moreover,
there are many different choices of initial wave functions in @xmath .
That is, PH is compatible with many different low-entropy wave
functions. Furthermore, for stating the typicality statements, we also
need to specify a measure @xmath on the unit sphere of @xmath . For the
finite-dimensional case, it is just the uniform Lebesgue measure.

Density Matrix Realism suggests an alternative way to think about the
low-entropy boundary condition. PH pins down the initial macrostate
@xmath , a special subspace of the total Hilbert space. Although @xmath
is compatible with many density matrices, there is a natural choice—the
normalized projection operator onto @xmath . Just as in ( 17 ), we can
specify it as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath represents a temporal boundary of the universe, @xmath is
the projection operator onto @xmath , @xmath counts the dimension of the
Hilbert space, and @xmath . Since the quantum state at @xmath has the
lowest entropy, we call @xmath the initial time. We shall call ( 26 )
the Initial Projection Hypothesis (IPH). In words: the initial density
matrix of the universe is the normalized projection onto the
PH-subspace.

I propose that we add IPH to any W-quantum theory. The resultant
theories will be called @xmath -theories. For example, here are the
equations of @xmath -BM:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

(A) is IPH and (B)—(D) are the defining equations of W-BM. (Given the
initial quantum state @xmath , there is a live possibility that for
every particle at @xmath , its velocity is zero. However, even in this
possibility, as long as the initial quantum state ‘‘spreads out’’ later,
as we assume it would, the particle configuration will typically start
moving at a later time. This is true because of equivariance. ²⁵ ²⁵ 25
Thanks to Sheldon Goldstein and Tim Maudlin for discussions here. )

Contrast these equations with BM formulated with wave functions and PH
(not including SP for now), which will be called @xmath -BM:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

IPH (A) in @xmath -BM plays the same role as PH (A’) in @xmath -BM.
Should IPH be interpreted as a law of nature in @xmath -theories? I
think it should be, for the same reason that PH should be interpreted as
a law of nature in the corresponding theories. The reason that PH should
be interpreted as a law ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 See, for example, Feynman ( 2017 ),
Albert ( 2000 ), Loewer ( 2007 ) and Loewer ( 2016 ) . is because it is
a particularly simple and informative statement that accounts for the
widespread thermodynamic asymmetry in time. PH is simple because it
characterizes a simple macrostate @xmath , of which the initial wave
function is a vector. PH is informative because with PH the dynamical
equations predict time asymmetry and without PH the dynamical equations
cannot. Similarly, IPH is simple because it provides crucial resources
for explaining the arrow of time. IPH is informative because it is
essential for explaining the time asymmetry in a quantum universe
described by a density matrix. (This is in addition to the fact that IPH
helps determine the @xmath -version of the guidance equation (D).) To be
sure, PH and IPH as laws face the same worries: both are statements
about boundary conditions but we usually think of laws as dynamical
equations. However, these worries are no more threatening to IPH being a
law than PH being a law.

Let us make three remarks about IPH. Firstly, IPH defines a unique
initial quantum state. The quantum state @xmath is informationally
equivalent to the constraint that PH imposes on the initial microstates.
Assuming that PH selects a unique low-entropy macrostate, @xmath is
singled out by the data in PH. ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 The weaker versions of PH are
vague about the exact initial low-entropy macrostate. It is vague
because, even with a choice of macro-variables, there may be many
subspaces that can play the role of a low-entropy initial condition. It
would be arbitrary, from the viewpoint of wave-function theories, to
pick a specific subspace. In contrast, it would not be arbitrary from
the viewpoint of @xmath -theories, as the specific subspace defines
@xmath , which determines the dynamics.

Secondly, on the universal scale, we do not need to impose an additional
probability or typicality measure on the Hilbert space. @xmath is
mathematically equivalent to an integral over projection onto each
normalized state vectors (wave functions) compatible with PH with
respect to a Lebesgue measure . But here we are not defining @xmath in
terms of state vectors. Rather, we are thinking of @xmath as a geometric
object in the Hilbert space: the (normalized) projection operator onto
@xmath . That is the intrinsic understanding of the density matrix. ²⁸
²⁸ 28 After writing the paper, I discovered that David Wallace has come
to a similar idea in a forthcoming paper. There are some subtle
differences. He proposes that we can reinterpret probability
distributions in QSM as actual mixed states. Consequently, the problem
of statistical mechanical probability is “radically transformed” (if not
eliminated) in QSM. Wallace’s proposal is compatible with different
probability distributions and hence different mixed states of the
system. It does not require one to choose a particular quantum state
such as ( 26 ). In contrast, I propose a particular, natural initial
quantum state of the universe based on the PH subspace—the normalized
projection onto the PH subspace ( 26 ). As we discuss in §5.1, this also
leads to the elimination of statistical mechanical probability, since
the initial state is fixed in the theory. Moreover, as we discuss below,
the natural state inherits the simplicity of the PH subspace, which has
implications for the nature of the quantum state. For a more detailed
comparison, see Chen ( 2018b ) .

Thirdly, @xmath is simple. Related to the first remark, IPH defines
@xmath explicitly as the normalized projection operator onto @xmath .
There is a natural correspondence between a subspace and its projection
operator. If we specify the subspace, we know what its projection
operator is, and vice versa. Since the projection operator onto a
subspace carries no more information than that subspace itself, the
projection operator is no more complex than @xmath . This is different
from @xmath , which is confined by PH to be a vector inside @xmath . A
vector carries more information than the subspace it belongs to, as
specifying a subspace is not sufficient to determine a vector. For
example, to determine a vector in an 18-dimensional subspace of a
36-dimensional vector space, we need 18 coordinates in addition to
specifying the subspace. The higher the dimension of the subspace, the
more information is needed to specify the vector. If PH had fixed @xmath
(the QSM microstate), it would have required much more information and
become a much more complex posit. PH as it is determines @xmath only up
to an equivalence class (the QSM macrostate). As we shall see in §6, the
simplicity of @xmath will be a crucial ingredient for a new version of
the nomological interpretation of the quantum state.

### 4.3 Connections to the Weyl Curvature Hypothesis

Let us point out some connections between our Initial Projection
Hypothesis (IPH) and the Weyl Curvature Hypothesis (WCH) proposed by
Penrose ( 1979 ) . Thinking about the origin of the Second Law of
Thermodynamics in the early universe with high homogeneity and isotropy,
and the relationship between space-time geometry and entropy, Penrose
proposes a low-entropy hypothesis:

  I propose, then, that there should be complete lack of chaos in the
  initial geometry . We need, in any case, some kind of low-entropy
  constraint on the initial state. But thermal equilibrium apparently
  held (at least very closely so) for the matter (including radiation)
  in the early stages. So the ‘lowness’ of the initial entropy was not a
  result of some special matter distribution, but, instead, of some very
  special initial spacetime geometry. The indications of [previous
  sections], in particular, are that this restriction on the early
  geometry should be something like: the Weyl curvature @xmath vanishes
  at any initial singularity . ( Penrose ( 1979 ) , p.630, emphasis
  original)

The Weyl curvature tensor @xmath is the traceless part of the Riemann
curvature tensor @xmath . It is not fixed completely by the
stress-energy tensor and thus has independent degrees of freedom in
Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Since the entropy of the matter
distribution is quite high, the origin of thermodynamic asymmetry should
be due to the low entropy in geometry, which corresponds very roughly to
the vanishing of the Weyl curvature tensor.

WCH is an elegant and simple way of encoding the initial low-entropy
boundary condition in the classical spacetime geometry. If WCH could be
extended to a quantum theory of gravity, presumably it would pick out a
simple subspace (or subspaces) of the total Hilbert space that
corresponds to @xmath . Applying IPH to such a theory, the initial
density matrix will be the normalized projection onto that subspace
(subspaces). ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 There is another connection between the current
project and Penrose’s work. The W-Everettian theory that we considered
in §3.2 combined with the Initial Projection Hypothesis is a theory that
satisfies strong determinism ( Penrose ( 1999 ) ). This is because the
entire history of the W @xmath -Everettian universe described by @xmath
, including its initial condition, is fixed by the laws.

## 5 Theoretical Payoffs

W @xmath -quantum theories, the result of applying IPH to W-theories,
have two theoretical payoffs, which we explore in this section. These
are by no means decisive arguments in favor of the density-matrix
framework, but they display some interesting differences with the
wave-function framework.

### 5.1 Harmony between Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Mechanics

In W @xmath -quantum theories, statistical mechanics is made more
harmonious with quantum mechanics. As we pointed out earlier, standard
QM and QSM contain the wave function in addition to the density matrix,
and they require the addition of both the Past Hypothesis (PH) and the
Statistical Postulate (SP) to the dynamical laws. In particular, we have
two kinds of probabilities: the quantum-mechanical ones (Born rule
probabilities) and the statistical mechanical ones (SP). The situation
is quite different in our framework. This is true for all the W @xmath
-theories. We will use W @xmath -BM ((A)—(D)) as an example.

W @xmath -BM completely specifies the initial quantum state, unlike
@xmath -BM. For @xmath -BM, because of time-reversal invariance, some
initial wave functions compatible with PH will evolve to lower entropy.
These are called anti-entropic exceptions. However, the uniform
probability distribution (SP) assigns low probability to these
exceptions. Hence, we expect that with overwhelming probability the
actual wave function is entropic. For W @xmath -BM, in contrast, there
is no need for something like SP, as there is only one initial density
matrix compatible with IPH— @xmath . It is guaranteed to evolve to
future states that have entropic behaviors. Therefore, on the universal
scale, W @xmath -BM eliminates the need for SP and thus the need for a
probability/typicality measure that is in addition to the
quantum-mechanical measure (B). This is a nice feature of W @xmath
-theories, as it is desirable to unify the two sources of randomness:
quantum-mechanical and statistical-mechanical. Of course, wave functions
and statistical-mechanical probabilities are still useful to analyze
subsystems such as gas in a box, but they no longer play fundamental
roles in W @xmath -theories. Another strategy to eliminate SP has been
explored in the context of GRW jumps by Albert ( 2000 ) . Wallace ( 2011
, 2012 ) has proposed a replacement of SP with a non-probabilistic
constraint on the microstate, giving rise to the Simple Dynamical
Conjecture . These are quite different proposals, all of which deserve
further developments.

### 5.2 Descriptions of the Universe and the Subsystems

W @xmath -quantum theories also bring more unity to the kinematics and
the dynamics of the universe and the subsystems.

Let us start with a quantum-mechanical universe @xmath . Suppose it
contains many subsystems. Some of them will be interacting heavily with
the environment, while others will be effectively isolated from the
environment. For a universe that contain some quasi-isolated subsystems
(interactions with the environment effectively vanish), the following is
a desirable property:

     Dynamic Unity The dynamical laws of the universe are the same as
    the effective laws of most quasi-isolated subsystems.

Dynamic Unity is a property that can come in degrees, rather than an
“on-or-off” property. Theory A has more dynamic unity than Theory B, if
the fundamental equations in A are valid in more subsystems than those
in B. This property is desirable, but not indispensable. It is desirable
because law systems that apply both at the universal level and at the
subsystem level are unifying and explanatory.

W-BM has more dynamic unity than BM formulated with a universal wave
function. For quantum systems without spin, we can always follow Dürr
et al. ( 1992 ) to define conditional wave functions in BM. For example,
if the universe is partitioned into a system @xmath and its environment
@xmath , then for @xmath , we can define its conditional wave function:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

where C is a normalization factor and @xmath is the actual configuration
of @xmath . @xmath always gives the velocity field for the particles in
@xmath according to the guidance equation. However, for quantum systems
with spin, this is not always true. Since BM is described by ( @xmath ),
it does not contain actual values of spin. Since there are no actual
spins to plug into the spin indices of the wave function, we cannot
always define conditional wave functions in an analogous way.
Nevertheless, in those circumstances, we can follow Dürr et al. ( 2005 )
to define a conditional density matrix for @xmath , by plugging in the
actual configuration of @xmath and tracing over the spin components in
the wave function associated with @xmath . ³⁰ ³⁰ 30 The conditional
density matrix for @xmath is defined as:

@xmath (28)

with the normalizing factor:

@xmath (29)

The conditional density matrix will guide the particles in @xmath by the
W-guidance equation (the spin version with the partial trace operator).

In W-BM, the W-guidance equation is always valid for the universe and
the subsystems. In BM, sometimes subsystems do not have conditional wave
functions, and thus the wave-function version of the guidance equation
is not always valid. In this sense, the W-BM equations are valid in more
circumstances than the BM equations. However, this point does not rely
on IPH.

What about Everettian and GRW theories? Since GRW and Everettian
theories do not have fundamental particles, we cannot obtain conditional
wave functions for subsystems as in BM. However, even in the @xmath
-versions of GRW and Everett, many subsystems will not have pure-state
descriptions by wave functions due to the prevalence of entanglement.
Most subsystems can be described only by a mixed-state density matrix,
even when the universe as a whole is described by a wave function. In
contrast, in W @xmath -Everett theories and W @xmath -GRW theories,
there is more uniformity across the subsystem level and the universal
level: the universe as a whole as well as most subsystems are described
by the same kind of object—a (mixed-state) density matrix. Since state
descriptions concern the kinematics of a theory, we say that W-Everett
and W-GRW theories have more kinematic unity than their @xmath
-counterparts:

     Kinematic Unity The state description of the universe is of the
    same kind as the state descriptions of most quasi-isolated
    subsystems.

So far, my main goal has been to show that Density Matrix Realism + IPH
is a viable position. They have theoretical payoffs that are
interestingly different from those in the original package (Wave
Function Realism + PH). In the next section, we look at their relevance
to the nature of the quantum state.

## 6 The Nomological Thesis

Combining Density Matrix Realism with IPH gives us W @xmath -quantum
theories that have interesting theoretical payoffs. We have also argued
that the initial quantum state in such theories would be simple and
unique. In this section, we show that the latter fact lends support to
the nomological interpretation of the quantum state:

  The Nomological Thesis:

    The initial quantum state of the world is nomological.

However, “nomological” has several senses and has been used in several
ways in the literature. We will start with some clarifications.

### 6.1 The Classical Case

We can clarify the sense of the“nomological” by taking another look at
classical mechanics. In classical @xmath -particle Hamiltonian
mechanics, it is widely accepted that the Hamiltonian function is
nomological, and that the ontology consists in particles with positions
and momenta. Their state is given by @xmath , and the Hamiltonian is
@xmath . Particles move according to the Hamiltonian equations:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

Their motion corresponds to a trajectory in phase space. The velocity
field on phase space is obtained by taking suitable derivatives of the
Hamiltonian function @xmath . The equations have the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here, @xmath is @xmath with suitable derivative operators. The
Hamiltonian equations have a simple form, because @xmath is simple.
@xmath can be written explicitly as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath takes on this form when we consider electric and
gravitational potentials:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

That is, the RHS of the Hamiltonian equations, after making the
Hamiltonian function explicit, are still simple. @xmath is just a
convenient shorthand for ( 32 ) and ( 33 ). Moreover, @xmath is also
fixed by the theory. A classical universe is governed by the dynamical
laws plus the fundamental interactions. If @xmath were different in ( 31
), then we would have a different physical theory (though it would still
belong to the class of theories called classical mechanics). For
example, we can add another term in ( 33 ) to encode another fundamental
interaction, which will result in a different theory.

Consequently, it is standard to interpret @xmath as a function in ( 30 )
that does not represent things or properties of the ontology. Expressed
in terms of @xmath , the equations of motion take a particularly simple
form. The sense that @xmath is nomological is that (i) it generates
motion, (ii) it is simple, (iii) it is fixed by the theory
(nomologically necessary), and (iv) it does not represent things in the
ontology. In contrast, the position and momentum variables in ( 30 ) are
“ontological” in that they represent things and properties of the
ontology, take on complicated values, change according to @xmath , and
are not completely fixed by the theory (contingent).

### 6.2 The Quantum Case

It is according to the above sense that Goldstein and Zanghì ( 2013 )
proposes that the universal wave function in BM is nomological (and
governs things in the ontology). With the guidance equation, @xmath
generates the motion of particles. It is of the same form as above:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

Why is it simple? Generic wave functions are not simple. However, they
observe that, in some formulations of quantum gravity, the universal
wave function satisfies the Wheeler-DeWitt equation and is therefore
stationary. To be stationary, the wave function does not have
time-dependence and probably has many symmetries, in which case it could
be quite simple. The Bohmian theory then will explicitly stipulate what
the universal wave function is. Therefore, in these theories, provided
that @xmath is sufficiently simple, we can afford the same
interpretation of @xmath as we can for @xmath in classical mechanics:
both are nomological in the above sense.

@xmath -BM also supports the nomological interpretation of the quantum
state but via a different route. With the W-guidance equation, @xmath
generates the motion of particles. It is of the same form as above:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

Why is it simple? Here we do not need to appeal to specific versions of
quantum gravity, which are still to be worked out and may not guarantee
the simplicity of @xmath . Instead, we can just appeal to IPH. We have
argued in §4.2 that IPH is simple and that @xmath is simple. Since the
quantum state evolves unitarily by the von Neumann equation, we can
obtain the quantum state at any later time as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

Since @xmath is a simple function of the time-evolution operator and the
initial density matrix, and since both are simple, @xmath is also
simple. So we can think of @xmath just as a convenient shorthand for (
36 ). (This is not true for @xmath , as generic @xmath is not simple at
all.)

The “shorthand” way of thinking about @xmath implies that the equation
of particle motion has a time-dependent form @xmath . Does
time-dependence undercut the nomological interpretation? It does not in
this case, as the @xmath is still simple even with time-dependence. It
is true that time-independence is often a hallmark of a nomological
object, but it is not always the case. In this case, we have simplicity
without time-independence. Moreover, unlike Goldstein and Zanghì ( 2013
) , we do not need time-independence to argue for the simplicity of the
quantum state.

Since @xmath is fixed by IPH, @xmath is also fixed by the theory. Let us
expand ( 35 ) to make it more explicit:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

The initial quantum state (multiplied by the time-evolution operators)
generates motion, has a simple form, and is fixed by the boundary
condition (IPH) in @xmath -BM. Therefore, it is nomological. This is of
course a modal thesis. The initial quantum state, which is completely
specified by IPH, could not have been different.

Let us consider other @xmath -theories with local beables. In @xmath
-Sm, the initial quantum state has the same simple form and is fixed by
IPH. It does not generate a velocity field, since there are no
fundamental particles in the theory. Instead, it determines the
configuration of the mass-density field on physical space. This is
arguably different from the sense of nomological that @xmath in
classical mechanics displays. Nevertheless, the mass-density field and
the Bohmian particles play a similar role—they are “local beables” that
make up tables and chairs, and they are governed by the quantum state.
In @xmath -GRWm and @xmath -GRWf, the initial quantum state has the same
simple form and is fixed by IPH. It does not generate a velocity field,
and it evolves stochastically. This will determine a probability
distribution over configurations of local beables—mass densities or
flashes—on physical space. The initial quantum state in these theories
can be given an extended nomological interpretation , in the sense that
condition (i) is extended such that it covers other kinds of ontologies
and dynamics: (i’) the quantum state determines (deterministically or
stochastically) the configuration of local beables.

The @xmath -theories with local beables support the nomological
interpretation of the initial quantum state. It can be interpreted in
non-Humean ways and Humean ways. On the non-Humean proposal, we can
think of the initial quantum state as an additional nomological entity
that explains the distribution of particles, fields, or flashes. On the
Humean proposal, in contrast, we can think of the initial quantum state
as something that summarizes a separable mosaic. This leads to
reconciliation between Humean supervenience and quantum entanglement.

### 6.3 Humean Supervenience

Recall that according to Humean supervenience (HS), the ”vast mosaic of
local matters of particular fact” is a supervenience base for everything
else in the world, the metaphysical ground floor on which everything
else depends. On this view, laws of physics are nothing over and above
the ‘‘mosaic.’’ They are just the axioms in the simplest and most
informative summaries of the local matters of particular fact. A
consequence of HS is that the complete physical state of the universe is
determined by the properties and spatiotemporal arrangement of the local
matters (suitably extended to account for vector-valued magnititudes) of
particular facts. It follows that there should not be any state of the
universe that fails to be determined by the properties of individual
space-time points. ³¹ ³¹ 31 This is one reading of David Lewis. Tim
Maudlin ( 2007 ) calls this thesis “Separability.” Quantum entanglement,
if it were in the fundamental ontology, would present an obstacle to HS,
because entanglement is not determined by the properties of space-time
points. The consideration above suggests a strong prima facie conflict
between HS and quantum physics. On the basis of quantum
non-separability, Tim Maudlin has proposed an influential argument
against HS. ³² ³² 32 See Maudlin ( 2007 ) , Chapter 2.

@xmath -theories with local beables offer a way out of the conflict
between quantum entanglement and Humean supervenience. A Humean can
interpret the laws (including the IPH) as the axioms in the best system
that summarize a separable mosaic. Take W @xmath -BM as an example:

  The W @xmath -BM mosaic:

    particle trajectories @xmath on physical space-time.

  The W @xmath -BM best system:

    four equations—the simplest and strongest axioms summarizing the
    mosaic:

    -   @xmath

    -   @xmath

    -   @xmath

    -   @xmath

Notice that (A)—(D) are simple and informative statements about @xmath .
They are expressed in terms of @xmath , which via law (C) can be
expressed in terms of @xmath . We have argued previously that the
initial quantum state can be given a nomological interpretation. The
Humean maneuver is that the law statements are to be understood as
axioms of the best summaries of the mosaic. The mosaic described above
is completely separable, while the best system, completely specifying
the quantum state and the dynamical laws, contains all the information
about quantum entanglement and superpositions. The entanglement facts
are no longer fundamental. As on the original version of Humean
supervenience, the best system consisting of (A)—(D) supervenes on the
mosaic. Hence, this proposal reconciles Humean supervenience with
quantum entanglement. As it turns out, the above version of Quantum
Humeanism also achieves more theoretical harmony, dynamical unity, and
kinematic unity (§5), which are desirable from the Humean best-system
viewpoint. We can perform similar “Humeanization” maneuvers on the
density matrix in other quantum theories with local beables—W-GRWm,
W-GRWf, and W-Sm (although such procedures might not be as compelling).

This version of Quantum Humeanism based on @xmath -theories is different
from the other approaches in the literature: Albert ( 1996 ), Loewer (
1996 ), Miller ( 2014 ), Esfeld ( 2014 ), Bhogal and Perry ( 2015 ),
Callender ( 2015 ) and Esfeld and Deckert ( 2017 ) . In contrast to the
high-dimensional proposal of Albert ( 1996 ) and Loewer ( 1996 ) , our
version preserves the fundamentality of physical space.

The difference between our version and those of Miller ( 2014 ), Esfeld
( 2014 ), Bhogal and Perry ( 2015 ), Callender ( 2015 ) , and Esfeld and
Deckert ( 2017 ) is more subtle. They are concerned primarily with
@xmath -BM. We can summarize their views as follows (although they do
not agree on all the details). There are several parts to their
proposals. First, the wave function is merely part of the best system.
It is more like parameters in the laws such as mass and charge. Second,
just like the rest of the best system, the wave function supervenes on
the mosaic of particle trajectories. Third, the wave function does not
have to be very simple. The Humean theorizer, on this view, just needs
to find the simplest and strongest summary of the particle histories,
but the resultant system can be complex simpliciter . One interpretation
of this view is that the best system for @xmath -BM is just (A’)—(D’) in
§4.2 (although they do not explicitly consider (A’)), such that neither
the mosaic nor the best system specifies the exact values of the
universal wave function. In contrast, our best system completely
specifies the universal quantum state. The key difference between our
approaches is that their interpretation of the wave function places much
weaker constraints than our nomological interpretation does. It is much
easier for something to count as being part of the best system on their
approach than on ours. While they do not require the quantum state to be
simple, we do. For them, the Bohmian guidance equation is likely very
complex after plugging in the actual wave function @xmath on the RHS,
but @xmath can still be part of their best system. ³³ ³³ 33 See Dewar (
2017 ) §5 for some worries about the weaker criterion on the best
system. For us, it is crucial that the equation remains simple after
plugging in @xmath for it to be in the best system. Consequently, @xmath
is nomological in the sense spelled out in §6.1, and we can give it a
Humean interpretation similar to that of the Hamiltonian function in CM.
Generic @xmath , on the other hand, cannot be nomological in our sense.
But that is ok for them, as their best-system interpretation does not
require the strong nomological condition that we use. Here we do not
attempt to provide a detailed comparison; we will do that in future
work.

## 7 Conclusion

I have introduced a new package of views: Density Matrix Realism, the
Initial Projection Hypothesis, and the Nomological Thesis. In the first
two steps, we introduced a new class of quantum theories—W @xmath
-theories. In the final step, we argue that it is a theory in which the
initial quantum state can be given a nomological interpretation. Each is
interesting in its own right, and they do not need to be taken together.
However, they fit together quite well. They provide alternatives to
standard versions of realism about quantum mechanics, a new way to get
rid of statistical-mechanical probabilities, and a new solution to the
conflict between quantum entanglement and Humean Supervenience. To be
sure, there are many other features of W @xmath -theories in general and
the nomological interpretation in particular that are worth exploring
further.

The most interesting feature of the new package, I think, is that it
brings together the foundations of quantum mechanics and quantum
statistical mechanics. In W @xmath -theories, the arrow of time becomes
intimately connected to the quantum-mechanical phenomena in nature. It
is satisfying to see that nature is so unified.

## Acknowledgement

I would like to thank the editors and referees of The British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science for helpful feedback. I am also grateful
for stimulating discussions with David Albert, Sheldon Goldstein, and
Barry Loewer. I have received helpful feedback from Abhay Ashtekar,
Karen Bennett, Harjit Bhogal, Max Bialek, Miren Boehm, Robert
Brandenberger, Tad Brennan, Sean Carroll, Juliusz Doboszewski, Detlef
Dürr, Denise Dykstra, Michael Esfeld, Veronica Gomez, Hans Halvorson,
Harold Hodes, Mario Hubert, Michael Kiessling, Dustin Lazarovici,
Stephen Leeds, Matthias Lienert, Niels Linnemann, Chuang Liu, Vera
Matarese, Tim Maudlin, Elizabeth Miller, Sebastian Murgueitio, Wayne
Myrvold, Jill North, Zee Perry, Davide Romano, Ezra Rubenstein, Charles
Sebens, Ted Sider, Joshua Spencer, Noel Swanson, Karim Thébault,
Roderich Tumulka, David Wallace, Isaac Wilhelm, Nino Zanghì, audiences
at Cornell University, the University of Western Ontario, the University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, and the 2018 Rotman Summer Institute in
Philosophy of Cosmology.
