## Chapter 1 Introduction

Diophantine equations are one of the oldest subjects in number theory.
They have been first studied by the Greek mathematician Diophantus of
Alexandria during the third century. By definition, a Diophantine
equation is a polynomial equation of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

What is of interest is to find all its integer solutions, that is all
the @xmath uplets @xmath in @xmath which satisfy equation ( 1.1 ).

Historically, one of the first Diophantine equation is the equation
@xmath This arises from the problem of finding all the rectangular
triangles whose sides have integer lengths. Such triples @xmath are
called Pythagorean triples. Some Pythagorean triples are @xmath but
these are not all. All Pythagorean triples can be obtained as follows:
if @xmath is a solution, then @xmath is a rational solution. We have
then @xmath , namely @xmath is the unit circle and has rational
coordinates. Using the parametrization of the circle @xmath and @xmath
where @xmath , the rational values of @xmath give all the solutions of
the equation. Another example is the linear Diophantine equation @xmath
where @xmath are fixed integers and @xmath are integer unknowns.

Given a Diophantine equation, the fundamental problem is to study is
whether solutions exist. If they exist one would like to know how many
there are and how to find all of them. Certain Diophantine equations
have no solutions in non zero integers like the Fermat equation, @xmath
with @xmath

The study of Diophantine equations helped to develop many tools in
modern number theory. For example, for the proof of Fermat’s Last
Theorem , many tools from algebraic geometry, elliptic curves, algebraic
number theory, etc. were developed.

Among the @xmath problems posed by Hilbert in @xmath , the @xmath
Problem concerned Diophantine equations. Hilbert asked if there is a
universal method for solving all Diophantine equations. Here we
reformulate it:

"Given a Diophantine equation with any number of unknown quantities and
with rational integral numerical coefficients: To devise a process
according to which it can be determined by a finite number of operations
whether the equation is solvable in integers".

In @xmath , Y. Matiyasevich gave a negative solution to Hilbert’s @xmath
th Problem. His result is the following.

###### Theorem 1 (Y. Matiyasevich).

There is no algorithm which, for a given arbitrary Diophantine equation,
would tell whether the equation has an integer solution or not.

###### Remark 1.0.1.

For rational solutions, the analog of Hilbert’s 10th problem is not yet
solved. That is, the question whether there exists an algorithm to
decide if a Diophantine equation has a rational solution or not is still
open.

Since there is no general method to solve Diophantine equations, some
techniques were found to solve particular families of Diophantine
equations. Many great mathematicians like Pierre Fermat , Leonhard Euler
, Joseph Louis Lagrange and Henri Poincaré have interesting work on the
subject. Many tools have also been developed such as transcendental
number theory and computational number theory.

In this thesis, we study certain Diophantine equations involving
arithmetic functions and binary recurrence sequences.

### 1.1 Motivation and Overview

Many problems in number theory may be reduced to finding the
intersection of two sequences of positive integers. The heuristic is
that the finiteness of this intersection should depend on how quickly
the two sequences grow. During his life time, P. Erdős and his
collaborators devoted a lot of work to the study of the intersection of
two arithmetic functions. In that line of research, we might add the
recurrence sequences.

In the last years, many papers have been published concerning
Diophantine equations of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are two non-degenerate binary recurrence
sequences, @xmath and @xmath are fixed positive integers. We refer to
the papers [ BD69 ] , [ KP75 ] , [ Ve80 ] , [ Lu00b ] .

Considering the Diophantine equation of the form ( 1.3 ), one can see
that on the one-hand the Euler function @xmath is a multiplicative
function so it behaves well with respect to the multiplicative
properties of the integers while on the other-hand the recurrence
sequence has some additive properties. So, the study of the intersection
between the multiplicative and the additive structure makes such
equations interesting.

In @xmath , M. Mignotte (see [ Mi78 ] and [ Mi79 ] ) proved that the
equation ( 1.1 ) has only finitely many solutions that are effectively
computable under certain conditions. For example, if @xmath and @xmath
are two non degenerate binary recurrence sequences whose characteristic
equation has real roots, then it suffices that the logarithm of the
absolute values of the largest roots to be linearly independent over
@xmath In @xmath Mátyás [ Ma81 ] gave a criterion for determining
whether two second order linear recurrence sequences have nonempty
intersection.

Later in @xmath , F. Luca studied Diophantine equations of form ( 1.3 )
(see [ Lu02 ] ), involving the Euler totient function of binary
recurrent sequences and proved that if @xmath and @xmath are two
non-degenerate binary recurrent sequences of integers such that @xmath
satisfies some technical assumptions, then the Diophantine equation (
1.3 ) has only finitely many effectively computable positive integer
solutions @xmath Though, for two given binary recurrent sequences, it is
in general difficult to find all such solutions. Furthermore, since
these results are ineffective, the determination of all the solutions is
a challenge.

Our goal in this thesis is to continue this line of research by solving
effectively certain equations of the form ( 1.1 ) and ( 1.3 ).

The material presented in this thesis covers all the results from the
following journal papers:

1.  B. Faye, F. Luca, A. Tall On the equation @xmath Korean Journal of
    Math. Soc. 52  (2015) No. 2, 513-514.

2.  B. Faye, F. Luca, On the equation @xmath International Journal of
    Number Theory, 11 , No. 5, (2015) 1691-1700.

3.  B. Faye, Jhon J. Bravo, F. Luca, A. Tall Repdigits as Euler
    functions of Lucas numbers An. St. Math. Univ. Ovidius Constanta 24
     (2) (2016) 105-126.

4.  B. Faye, F. Luca, Pell and Pell Lucas numbers with only one distinct
    digit Ann. Math. Informaticae, 45  (2015) 55-60.

5.  B. Faye, F. Luca, Pell Numbers whose Euler Function is a Pell Number
    Publications de l’Institut Mathématique nouvelle série (Beograd),
    101  (2015) 231-245.

6.  B. Faye, F. Luca, Lucas Numbers with Lehmer Property Mathematical
    Reports, 19(69) , 1(2017), 121-125.

7.  B. Faye, F. Luca, Pell Numbers with the Lehmer property , Afrika
    Matematika, 28(1-2) (2017), 291-294.

### 1.2 Some background and Diophantine Problems

In this section, we give an overview of the different Diophantine
problems which have been studied in this thesis. All these problems have
been treated in papers which are either published or have been submitted
for publication.

#### Pell numbers whose Euler function is a Pell number

In [ LF09 ] , it is shown that @xmath , and @xmath are the only
Fibonacci numbers whose Euler function is also a Fibonacci number, while
in [ Lu00a ] , Luca found all the Fibonacci numbers whose Euler function
is a power of @xmath . In [ LS14 ] , Luca and Stănică found all the Pell
numbers whose Euler function is a power of @xmath . In [ DFLT14 ] , we
proved a more general result which contains the results of [ Lu00a ] and
[ LS14 ] as particular cases. Namely, consider the Lucas sequence @xmath
, with @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is an integer. We proved that there are finitely
many terms of this sequence which their Euler’s function are powers of
@xmath .

In the same direction, we have investigated in this thesis, the
solutions of the Diophantine equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Pell sequence given by @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath In others words, we are interested in knowing which are the terms
of the Pell sequence whose Euler’s function are also the terms of the
Pell sequence.

In Chapter 3 , we effectively solve the above equation. We prove the
following

###### Theorem (Chapter 3, Theorem 16).

The only solutions in positive integers @xmath of the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are @xmath

### Repdigits and Lucas sequences

Let @xmath and @xmath be the sequence of Fibonacci and Lucas numbers
given by @xmath and @xmath and recurrences

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In [ LM06 ] , it was shown that the largest solution of the Diophantine
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

is obtained when @xmath Numbers of the form @xmath are called repdigits
in base @xmath , since their base @xmath representation is the string
@xmath . Here, we look at Diophantine equation ( 1.4 ) with @xmath
replaced by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Altrough we did not completely solve the problem, we obtained some
interesting properties of the solutions of the above equation. These
results are the main result in [ JBLT15 ] , which is presented in
Chapter 5 . We prove the following.

###### Theorem (Chapter 5, Theorem 19).

Assume that @xmath is such that equation ( 1.5 ) holds with some @xmath
. Then

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath is even;

-   @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath .

-   @xmath .

Furthermore, we investigated the terms of the Pell sequence @xmath and
its companions @xmath given by @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath , which
are repdigits. This leads us to solve the equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can see that this problem leads to a Diophantine equation of the
form ( 1.1 ). In fact, a straightforward use of the theory of linear
form in logarithms gives some very large bounds on @xmath , which then
can be reduced either by using the LLL [ LLL82 ] algorithm or by using a
procedure originally discovered by Baker and Davenport [ BD69 ] and
improved by Dujella and Pethő [ DP98 ] .

In our case, we do not use linear forms in logarithms. We prove in an
elementary way that the solutions of the equations ( 1.6 ) and ( 1.7 )
are respectively @xmath and @xmath Theses results are the main results
of [ FL15b ] and are presented in Chapter 5 .

#### American Mathematical Monthly problem

Problem @xmath from the American Mathematical Monthly [ Lu97 ] asks to
find all positive integer solutions @xmath of the Diophantine equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

To our knowledge, no solution was ever received to this problem. In this
thesis, we prove the following result.

###### Theorem (Chapter 4, Theorem 17).

Equation ( 1.8 ) has no positive integer solution @xmath .

In [ Lu08 ] , it was shown that if @xmath is a fixed integer, then the
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

has only finitely many positive integer solutions @xmath . That is,
there are only finitely many repdigits in base @xmath whose Euler
function is also a repdigit in base @xmath . Taking @xmath , with @xmath
, it follows that equation ( 1.8 ) has only finitely many positive
integer solutions @xmath .

In [ FL15a ] , our main result improve the result of [ Lu08 ] for
certain values of @xmath .

###### Theorem (Chapter 4, Theorem 18).

Each one of the two equations

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.10)
  -- -- -- --------

has only finitely many positive integer solutions @xmath with the
exception @xmath case in which any positive integer @xmath leads to a
solution of the second equation above. Aside from the above mentioned
exceptions, all solutions have @xmath .

##### On Lehmer’s Conjecture

A composite positive integer @xmath is Lehmer if @xmath divides @xmath .
Lehmer [ Le32 ] conjectured that there is no such integer. To this day,
the conjecture remains open. Counterexamples to Lehmer’s conjecture have
been dubbed Lehmer numbers .

Several people worked on getting larger and larger lower bounds on a
potential Lehmer number. Lehmer himself proved that if @xmath is Lehmer,
then @xmath . This has been improved by Cohen and Hagis [ CH80 ] to
@xmath The current record @xmath is due to Renze [ Re04 ] . If in
addition @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath

Not succeeding in proving that there are no Lehmer numbers, some
researchers have settled for the more modest goal of proving that there
are no Lehmer numbers in certain interesting subsequences of positive
integers. In @xmath , F. Luca [ Lu07 ] proved that there is no Lehmer
number in the Fibonacci sequence. In [ RL12 ] , it is shown that there
is no Lehmer number in the sequence of Cullen numbers @xmath of general
term @xmath , while in [ KO13 ] the same conclusion is shown to hold for
generalized Cullen numbers. In [ CL11 ] , it is shown that there is no
Lehmer number of the form @xmath for any @xmath and integer @xmath . In
Chapter 6 , we adapt the method from [ Lu07 ] to prove the following
theorems:

###### Theorem (Chapter 6, Theorem 22).

There is no Lehmer number in the Lucas sequence @xmath

###### Theorem (Chapter 6, Theorem 23).

There is no Lehmer number in the Pell sequence @xmath

### 1.3 Organization of the Thesis

Our thesis consists of six chapters. This chapter, as the title
suggests, gives a general introduction and the main motivation of this
thesis, together with a description of the different Diophantine
problems which have been studied. From Chapter 3 to Chapter 6 , each
chapter contains new results concerning Diophantine equations with
arithmetic function and some given binary recurrence sequences.

In Chapter 2 , we give the preliminary tools and main results that will
be used in this work. We start by reminding some definitions and
properties of binary recurrence sequences and arithmetic functions with
the main emphasis of the Euler’s function. In Section 2.4 , we recall
results on the Primitive Divisor Theorem of members of Lucas sequences.
Chapter 2 concludes with a result due to Matveev [ Ma00 ] which gives a
general lower bound for linear forms in logarithms of algebraic
numbers(Section 2.5 ) and results from Diophantine properties of
continued fractions(Section 2.6 ).

In Chapter 3 , we investigate Pell numbers whose Euler function is also
a Pell number.

In Chapter 4 , we solve the Diophantine equations ( 1.8 ) and ( 1.10 ).

In Chapter 5 , we use some tools and results from Diophantine
approximations and linear form in logarithms of algebraic numbers,
continued fractions and sieve methods to solve Theorem 17 , Theorem 18
and Diophantine equations ( 1.6 ) and ( 1.7 ).

In Chapter 6 , we prove that the Lehmer Conjecture holds for the Lucas
sequence @xmath and the Pell sequence @xmath . Namely, none of these
sequences contains a Lehmer number.

## Chapter 2 Preliminary results

In this chapter, we give some preliminaries that will be useful in this
thesis. In Section 2.1 , we discuss some basic definitions and
properties of arithmetic functions, in Section 2.2 , the Euler function
and related results. In Section 2.3 , we study the arithmetic of binary
recurrence sequences. In Section 2.4 , we recall the Primitive Divisor
Theorem for members of Lucas sequences. We conclude this chapter with
results from linear forms in logarithms of algebraic numbers in Section
2.5 and properties of continued fractions in Section 2.6 .

### 2.1 Arithmetic Functions

An arithmetic function is a function defined on the set of natural
numbers @xmath with real or complex values. It can be also defined as a
sequence @xmath An active part of number theory consists, in some way,
of the study of these functions.

The usual number theoretic examples of arithmetic functions are @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath for the number of divisors of @xmath including @xmath
, the number of distinct prime factors of @xmath and the number of prime
power factors of @xmath , respectively. These functions can be described
in terms of the prime factorization of @xmath as in the following
proposition:

###### Proposition 1.

Suppose that @xmath , has the prime factorization

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The expression of @xmath and @xmath follow from their definition.
Divisors of @xmath have the form @xmath where for each @xmath , the
possible values of @xmath are @xmath This gives the expression of @xmath
∎

###### Definition 1.

An arithmetic function @xmath , such that @xmath , is said to be

-    completely multiplicative if @xmath

-    multiplicative if @xmath

###### Example 1.

1.   For any @xmath , @xmath is completely multiplicative.

2.  @xmath is multiplicative.

3.   Neither @xmath nor @xmath is multiplicative.

### 2.2 The Euler Totient @xmath

###### Definition 2.

For a positive integer @xmath , the Euler totient function @xmath counts
the number of positive integers @xmath which are coprime to @xmath ,
that is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, if @xmath is a prime number, then @xmath Further, let @xmath be
the set of congruence classes @xmath . This set is also a ring and its
invertible elements form a group whose cardinality is @xmath .
Lagrange’s theorem from group theory tells us that the order of every
element in a finite group is a divisor of the order of the group. In
this particular case, this theorem implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds for all integers @xmath coprime to @xmath . The above relation is
known as the Euler Theorem.

###### Theorem 2.

The Euler totient function @xmath is multiplicative, i.e

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If @xmath and @xmath , then the result holds. Suppose now that @xmath
and @xmath We denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, we obtain that @xmath @xmath and @xmath We now show that the set
@xmath has as many elements as the set @xmath , then the theorem
follows.

∎

###### Theorem 3.

If @xmath , where @xmath are distinct primes and @xmath are positive
integers, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the sum of divisors of @xmath .

###### Example 2.2.1.

.

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

The next lemma from [ Lu01 ] is useful in order to obtain an upper bound
on the sum appearing in the right–hand side of ( 3.3 ).

###### Lemma 1.

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.3 Linearly Recurrence Sequences

Linear recurrence sequences have interesting properties and played a
central role in number theory. The arithmetic of these sequences have
been studied by François Edouard Anatole Lucas (1842-1891). We shall
reference some theorems from the multitude of results that had been
proved over recent years.

###### Definition 3.

In general, a linear recurrence sequence @xmath of order @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath , for @xmath , where @xmath are constants. The values @xmath
are not all zero.

Linear recurrence sequences of order @xmath are called binary and the
ones of order @xmath ternary . For a linear recurrence sequence of order
@xmath , the @xmath initial values determine all others elements of the
sequence.

###### Example 2.3.1.

For @xmath , let @xmath @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a linear recurrence sequence.

###### Definition 4.

The characteristic polynomial of the linear recurrence of recurrence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the polynomial,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We assume that this polynomial has distinct roots @xmath i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of multiplicities @xmath respectively.

It is well known from the theory of linearly recurrence sequences that
for all @xmath , there exist uniquely determined polynomials @xmath of
degree less than @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this thesis, we consider only integer recurrence sequences, namely
recurrence sequences whose coefficients and initial values are integers
i.e @xmath (all the roots of @xmath are distinct). Hence, @xmath is an
algebraic number for all @xmath and @xmath Thus, we have the following
result.

###### Theorem 4.

Assume that @xmath has distinct roots. Then there exist constants @xmath
such that the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Conf [ Lu09b ] , page @xmath ∎

A geometric sequence is a simple example of linear recurrence sequences.
It is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The constant ratio @xmath is called the common ratio of the sequence.

#### 2.3.2 Lucas sequence

Let @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath

###### Definition 5.

A Lucas sequence @xmath is a binary recurrence sequence that satisfies
the recurrence sequence @xmath , @xmath Its characteristic polynomial is
of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, @xmath is an integer for all @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath
denote the two roots of its characteristic polynomial and its
discriminant @xmath . Then the roots are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 2.3.3.

If @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath then @xmath is called a Lucas sequence
of the first kind.

##### Binet’s Formula

Binet’s formula is a particular case of Theorem 4 . Its named after the
mathematician Jacques Phillipe Marie Binet who found first the similar
formula for the Fibonacci sequence . For a Lucas sequence @xmath ,
Theorem 4 tells us that the corresponding Binet formula is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The values of @xmath and @xmath are found by using the formula ( 2.2 ),
when @xmath . Hence, one obtains the system

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Solving it, we get that @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath , we can write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The companion Lucas-sequence @xmath of @xmath has the following Binet
formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Example 2.3.4.

.

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

###### Definition 6.

A Lucas sequence, as defined by formula ( 2.2 ), is said to be
nondegenerate if @xmath and @xmath is not a root of unity.

There are several relations among the Lucas sequence @xmath and its
companion sequence @xmath which can be proved using their Binet
formulas. Here, we recall some of those relations that will be useful
throughout this thesis.

###### Theorem 5.

Let @xmath be a Lucas sequence. Then, the following holds:

-   @xmath where @xmath is its companion sequence.

-   @xmath for all positive integers @xmath . Consequently, the integers
    @xmath and @xmath are relatively prime when @xmath and @xmath are
    relatively prime.

-    If @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.

Assume that @xmath is odd and @xmath The following holds:

-    If @xmath , then @xmath

-    If @xmath and @xmath then @xmath .

-    If @xmath and @xmath then @xmath .

###### Definition 7.

For a prime @xmath , let @xmath be the order of appearance of @xmath in
@xmath ; i.e., the minimal positive integer @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.

-    If @xmath , then @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath

-    If @xmath , then @xmath .

#### 2.3.5 The Fibonacci sequence

###### Definition 8.

The Fibonacci sequence is a Lucas sequence defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The polynomial @xmath is the characteristic polynomial for @xmath whose
roots are @xmath and @xmath . For the Fibonacci numbers, the quotient of
successive term is not constant as it is the case for geometric
sequences. Indeed, Johannes Kepler found that the quotient converges and
it corresponds to @xmath , the Golden Ratio . The following theorems,
which correspond to ( 2.3 ) and ( 2.4 ) respectively, give the Binet
formula of the Fibonacci sequence @xmath and its companion @xmath in
terms of the Golden Ratio.

###### Theorem 6.

If @xmath is the @xmath Fibonacci number,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 7.

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The sequence of Fibonacci numbers can also be extended to negative
indices @xmath by rewriting the recurrence by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using Theorems 6 and 7 , we have the following Lemma.

###### Lemma 2.

1.  @xmath and @xmath

2.  @xmath and @xmath

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.   Let @xmath be a prime number. If @xmath then @xmath Otherwise
    @xmath

6.   If @xmath and @xmath is odd, then @xmath

7.   Let @xmath and @xmath be positive integers such that @xmath is odd
    prime. Then @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath is even.

8.  -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

: See. [ Lu97 ] , [ Lu08 ] , [ Lu02 ] . ∎

Many Diophantine equations involving Fibonacci and Lucas numbers being
squares, perfect powers of the larger exponents of some others integers
were proved over the past years. Here we give few of them.

###### Lemma 3 (Bugeaud, Luca, Mignotte and Siksek, [Bms06] and [Blms08]
).

The equation @xmath with some @xmath implies that @xmath . Furthermore,
the only solutions of the equation @xmath for some prime @xmath and
integers @xmath have @xmath .

We also recall a result about square-classes of members of Lucas
sequences due to McDaniel and Ribenboim (see [ MR98 ] ).

###### Lemma 4.

If @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath or @xmath with @xmath odd.

Before we end this section, we recall well-known results on the
sequences @xmath and @xmath which can be easily proved using formulas (
2.3 ) and ( 2.4 ).

###### Lemma 5.

The relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds for all @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.

The relations

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath

-   -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

hold for all positive integers @xmath .

### 2.4 The Primitive Divisor Theorem

In this section, we recall the Primitive Divisor Theorem of members for
Lucas sequences. In fact, the Primitive Divisor Theorem is an extension
of Zygmondy’s theorem.

###### Definition 9.

Let @xmath be a Lucas sequence. The integer @xmath , with @xmath is said
to be a primitive divisor for @xmath if @xmath divide @xmath and @xmath
not divide @xmath for all @xmath . In other words, a prime factor @xmath
of @xmath such that @xmath is a primitive prime.

The existence of primitive divisors is an old problem which has been
completely solved by Yuri Bilu, Guillaume Hanrot and Paul M Voutier [
BHV01 ] . Here we state it.

###### Theorem 8.

For @xmath , the @xmath th term @xmath of any Lucas sequence has a
primitive divisor.

Carmichael proved the theorem in the case when the roots of the
characteristic polynomial of @xmath are real. In particular he proved
the following results.

###### Lemma 7 (Carmichael [Ca13]).

@xmath has a primitive divisor for all @xmath

###### Lemma 8 (Carmichael [Ca13]).

@xmath has a primitive divisor for all @xmath , while @xmath , and
@xmath .

Moreover, any primitive prime @xmath such that @xmath , satisfies the
congruence of the following theorem.

###### Theorem 9.

If @xmath is a primitive divisor of a Lucas sequences @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In fact @xmath . Further, when @xmath , then

If @xmath then @xmath

If @xmath then @xmath

We recall a result of McDaniel on the prime factors of the Pell sequence
@xmath

###### Lemma 9 (McDaniel [Mc02]).

Let @xmath be the sequence of Pell numbers. Then @xmath has a prime
factor @xmath for all @xmath .

It is known that @xmath has a primitive divisor for all @xmath (see [
Ca13 ] or [ BHV01 ] ). Write @xmath , where @xmath is coprime to @xmath
. It is known that if @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath . In
particular,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We need a bound on @xmath . We have the following result.

###### Lemma 10.

The inequality

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds for all primes @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath , the inequality holds for the prime @xmath . Assume that
@xmath is odd. Then @xmath for some @xmath . Furthermore, by Theorem 5
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 5 , it follows easily that @xmath cannot divide both @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath since otherwise @xmath will also divide

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a contradiction since @xmath is odd. Hence, @xmath divides one
of @xmath or @xmath . If @xmath divides @xmath , we have, by ( 3.2 ),
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which leads to the desired inequality ( 2.8 ) upon taking logarithms of
both sides. In case @xmath divides @xmath , we use the fact that @xmath
is even by Lemma 6 (i). Hence, @xmath divides @xmath , therefore, by
formula ( 2.4 ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which leads again to the desired conclusion by taking logarithms of both
sides. ∎

Before we end our discussion on preliminaries of this thesis, it will be
helpful to recall some basic definitions and results from Diophantine
approximations which will be very useful for Chapter 5 . We will also
introduce others tools as continued fractions in Section 2.6 .

### 2.5 Linear forms in logarithms

#### 2.5.1 Algebraic Numbers

###### Definition 10.

A complex (or real) number @xmath is an algebraic number if it is the
root of a polynomial

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with integers coefficients @xmath .

Let @xmath be an algebraic number of degree @xmath over @xmath with
minimal primitive polynomial over the integers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the leading coefficient @xmath is positive. The logarithmic height
of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.5.2 Linear forms in logarithms of rational numbers

We first define what is meant by linear forms in logarithms . We refer
to the description given in [ Bu08 ] .

Let @xmath be an integer. For @xmath , let @xmath be a non zero rational
number, @xmath be a positive integer and set @xmath and @xmath . We
consider the quantity:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which occurs naturally in many Diophantine equations. It’s often easy to
prove that @xmath and to find an upper bound for it. For applications to
Diophantine problems, it is important that not only the above linear
form is nonzero, but also that we have a strong enough lower bound for
the absolute value of this linear form. Since @xmath , the reason why it
is called linear form in logarithms is that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assuming that @xmath is nonzero, one can state a trivial lower bound for
@xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The dependence on the @xmath ’s is very satisfactory, unlike the
dependence on @xmath . However, to solve many Diophantine questions, we
need a better dependence on @xmath , even if the dependence on the
@xmath ’s is not the best possible. More generally, one can state
analogous lower bounds when the @xmath are replaced by nonzero algebraic
numbers @xmath , the real numbers @xmath being then expressed in terms
of the logarithmic height of @xmath .

#### Lower bounds for linear forms in logarithms of algebraic numbers

A lower bound for a nonzero expression of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are algebraic numbers and @xmath are integers, is the same
as a lower bound for a nonzero number of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

since @xmath for @xmath The first nontrivial lower bounds were obtained
by A.O. Gel’fond. His estimates were effective only for @xmath Later, A.
Schinzel deduced explicit Diophantine results using the approach
introduced by A.O. Gel’fond. In @xmath , A. Baker succeeded to extend to
any @xmath the transcendence method used by A.O. Gel’fond for @xmath

###### Theorem 10 (A. Baker, @xmath).

Let @xmath be algebraic numbers from @xmath different from @xmath
Further, let @xmath be rational integers such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is an effectively computable constant depending
only on @xmath and on @xmath

Baker’s result marked a rise of the area of effective resolution of the
Diophantine equations of certain types, more precisely those that can be
reduced to exponential equations. Many important generalizations and
improvements of Baker’s result have been obtained. We refer to a paper
of Baker (see [ Ba67 ] ) for an interesting survey on these results.

From this theory, we recall results that we shall use in this thesis. We
present a Baker type inequality with explicit constants which is easy to
apply. Here, we give the result of Matveev [ Ma00 ] .

#### 2.5.3 Matveev’s Theorem

###### Theorem 11 (Matveev [Ma00]).

Let @xmath be a number field of degree @xmath over @xmath @xmath be
positive real numbers of @xmath , and @xmath rational integers. Put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be real numbers, for @xmath Then, assuming that @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.6 Continued Fractions

We recall some definitions and properties of continued fractions. The
material of this section is mainly from [ Lu09b ] . We also present the
reduction method based on a lemma of Baker–Davenport [ BD69 ] .

###### Definition 11.

A finite continued fraction is an expression of the form

1.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath We use the notation @xmath
    for the above expression.

2.   The continued fraction @xmath is called simple if @xmath

3.   The continued fraction @xmath with @xmath is called the @xmath -th
    convergent of @xmath

One can easily see that every simple continued fraction is a rational
number. Conversely, using the Euclidean algorithm, every rational number
can be represented as a simple continued fraction; however the
expression is not unique. For example, the continued fraction of @xmath
However, if @xmath , then the representation of a rational number as a
finite continued fraction is unique. Continued fractions are important
in many branches of mathematics, and particularly in the theory of
approximation to real numbers by rationals.

###### Definition 12.

Let @xmath be an infinite sequence of integers with @xmath for all
@xmath The infinite continued fraction is defined as the limit of the
finite continued fraction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Infinite continued fractions always represent irrational numbers.
Conversely, every irrational number can be expanded in an infinite
continued fraction.

###### Example 2.

The most basic of all continued fractions is the one using all 1’s:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we put @xmath for the dots numbers then @xmath . So @xmath which is
equivalent to @xmath . The quadratic formula gives us, @xmath , i.e.,
the golden ratio.

#### 2.6.1 Some properties of continued fractions

In this section, we use the following notations:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following theorem indicates that the convergents @xmath give the
best approximations by rationals of the irrational number @xmath .

###### Theorem 12.

(Convergents).

1.   Let @xmath be an irrational number and let @xmath for @xmath be the
    convergents of the continued fraction of @xmath . If @xmath with
    @xmath and @xmath is a positive integer such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then @xmath

2.   If @xmath is irrational and @xmath is a rational number with @xmath
    such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    then @xmath is a convergent of @xmath

###### Proof.

See [ Lu09b ] . ∎

###### Theorem 13 (Legendre’s Theorem).

If @xmath is an irrational number and @xmath is a rational number in
lowest terms, @xmath , such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is a convergent of the continued fraction of @xmath .

Legendre’s Theorem is an important result in the study of continued
fractions, because it tells us that good approximations of irrational
numbers by rational numbers are given by its convergents.

#### 2.6.2 The Baker–Davenport Lemma

In @xmath , Dujella and Pethő in [ DP98 , Lemma 5 @xmath ] gave a
version of the reduction method based on a lemma of Baker–Davenport
lemma [ BD69 ] . The next lemma from [ BL13 ] , gave a variation of
their result. This will be our key tool used to reduce the upper bounds
on the variable @xmath in Chapter 5 .

###### Lemma 11.

Let @xmath be a positive integer, let @xmath be a convergent of the
continued fraction of the irrational @xmath such that @xmath , and let
@xmath be some real numbers with @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath , where
@xmath denotes the distance from the nearest integer. If @xmath , then
there is no solution to the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

in positive integers @xmath and @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We proceed as in the proof of Lemma 5 in [ DP98 ] . In fact, we assume
that @xmath . Multiplying the relation ( 2.10 ) by keeping in mind that
@xmath (because @xmath is a convergent of @xmath ), we then have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

leading to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

## Chapter 3 Pell numbers whose Euler function is a Pell number

In this chapter, we find all the members of the Pell sequence whose
Euler’s function is also a member of the Pell sequence. We prove that
the only solutions are @xmath and @xmath . The material of this chapter
is the main result in [ FL15d ] .

### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter, we have the following result.

###### Theorem 14.

The only solutions in positive integers @xmath of the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

are @xmath

For the proof, we begin by following the method from [ LF09 ] , but we
add to it some ingredients from [ Lu07 ] .

### 3.2 Preliminary results

Let @xmath be the roots of the characteristic equation @xmath of the
Pell sequence @xmath . Formula ( 2.2 ) implies easily that the
inequalities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

hold for all positive integers @xmath .

We need some inequalities from the prime number theory. The following
inequalities (i), (ii) and (iii) are inequalities (3.13), (3.29) and
(3.41) in [ RS62 ] , while (iv) is Theorem 13 from [ Ro83 ] .

###### Lemma 12.

Let @xmath be the sequence of all prime numbers. We have:

-    The inequality

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    holds for all @xmath .

-    The inequality

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    holds for all @xmath .

-    The inequality

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    holds for all @xmath .

-    The inequality

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    holds for all @xmath .

For a positive integer @xmath , we put @xmath . We need the following
result.

###### Lemma 13.

Put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

Since @xmath , it follows that every prime factor @xmath is odd and
satisfies the congruence @xmath . Further, putting @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(by inequality ( 3.2 )), giving

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, the inequality

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds for all @xmath , since it follows from ( 3.4 ) for @xmath via the
fact that the function @xmath is increasing for @xmath , while for
@xmath it can be checked directly. To prove the first bound, we use (
3.5 ) to deduce that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Since the inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds for all @xmath , ( 3.6 ) implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The remaining range for @xmath can be checked on an individual basis.
For the second bound on @xmath , we follow the argument from [ Lu07 ]
and split the primes in @xmath in three groups:

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath ;

We have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the last inequalities above hold for all @xmath . For the
remaining primes in @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the sums of the reciprocals of the primes
in @xmath satisfying (ii) and (iii), respectively. The sum @xmath was
estimated in [ Lu07 ] using the large sieve inequality of Montgomery and
Vaughan [ MV73 ] which asserts that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath stands for the number of primes @xmath with @xmath and the
bound on it is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last inequality holds for @xmath . Finally, for @xmath , we
use the estimate ( 3.5 ) on @xmath to deduce that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last bound holds for all @xmath . To summarize, for @xmath ,
we have, by ( 3.7 ), ( 3.8 ), ( 3.10 ) and ( 3.11 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath even, which is stronger @xmath that the desired inequality.
Here, we @xmath used that @xmath for even @xmath . For odd @xmath , we
use the same argument except that the first fraction @xmath on the
right–hand side above gets replaced by @xmath (by ( 3.7 )), and we only
have @xmath for odd @xmath . This was for @xmath . For @xmath , the
desired inequality can be checked on an individual basis. ∎

### 3.3 Proof of Theorem 14

#### A bird’s eye view of the proof

In this section, we explain the plan of attack for the proof Theorem 14
. We assume @xmath . We put @xmath for the number of distinct prime
factors of @xmath and @xmath . We first show that @xmath and that any
possible solution must be large. This only uses the fact that @xmath for
all prime factors @xmath of @xmath , and all such primes with at most
one exception are odd. We show that @xmath and @xmath . This is Lemma 14
. We next bound @xmath in terms of @xmath by showing that @xmath (Lemma
15 ). Next we show that @xmath is large, by proving that @xmath (Lemma
16 ). When @xmath is odd, then @xmath for all prime factor @xmath of
@xmath . This implies that @xmath . Thus, @xmath and @xmath , a
contradiction in our range for @xmath . This is done in Subsection 3.3 .
When @xmath is even, we write @xmath with an odd integer @xmath and
bound @xmath and the smallest prime factor @xmath of @xmath . We first
show that @xmath , that if @xmath and @xmath have a common divisor
larger than @xmath , then @xmath (Lemma 17 ). A lot of effort is spent
into finding a small bound on @xmath . As we saw, @xmath if @xmath and
@xmath are not coprime. When @xmath and @xmath are coprime, we succeed
in proving that @xmath . Putting @xmath for the exponent of @xmath in
the factorization of @xmath , it turns out that our argument works well
when @xmath and we get a contradiction, but when @xmath , then we need
some additional information about the prime factors of @xmath . It is
always the case that @xmath for all primes @xmath , except for @xmath
for which @xmath , but, lucky for us, both @xmath and @xmath have two
suitable prime factors each which allows us to obtain a contradiction.
Our efforts in obtaining @xmath involve quite a complicated argument
(roughly the entire argument after Lemma 17 until the end), which we
believe it is justified by the existence of the mighty prime @xmath ,
for which @xmath . Should we have only obtained say @xmath , we would
have had to say something nontrivial about the prime factors of @xmath ,
a nuisance which we succeeded in avoiding simply by proving that @xmath
cannot get that large!

#### Some lower bounds on @xmath and @xmath

Firstly, by a computational search we get that when @xmath , the only
solutions are obtained at @xmath . So, from now on @xmath . We write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are primes and @xmath are positive integers. Clearly,
@xmath .

Lemma 9 on page @xmath applies, therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus @xmath by Lemma 6 . Further, it follows from [ FL15c ] , that
@xmath Hence, @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

by Lemma 12 (iii). The function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is increasing for @xmath . Since @xmath , inequality ( 3.13 ) together
with the fact that @xmath , show that @xmath .

Let @xmath . Since @xmath is even, then @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the fact that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now are ready to provide a large lower bound on @xmath . We
distinguish the following cases.

Case 1 : @xmath is odd .

Here, we have @xmath . So,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is odd, then @xmath is divisible only by primes @xmath with
@xmath being odd. There are precisely @xmath among the first @xmath
primes with this property. We set them as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get that @xmath . Since @xmath , we get, by Lemma 6 , that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Case 2 : @xmath .

Since both @xmath and @xmath are even, we get @xmath Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is a factor of @xmath , as in Case 1, we have that @xmath
There are precisely @xmath among the first @xmath primes with this
property. We set them again as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Writing @xmath as the @xmath th prime number in @xmath , a computation
with Mathematica shows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which via inequality ( 3.16 ) shows that @xmath . Of the @xmath prime
factors of @xmath , we have that only @xmath of them are odd ( @xmath
because @xmath is even), but one of those is congruent to @xmath modulo
@xmath by McDaniel’s result (Lemma 9, page 17). Hence, @xmath , which
shows, via Lemma 6 , that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Case 3 : @xmath .

In this case, since both @xmath and @xmath are multiples of @xmath , we
get that @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Letting @xmath be the sequence of all primes, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

showing that @xmath . Since @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

To summarize, from ( 3.15 ), ( 3.17 ) and ( 3.18 ), we get the following
results.

###### Lemma 14.

If @xmath , then

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.  @xmath .

#### Computing a bound for @xmath in term of @xmath

From the previous section, we have seen that @xmath . Since @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath be the @xmath th prime number. Lemma 12 shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then have, using Lemma 12 (ii), that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Inequality (ii) of Lemma 12 requires that @xmath , which holds for us
with @xmath because @xmath . Hence, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we have @xmath . Hence, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which yields, after taking logarithms, to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds in our range for @xmath (in fact, it holds for all @xmath , which
is our case since for us @xmath ). Inserting inequality ( 3.21 ) into (
3.20 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, we proved the following result.

###### Lemma 15.

If @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Bounding the primes @xmath for @xmath

Write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, @xmath , therefore @xmath . Since also @xmath , we have, by
Theorem 5 , that @xmath where the last relation follows again by Theorem
5 because @xmath Using the inequality ( 3.2 ) and Lemma 15 , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now use the inductive argument from Section 3.3 in [ LF09 ] in order
to find a bound for the primes @xmath for all @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get, therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using an inductive argument on the index @xmath for @xmath , we now show
that if we put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is implies by the inequality ( 3.26 ) and the fact that @xmath ,
we have that @xmath . We assume now that for @xmath the inequality (
3.27 ) is satisfied and let us prove it for @xmath by replacing @xmath
by @xmath . We have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which we write as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is even, then @xmath . Therefore @xmath . Further, since
@xmath , and @xmath it follows that @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the denominator of the positive rational integer on the left hand
side of the above inequality divides @xmath , it follows that this
number is at least as large as @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the inequalities @xmath hold for all @xmath , we get that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using Lemma 15 , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining these inequalities, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is not possible in our range of @xmath . Hence, @xmath . Since
also @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is non zero integer since @xmath and @xmath are conjugate, therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since we certainly have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which combined with ( 3.25 ) lead to

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 15 . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Multiplying both sides by @xmath , we get that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the assumption hypothesis, we get that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This ends the proof by induction of the estimate ( 3.27 ).

In particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which together with formulae ( 3.20 ) and ( 3.24 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath by inequality ( 3.2 ), we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath (see ( 3.19 )), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last two inequalities above hold because @xmath .

So, we proved the following result.

###### Lemma 16.

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### The case when @xmath is odd

Let @xmath be any prime factor of @xmath . Reducing relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

of Lemma 5 modulo @xmath , we get @xmath . Since @xmath is odd, (because
@xmath is odd), then @xmath . This is satisfied by all prime factors
@xmath of @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which, by Lemma 6 (ii), gives @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

inequality which together with Lemma 16 gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in contradiction with Lemma 14 .

#### Bounding @xmath

From now on, @xmath is even. We write it as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are odd primes. Thus, by inequality (
3.14 ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and taking logarithms we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the above, we used the inequality @xmath which is valid for all
@xmath with @xmath and that @xmath for @xmath with @xmath for all @xmath
and all divisors @xmath with @xmath .

Let us deduce that the case @xmath is impossible. Indeed, if this were
so, then @xmath is a power of @xmath and so, by Lemma 14 , both @xmath
and @xmath are divisible by @xmath . Thus, @xmath . Inserting this into
( 3.29 ), and using Lemma 13 , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a contradiction.

Thus, @xmath so @xmath . We now put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also let @xmath be minimal in @xmath . We split the sum appearing in
( 3.29 ) in two parts:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To bound @xmath , we note that all divisors involved divide @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using Lemmas 1 and 13 , we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We now bound @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath and there is nothing to
bound. So, assume that @xmath . We argue as follows. Note that since
@xmath , by Theorem 5 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be any odd prime factor of @xmath . By reducing the relation
of Lemma 5 modulo @xmath and using the fact that @xmath and @xmath are
both odd, we get @xmath , therefore @xmath . Hence, @xmath for such
primes @xmath . Now let @xmath be any divisor of @xmath which is a
multiple of @xmath . The number of them is @xmath . For each such @xmath
, there is a primitive prime factor @xmath of @xmath . Thus, @xmath .
This shows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last inequality follows from the fact that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath does not divide @xmath , it follows from ( 2.7 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, ( 3.31 ), ( 3.32 ) and ( 3.1 ) imply that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Invoking Lemma 10 , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now every divisor @xmath participating in @xmath is of the form @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath is a divisor of @xmath divisible by @xmath for
some @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, @xmath and since the function @xmath is decreasing for
@xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting also @xmath , we get, by Lemma 14 , that @xmath . Thus,
inserting this as well as ( 3.30 ) and ( 3.36 ) all into ( 3.29 ), we
get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

inequalities ( 3.38 ), ( 3.34 ) and ( 3.36 ) give us that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The function @xmath is decreasing for @xmath . Thus, @xmath . For a
positive integer @xmath put

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then inequality ( 3.37 ) implies that both inequalities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

hold. Assuming that @xmath , we get, by Lemma 12 , that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Mathematica confirmed that the above inequality implies @xmath . Another
calculation with Mathematica showed that the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

for even values of @xmath implies that @xmath . The minimum of the
function @xmath for @xmath is at @xmath and @xmath . For the remaining
positive integers @xmath , we have @xmath . Hence, inequality ( 3.3 )
implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

according to whether @xmath or @xmath , and either one of the above
inequalities implies that @xmath . Thus, @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath
is square free and @xmath , we have that @xmath . Assume @xmath and let
@xmath be such that @xmath . Let us show that @xmath . Indeed, if @xmath
, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . Thus, we get that @xmath divide @xmath , showing that
@xmath divide @xmath . Since @xmath , only the case @xmath is possible.
In this case, @xmath , and inequality ( 3.3 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a contradiction. Let us record what we have deduced so far.

###### Lemma 17.

If @xmath is even, then @xmath . Further, if @xmath , then @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath .

We now deal with @xmath . For this, we return to ( 3.29 ) and use the
better inequality namely

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the right–hand side above, @xmath and @xmath . The values of the
right–hand side above are in fact

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Computing we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now exploit the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our goal is to prove that @xmath . Assume this is not so. We use the
bound

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of Lemma 13 . Each divisor @xmath participating in @xmath is of the form
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is a multiple of a prime at least as
large as @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using ( 3.34 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last inequality holds because @xmath is large. Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we used the inequalities @xmath , valid for all real numbers
@xmath , as well as @xmath which is valid for @xmath with @xmath which
belongs to @xmath because @xmath is large. Thus, the inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds for @xmath participating in @xmath . The function @xmath is
decreasing for @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting inequality ( 3.34 ) into ( 3.46 ) and using ( 3.43 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , inequality ( 3.47 ) implies @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. For @xmath and @xmath , inequality ( 3.47 ) implies @xmath
. When @xmath and @xmath , we get @xmath . Here, inequality ( 3.47 )
implies that @xmath . This is too big, so we use the bound

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of Lemma 13 instead for the divisors @xmath of participating in @xmath ,
which in this case are all the divisors of @xmath larger than @xmath .
We deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since all the divisors @xmath of @xmath are either of the form @xmath or
@xmath for some divisor @xmath of @xmath , and the function @xmath is
increasing for @xmath , hence the last inequality above follows
immediately. Using Lemma 1 and inequalities ( 3.44 ) and ( 3.45 ), we
get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which gives @xmath . So, in all cases, @xmath . Here, we checked that
@xmath for all such @xmath except @xmath for which @xmath . If @xmath ,
we then get @xmath , so @xmath . Thus, @xmath , in contradiction with
Lemma 14 . Assume now that @xmath . Say @xmath . In this case, @xmath
and @xmath divide @xmath which divides @xmath , therefore @xmath . Thus,
if there is some other prime factor @xmath of @xmath , then @xmath , and
there is a primitive prime @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . In
particular, @xmath . Thus, @xmath , showing that @xmath . Hence, @xmath
, therefore @xmath , a contradiction. A similar contradiction is
obtained if @xmath since @xmath has two primitive prime factors namely
@xmath and @xmath so @xmath . This finishes the proof.

## Chapter 4 On The Equation @xmath

In this chapter, we study all positive integer solutions @xmath of the
Diophantine equation of the form @xmath . In Section 4.2 , we first
present the proof of the case when @xmath . In Section 4.3 , we give the
complete proof of the equation from the title, which is the main result
in [ FL15a ] .

### 4.1 Introduction

As we mentioned in the Introduction, Problem @xmath from the American
Mathematical Monthly [ Lu97 ] asks to find all positive integer
solutions @xmath of the Diophantine equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In [ LM06 ] , it was shown that if @xmath is a fixed integer, then the
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

has only finitely many positive integer solutions @xmath . That is,
there are only finitely many repdigits in base @xmath whose Euler
function is also a repdigit in base @xmath . Taking @xmath , it follows
that equation ( 4.1 ) should have only finitely many positive integer
solutions @xmath .

The main objective is to bound the value of @xmath . Firstly, we make
explicit the arguments from [ LM06 ] together with some specific
features which we deduce from the factorizations of @xmath for small
values of @xmath .

In the process of bounding @xmath , we use two analytic inequalities
i.e., inequality ( 3.9 ) and the approximation @xmath of Lemma 12 .

### 4.2 On the Equation @xmath

In this section we show that the equation of the form @xmath has no
positive integer solutions @xmath , where @xmath is the Euler function.
Here we follow [ FLT15 ] .

###### Theorem 15.

The Diophantine equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

has no positive integer solution @xmath .

### The proof of Theorem 15

For the proof, we make explicit the arguments from [ LM06 ] together
with some specific features which we deduce from the factorizations of
@xmath for small values of @xmath . Write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We achieve the proof of Theorem 15 as a sequence of lemmas. The first
one is known but we give a proof of it for the convenience of the
reader.

###### Lemma 18.

In equation ( 4.3 ), @xmath and @xmath are not coprime.

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath . Assume first that @xmath is odd. Then @xmath .
Applying the @xmath function in both sides of ( 4.5 ) and comparing it
with ( 4.3 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is even, then @xmath , and the above inequality shows that
@xmath , so @xmath , false. Thus, @xmath is odd, so @xmath and @xmath .
If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a contradiction. So, @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is impossible. Thus, @xmath is even and since @xmath , it follows
that @xmath is odd so @xmath . Furthermore, a previous argument shows
that in ( 4.4 ) we have @xmath . Since @xmath is odd, we have that
@xmath , therefore @xmath for @xmath . Hence, @xmath . If @xmath , it
follows that @xmath , a contradiction. Hence, @xmath for @xmath .
Reducing now relation ( 4.4 ) modulo @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Reducing now equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modulo @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a contradiction. ∎

###### Lemma 19.

If @xmath satisfies equation ( 4.3 ), then @xmath is not a multiple of
any number @xmath such that @xmath for some prime @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is clear, because if @xmath is a multiple of a number @xmath such
that @xmath for some prime @xmath , then @xmath , which is false. ∎

Since @xmath is a prime dividing @xmath , it follows that @xmath . From
the Cunningham project tables [ BLSTW02 ] , we deduced that if @xmath is
an odd prime, then @xmath has a prime factor @xmath except for
@xmath . So, if @xmath is odd, then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Lemma 20.

The following inequality holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that @xmath . None of the values @xmath satisfies equation ( 4.3
) for some @xmath , so @xmath . Put @xmath . Note that @xmath because
@xmath and @xmath are not coprime by Lemma 18 . Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For each prime number @xmath , we write @xmath for the order of
appearance of @xmath in the Lucas sequence of general term @xmath . That
is, @xmath is the order of @xmath modulo @xmath . Clearly, if @xmath ,
then @xmath for some divisor @xmath of @xmath . Thus, we can rewrite
inequality ( 4.8 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath and @xmath is a power of @xmath , then @xmath , therefore
@xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting ( 4.10 ) into ( 4.9 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We take logarithms in inequality ( 4.11 ) above and use the inequality
@xmath valid for all real numbers @xmath to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath . If @xmath , then since @xmath , we get that
every odd prime factor of @xmath is in @xmath . In particular, it is at
least @xmath . Thus, @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We thus get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We need to bound @xmath . For this, we first take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Put @xmath . Since @xmath for all @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now use inequality ( 3.9 ). Put @xmath . Clearly, @xmath and since
@xmath and @xmath , it follows that @xmath is not a multiple of @xmath .
In particular, one of @xmath and @xmath is a multiple of @xmath , so
that at most one of these two numbers can be a prime. We now split
@xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , we use estimate ( 3.9 ) and Abel’s summation formula to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The expression @xmath is negative for @xmath , so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inequality ( 4.17 ) holds for @xmath as well, since there

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, inequality ( 4.17 ) holds for all divisors @xmath of @xmath with
@xmath .

As for @xmath , we have by ( 4.14 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, collecting ( 4.16 ), ( 4.17 ) and ( 4.18 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath and at most one of @xmath and @xmath is prime, we get, via
( 4.19 ), that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

So, in order to prove ( 4.20 ), it suffices that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The only possible divisors @xmath of @xmath with @xmath (so, whose odd
prime factors are in @xmath ), and with @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We checked individually that for each of the values of @xmath in @xmath
given by ( 4.21 ), inequality ( 4.20 ) holds.

Now we write @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is odd. Since @xmath , we
have that @xmath . Hence, keeping @xmath fixed and summing over @xmath ,
we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting inequalities ( 4.20 ) and ( 4.22 ) into ( 4.12 ), we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is sub–multiplicative when restricted to the set @xmath . That is, the
inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Indeed, to see why this is true, assume say that @xmath . Then @xmath ,
so it is enough to show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is clear for @xmath . It thus follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Inserting the above inequality into ( 4.23 ), taking logarithms and
using the fact that @xmath for all real numbers @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next we show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We check that it holds for @xmath . So, from now on, @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

because @xmath . Thus, it suffices that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, ( 4.25 ) holds, therefore ( 4.24 ) implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is exactly ( 4.7 ). This finishes the proof of the lemma. ∎

###### Lemma 21.

If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is clear for @xmath , since then @xmath , therefore @xmath , so
@xmath is even. Let now @xmath be odd. Consider the number

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assume that @xmath . Since @xmath for @xmath , we have that @xmath .
Since @xmath for all odd @xmath , we get that, @xmath , as desired. So,
it remains to show that @xmath in ( 4.27 ). We do this by contradiction.
Suppose that @xmath . Since @xmath , reducing equation ( 4.27 ) modulo
@xmath we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath is even. Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for integers @xmath and @xmath has been solved by Ljunggren [ Lj43 ] who
showed that the only possibilities are @xmath . This contradiction shows
that @xmath and finishes the proof of this lemma. ∎

###### Remark 4.2.1.

Apart from Ljunggren’s result, the above proof was based on the
computational fact that if @xmath is an odd prime, then @xmath . In
fact, the first prime failing this test is @xmath .

###### Lemma 22.

We have @xmath .

###### Proof.

We split the odd prime factors @xmath of @xmath in two subsets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 20 , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We first bound @xmath . By Lemma 21 , if @xmath , then @xmath . In
particular, @xmath . Let @xmath , and put @xmath . Suppose that @xmath
are all the members of @xmath . By the Primitive Divisor Theorem, @xmath
has a primitive prime factor for all divisors @xmath of @xmath , and
this prime is congruent to @xmath modulo @xmath . Since the number
@xmath has @xmath divisors, we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The above inequality implies that @xmath , otherwise for @xmath , we
would get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a contradiction. This shows that @xmath for all @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use ( 4.29 ) to bound @xmath by better and better bounds. We start
with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is implied by ( 4.29 ). Assume @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last inequality above holds for all @xmath , except for @xmath
by Lemma 12 @xmath . We thus get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which gives @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By ( 4.6 ), the first few possible odd prime factors of @xmath are
@xmath and @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If follows that @xmath can have at most one odd prime, so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, in fact @xmath has no odd prime factor, giving that @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since by Lemma 18 , @xmath and @xmath are not coprime, it follows that
in fact @xmath , so @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 23.

We have @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the smallest prime factor of @xmath which exists for if
not @xmath , which is not possible. Let @xmath be all the prime factors
of @xmath . For each divisor @xmath of @xmath , the number @xmath has a
primitive divisor which is congruent to @xmath modulo @xmath . Since
there are @xmath divisors of @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath does not divide @xmath (otherwise it would divide @xmath ),
we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Lemmas 20 and 23 now show that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This gives @xmath , so by Lemma 21 , we have @xmath , which finishes the
proof of this lemma. ∎

Obviously, Lemma 22 and 23 contradict each other, which completes the
proof of the theorem.

### 4.3 On the Equation @xmath

In this section, we prove that the equation of the form @xmath has only
finitely many integers solutions @xmath . Here we follow [ FL15a ] .

###### Theorem 16.

Each one of the two equations

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

has only finitely many positive integer solutions @xmath with the
exception @xmath case in which any positive integer @xmath leads to a
solution of the second equation above. Aside from the above mentioned
exceptions, all solutions have @xmath .

#### Proof of Theorem 16

Here we follow the same approach as for the proof of Theorem 15 . Since
most of the details are similar, we only sketch the argument.

Since @xmath with equality only when @xmath , it follows easily that
@xmath and equality occurs only when @xmath , case in which only @xmath
leads to a solution of the first equation while any positive integer
@xmath leads to a solution of the second equation. From now on, we
assume that @xmath . The next lemma gives an upper bound on @xmath .

###### Lemma 24.

Assume that @xmath . Then the following inequality holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Observe that either one of the two equations leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the argument from Lemma 20 , we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note also that @xmath is odd, since if @xmath is even, then both numbers
@xmath and @xmath are odd, and the only positive integers @xmath such
that @xmath is odd are @xmath . However, none of the equations @xmath or
@xmath has any positive integer solutions @xmath and @xmath . In the
right–hand side of ( 4.32 ), we separate the cases @xmath . Note that
since @xmath is odd, it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , put

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Lemma 12 @xmath together with inequality ( 4.33 ) show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We take logarithms in ( 4.32 ) use ( 4.35 ) as well as the inequality
@xmath valid for all real numbers @xmath to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath . Thus, @xmath for @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We now proceed to bound @xmath . Letting for a divisor @xmath of @xmath
the notation @xmath stand for the set of primitive prime factors of
@xmath , the argument from the proof of Lemma 20 gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , we use estimate ( 3.9 ) and Abel’s summation formula as in
the upper bound of inequality ( 4.17 ) to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The expression @xmath is negative for @xmath and @xmath , so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, collecting ( 4.16 ), ( 4.38 ) and ( 4.39 ), we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

We first deal with the range when @xmath . In this case, by ( 4.40 ),
using the fact that @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as well as the fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the factor in parenthesis in the right–hand side above is smaller
than @xmath since @xmath and @xmath . Assume now that @xmath . Then
using ( 4.40 ), we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It remains to check that the sum of the first two terms in the right
above is at most @xmath . Using the fact that the first term is at most
@xmath (see ( 4.42 )), we get that it suffices that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , for @xmath the left-hand side above is smaller than the
number @xmath , while the right–hand side is larger than @xmath , so the
above inequality holds for @xmath . Once checks that it also holds for
@xmath (because @xmath ), while for @xmath , the only prime in @xmath is
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so the desired inequality holds for @xmath as well. This proves ( 4.41
).

Inserting ( 4.41 ) into ( 4.36 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the first sum above, we use Lemma 12 @xmath to conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Thus, putting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

One checks that if @xmath (which is our case), then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we have @xmath , therefore inequality ( 4.43 ) implies
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the required result. ∎

###### Lemma 25.

Assume @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Lemma 24 implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the argument in the proof of Lemma 20 , one get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Inserting the above inequality into ( 4.44 ), taking logarithms and
using the fact that @xmath for all real numbers @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the inequality ( 4.25 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The desired inequality follows now from ( 4.46 ) and ( 4.47 ). ∎

###### Lemma 26.

We have @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 25 , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Clearly, if @xmath participates in @xmath , then @xmath divides both
@xmath and @xmath , so it is an odd prime factor of @xmath .

We next bound @xmath and we shall return to @xmath later. Following the
argument in the proof of Lemma 21 , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, we get from ( 4.48 ), that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , then @xmath , so @xmath , or @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which together with ( 4.50 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Lemma 12 @xmath . We thus get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . The function @xmath has a maximum at @xmath , and @xmath
, therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

giving @xmath , as desired. ∎

###### Remark 4.3.1.

A close analysis of our argument shows that @xmath is in fact an upper
bound for all positive integers @xmath arising from equations of the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

assuming that @xmath . Since @xmath must hold in the above equation, in
order to infer whether equation ( 4.2 ) has only finitely or infinitely
many solutions when @xmath is a variable as well, it remains to only
treat the cases @xmath and @xmath . We leave the analysis of these cases
as a future project.

## Chapter 5 Repdigits and Lucas sequences

### 5.1 Introduction

In this chapter, we are interested in finding all Repdigits among
members of some Lucas sequences. In Section 5.2 , we study members of
the Lucas sequence @xmath whose Euler function is a repdigit. In Section
5.4 , we find all the repdigits which are members of Pell or Pell-Lucas
sequences. The main tools used to prove the results in this chapter are
linear forms in logarithm à la Baker (Matveev Theorem), the
Baker-Davenport reduction algorithm and the Primitive Divisor Theorem
for members of Lucas sequences.

### 5.2 Repdigits as Euler functions of Lucas numbers

We prove in this section some results about the structure of all Lucas
numbers whose Euler function is a repdigit in base @xmath . For example,
we show that if @xmath is such a Lucas number, then @xmath is of the
form @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath . We follow the material from [
JBLT15 ] .

As mentioned in the Introduction, here we look at the Diophantine
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have the following result.

###### Theorem 17.

Assume that @xmath is such that equation ( 5.1 ) holds with some @xmath
. Then:

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath is even;

-   @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath .

-   @xmath .

### 5.3 The proof of Theorem 17

#### 5.3.1 Method of the proof

The main method for solving the Diophantine equation ( 5.1 ) consists
essentially of three parts: a transformation step, an application of the
theory of linear forms in logarithms of algebraic numbers, and a
procedure for reducing upper bounds.

Firstly, we transform the equation ( 5.1 ) into a purely exponential
equation or inequality, i.e., a Diophantine equation or inequality where
the unknowns are in the exponents.

Secondly, a straightforward use of the theory of linear form in
logarithms gives a very large bound on @xmath , which has been
explicitly computed by using Matveev’s theorem [ Ma00 ] .

Thirdly, we use a Diophantine approximation algorithm, so-called the
Baker-Davenport reduction method to reduce the bounds.

#### The exponent of @xmath on both sides of (5.1)

Write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath odd primes and @xmath for all @xmath Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Applying the @xmath function on both sides of ( 5.1 ) and using ( 5.3 ),
we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath . Note also that @xmath and since @xmath is never a
multiple of @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

so @xmath . This shows that if @xmath satisfies equation ( 5.1 ), then
@xmath , so @xmath .

We will also use in the later stages of this section the Binet formula (
2.4 ) with @xmath . In particular,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Furthermore,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 5.3.2 The case of the digit @xmath

If @xmath , we get that @xmath , @xmath is odd, so @xmath , therefore
@xmath . If @xmath , we get @xmath , and from ( 5.4 ) either @xmath and
@xmath , so @xmath , therefore @xmath , or @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Thus, @xmath or @xmath . Lemma 3 shows that @xmath except for the case
when @xmath when @xmath . So, for @xmath , we get that @xmath or @xmath
. Let us see that the second case is not possible. Assuming it is, we
get @xmath . Write @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is odd. Clearly,
@xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath has a primitive divisor which does not divide
the number @xmath . Hence, @xmath is not possible in this case. However,
if @xmath then @xmath , and both @xmath and @xmath have primitive
divisors, so the equation @xmath is not possible in this case either.
So, the only possible case is @xmath . Thus, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath , we get @xmath . For the Lucas sequence @xmath , the value
of the period modulo @xmath is @xmath . Furthermore, from @xmath , we
get that @xmath . Thus, @xmath for some @xmath . However, this is not
possible for @xmath , since for @xmath , we get that @xmath and @xmath ,
while for @xmath , we have that @xmath is divisible by both the primes
@xmath and at least another prime, namely a primitive prime factor of
@xmath , so @xmath is not possible. Thus, @xmath , so @xmath .

When @xmath , we get that @xmath . This shows that @xmath . Write @xmath
for some @xmath and @xmath . As before, if @xmath , then @xmath cannot
be a prime since either @xmath , so @xmath , and then @xmath is even, or
@xmath , and then @xmath is divisible by at least two primes, namely the
primitive prime factors of @xmath and of @xmath . Thus, @xmath .
Assuming @xmath , and reducing both sides of the above formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modulo @xmath , we get @xmath , which is not possible. This shows that
@xmath , so @xmath , therefore @xmath .

To summarize, we have proved the following result.

###### Lemma 27.

The equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has no solutions with @xmath if @xmath .

#### 5.3.3 The case of @xmath even

Next we treat the case @xmath . It is well-known and easy to see by
looking at the period of @xmath modulo @xmath that @xmath for any @xmath
. Hence, we only need to deal with the cases @xmath or @xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath is odd. Furthermore, relation ( 5.4 )
shows that @xmath . Assume first that @xmath . We check that @xmath are
not convenient. For @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath are divisors of
@xmath and all have odd primitive divisors which are prime factors of
@xmath , contradicting the fact that @xmath . Assume now that @xmath is
a multiple of some prime @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath already have
primitive prime factors, so @xmath , for if not, then @xmath , and
@xmath would have (at least) one additional prime factor, namely a
primitive prime factor of @xmath . Thus, @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The two factors above are coprime, so, up to relabeling the prime
factors of @xmath , we may assume that @xmath and @xmath . Lemma 3 shows
that @xmath . Further, since @xmath is odd, we get that @xmath ,
therefore the second relation above implies that @xmath . If @xmath is
odd, we then get that @xmath . This leads to @xmath with @xmath , which
is a contradiction. Thus, @xmath is even, showing that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is impossible.

If @xmath , then @xmath . Assume first that @xmath for some prime @xmath
. Write @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath , since @xmath is then a
multiple of a primitive prime factor of @xmath , a primitive prime
factor of @xmath , a primitive prime factor of @xmath and a primitive
prime factor of @xmath . So, @xmath . Then @xmath is a multiple of
@xmath and of the primitive prime factors of @xmath and @xmath , showing
that @xmath , for if not, then @xmath and @xmath would have (at least)
an additional prime factor, namely a primitive prime factor of @xmath .
Thus, with @xmath , we may write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Further, it is easy to see that up to relabeling the prime factors of
@xmath , we may assume that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore,
since @xmath , relation ( 5.4 ) tells us that @xmath for @xmath .
Reducing equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modulo @xmath we get @xmath , so @xmath is even. We thus get @xmath , an
equation which has no solutions by Lemma 3 .

So, it remains to assume that @xmath .

Assume @xmath . If also @xmath , then @xmath is divisible by the
primitive prime factors of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This shows that
@xmath and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Up to relabeling the prime factors of @xmath , we get @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Reducing the last relation modulo @xmath
, we get @xmath , so @xmath is even. We thus get @xmath , and this is
false. Thus, @xmath . By the existence of primitive divisors Lemma 8 ,
@xmath , so @xmath and none leads to a solution.

Assume next that @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume first that there exist @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath by (
5.4 ). It then follows that in fact @xmath and up to relabeling the
primes we have @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath , we get that @xmath ,
which reduced modulo @xmath gives @xmath , therefore @xmath . As for the
second relation, we get @xmath , which reduced modulo @xmath also gives
@xmath , so also @xmath . This is impossible since @xmath for some
@xmath . Thus, @xmath for all @xmath . Reducing relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modulo @xmath , we get that @xmath , and since @xmath , we get that
@xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath are also primitive prime factors for
@xmath and/or @xmath , respectively, we get that @xmath .

Suppose next that @xmath . We then get @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Reducing the above relations modulo @xmath , we get that @xmath are odd.
Thus,

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath for @xmath . Thus, @xmath , in these cases equation ( 5.1 )
has no solutions.

Assume next that @xmath . We then get that @xmath and either

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Reducing the above relations modulo @xmath as we did before, we get that
exactly one of @xmath is even and the other two are odd. Then

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

giving

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies that @xmath for @xmath . The only new possibility is
@xmath , which does not fulfill ( 5.1 ).

So, we proved the following result.

###### Lemma 28.

There is no @xmath with @xmath even such that the relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds.

#### 5.3.4 The case of @xmath even

Next we look at the solutions of ( 5.1 ) with @xmath even. Write @xmath
, where @xmath , @xmath is odd and coprime to @xmath .

Assume first that there exists an @xmath such that @xmath . Without loss
of generality we assume that @xmath . It then follows from ( 5.4 ) that
@xmath , and that @xmath if @xmath . So, if @xmath , then @xmath ,
@xmath , and by Lemma 3 , we get that @xmath . In this case, by the
existence of primitive divisors Lemma 8 , we get that @xmath , otherwise
@xmath would be divisible both by a primitive prime factor of @xmath as
well as by a primitive prime factor of @xmath . Hence, @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath and this is not possible for any @xmath . Suppose now that
@xmath . If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and reducing the above relation modulo @xmath , we get that @xmath .
Since @xmath , we read that @xmath . Relation ( 5.4 ) shows that @xmath
so @xmath . By Lemma 3 , we get again that @xmath and by the existence
of primitive divisors Lemma 8 , we get that @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is impossible for @xmath , since @xmath whenever @xmath is a
multiple of @xmath . This shows that @xmath , so @xmath . Let @xmath be
a prime factor of @xmath . Then @xmath is divisible by @xmath and by the
primitive prime factor of @xmath , and since @xmath , we get that @xmath
, and @xmath . Thus, @xmath , and, by Lemma 3 , we get that @xmath .
Reducing the above relation modulo @xmath , we get that @xmath , so
@xmath , showing that @xmath , which is impossible.

This shows that in fact we have @xmath for @xmath . Reducing relation
@xmath modulo @xmath , we get that @xmath for @xmath . Since we already
know that @xmath , we get that @xmath for all @xmath . Since in fact
@xmath is always a primitive divisor for @xmath for some divisor @xmath
of @xmath , we get that @xmath . Reducing relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modulo @xmath , we get @xmath , therefore @xmath is odd. Next, reducing
the relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

modulo @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, if @xmath , then @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Computing @xmath
for @xmath , we get that @xmath for each prime factor @xmath of them.
Thus, @xmath , which is impossible. Hence, @xmath . We get the relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assume that the first relation in ( 5.8 ) holds for some @xmath .
Reducing the first equation in ( 5.8 ) modulo @xmath , we get @xmath ,
therefore @xmath . If @xmath is odd, we then obtain @xmath ; hence,
@xmath with @xmath , which is impossible. If @xmath is even, we then get
that @xmath , and this is impossible since @xmath by Lemma 4 . Assume
now that the second relation in ( 5.8 ) holds for some @xmath . Reducing
it modulo @xmath , we get @xmath . Hence, @xmath . Now

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The above relation shows that @xmath and @xmath are distinct modulo
@xmath , because otherwise the left–hand side above is a quadratic
residue modulo @xmath while @xmath is not a quadratic residue modulo
@xmath . Thus, @xmath , and we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a contradiction. Finally, assume that @xmath and that the right relation
( 5.8 ) holds. Reducing it modulo @xmath , we get @xmath , therefore
@xmath is even. If @xmath is even, then so is @xmath , so we get that
@xmath , which is false by Lemma 4 . Hence, @xmath and @xmath are both
odd. Furthermore, since @xmath is odd and not a multiple of @xmath , we
get that @xmath and @xmath , giving @xmath . Looking at the values of
@xmath modulo @xmath , we see that the period is @xmath , and @xmath ,
showing that @xmath . This shows that @xmath , and since @xmath and
@xmath are odd, we get the congruence @xmath . This together with the
fact that @xmath for @xmath , implies that @xmath . Thus, @xmath and
@xmath are congruent modulo @xmath so their product is @xmath modulo
@xmath . Now we write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . However, since in fact @xmath , we get that @xmath for
@xmath , a contradiction. So, we must have @xmath , therefore @xmath ,
so @xmath , and such values can be dealt with by hand.

Thus, we have proved the following result.

###### Lemma 29.

There is no @xmath even such that relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds.

#### 5.3.5 @xmath and @xmath is even

From now on, @xmath is odd and @xmath is also odd. If @xmath , with
@xmath a prime number, therefore reducing the equation @xmath modulo
@xmath we get that @xmath . Thus, @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath with
@xmath , a contradiction. Thus, @xmath for all @xmath .

We next show that @xmath for all @xmath . Assume that this is not so and
suppose that @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath and by Lemma 3 , we have
@xmath . So,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath , so @xmath , which is false. When @xmath , we
get that @xmath following the fact that @xmath . However, we also have
that @xmath , showing that @xmath ; in particular, @xmath , a
contradiction.

Assume now that @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Reducing the above relation ( 5.9 ) modulo @xmath we get @xmath , which
is impossible since the left–hand side is a quadratic residue modulo
@xmath while the right–hand side is not.

Thus, @xmath for @xmath . Assume next that @xmath . Then @xmath and
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Reducing the above relation ( 5.10 ) modulo @xmath , we get @xmath ,
therefore @xmath . Thus, @xmath is even. If @xmath is even, so is @xmath
, so @xmath , and this is false by Lemma 3 . Hence, @xmath and @xmath
are both odd. It now follows that @xmath , so @xmath , therefore @xmath
, and also @xmath , so @xmath , showing that @xmath . Hence, @xmath ,
showing that @xmath . Thus, @xmath , and since @xmath and @xmath are odd
and @xmath and @xmath are congruent to @xmath modulo @xmath (as perfect
squares), we therefore get that @xmath . Since also @xmath , we get that
in fact @xmath . Thus, @xmath and @xmath are congruent modulo @xmath so
their product is @xmath modulo @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Since in fact we have @xmath , we get that @xmath for
@xmath , a contradiction.

Thus, @xmath and @xmath . To get that @xmath is even, we write @xmath .
So,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Reducing equation ( 5.11 ) modulo @xmath we get @xmath , giving @xmath .
Hence, @xmath is even. It is not possible that all @xmath are even for
@xmath , since then we would get @xmath , which is not possible by Lemma
3 . Hence, exactly one of them is even, say @xmath and the other two are
odd. Then @xmath and @xmath . Thus, @xmath and @xmath , so @xmath .This
shows that @xmath . Since @xmath is congruent to @xmath modulo @xmath
(as a perfect square), we get that @xmath . Thus, @xmath , so @xmath and
@xmath are congruent modulo @xmath so their product is @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In the above product, all odd factors are congruent to
@xmath modulo @xmath except possibly for @xmath . This shows that @xmath
, which shows that @xmath . Now since @xmath , we get that @xmath . So,
@xmath . Assuming that @xmath is odd, we would get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a contradiction. In the above, we used that @xmath and @xmath
and quadratic reciprocity to conclude that @xmath as well as @xmath .

So, we have showed the following result.

###### Lemma 30.

If @xmath is a solution of the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is odd, @xmath is odd, @xmath and @xmath is even. Further,
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are odd and @xmath is even.

#### 5.3.6 @xmath for some prime @xmath with @xmath

The factorizations of all Lucas numbers @xmath for @xmath are known. We
used them and Lemma 30 and found no solution to equation ( 5.1 ) with
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a prime factor of @xmath . Suppose first that @xmath for
some positive integer @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath is divisible by
at least four primes, namely primitive prime factors of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, which is false. Suppose that @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The three factors above are coprime, so they are @xmath in some order.
Since @xmath is even, we get that one of @xmath or @xmath is a square,
which is false by Lemmas 3 and 4 . Hence, @xmath . All primes @xmath are
quadratic residues modulo @xmath . When @xmath , they are primitive
prime factors of @xmath . When @xmath , all of them are primitive prime
factors of @xmath or @xmath with at least one of them being a primitive
prime factor of @xmath . Thus, @xmath holds for all @xmath both in the
case @xmath and @xmath , and when @xmath at least one of the the above
congruences holds modulo @xmath . This shows that @xmath , so @xmath .
When @xmath , we in fact have @xmath . Assume now that @xmath . Then the
congruence @xmath implies @xmath , while the congruence @xmath implies
@xmath . Hence, when @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is false for any @xmath . Similarly, if @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is false for any @xmath . So, indeed when @xmath is a power of a
prime @xmath , then the congruence @xmath must hold. We record this as
follows.

###### Lemma 31.

If @xmath and @xmath is solution of he equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with some @xmath and @xmath prime, then @xmath and @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath is divisible by two distinct primes @xmath and
@xmath . By Lemma 8 , @xmath and @xmath each have primitive prime
factors. This shows that @xmath , for if @xmath , then @xmath would have
(at least) one additional prime factor, which is a contradiction. Assume
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Unless @xmath , the three factors above are coprime. Say @xmath . Then
the three factors above are @xmath and @xmath in some order. By Lemmas 3
and up to relabeling the primes @xmath and @xmath , we may assume that
@xmath , so @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . On the other hand, if @xmath ,
then @xmath . This shows then that up to relabeling the primes we may
assume that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . However, in this case @xmath ,
showing that @xmath . In particular, we also have @xmath , so @xmath ,
and this is not possible. So, this case cannot appear.

Write @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is even, then @xmath because @xmath , so @xmath cannot divide
@xmath . If @xmath is odd, then @xmath , because if not we would have
that @xmath , so @xmath , and since @xmath is odd we would get @xmath ,
which is false since @xmath and @xmath . Thus, we get, using ( 5.6 ),
that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

On the other hand, by inequality ( 5.5 ), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the inequality ( 5.7 ). From ( 5.13 ) and ( 5.14 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Once checks that the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

is valid for all pairs of primes @xmath with @xmath . Indeed, the above
inequality ( 5.15 ) is implied by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath , then @xmath and the above inequality ( 5.16 ) is clear,
whereas if @xmath , then @xmath and the inequality ( 5.16 ) is again
clear.

We thus get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We exploit the two relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.17)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the above, we used the inequality ( 3.25 ). Since @xmath is odd, we
have @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first inequality ( 5.17 ) and ( 5.18 ) show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

showing that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since also

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we see

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since also @xmath , we get that ( 5.19 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the middle inequality is implied by @xmath , which holds for
@xmath .

The same argument based on ( 5.18 ) shows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are in a situation to apply Theorem 11 to the left–hand sides of (
5.20 ) and ( 5.21 ). These expressions are nonzero, since any one of
these expressions being zero means @xmath for some positive integer
@xmath , which is false. We always take @xmath for which @xmath . We
take @xmath , @xmath , so we can take @xmath and @xmath . For ( 5.20 ),
we take @xmath , and @xmath . For ( 5.21 ), we take @xmath , so we can
take @xmath . This last inequality holds because @xmath for all @xmath ,
while for @xmath we have @xmath . We take @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that @xmath . So, @xmath . Now Theorem 11 implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a lower bound of the left–hand side of ( 5.20 ), so inequality ( 5.20
) implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now Theorem 11 implies that the right–hand side of inequality ( 5.21 )
is at least as large as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

leading to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using ( 5.22 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using again ( 5.22 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we need to reduce the bound. We return to ( 5.20 ). Put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then ( 5.20 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming @xmath , we get that the right–hand side of ( 5.24 ) is @xmath
. Analyzing the cases @xmath and @xmath and by a use of the inequality
@xmath which holds for all @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume say that @xmath . Dividing across by @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We are now ready to apply Lemma 11 with the obvious parameters

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we can take @xmath by ( 5.23 ). Applying Lemma 11 ,
performing the calculations and treating also the case when @xmath , we
obtain @xmath . Now we go to inequality ( 5.21 ) and for @xmath , we
consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then inequality ( 5.21 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the right–hand side is smaller than @xmath . We thus
obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We proceed in the same way as we proceeded with @xmath by applying Lemma
11 to @xmath and distinguishing the cases in which @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. In all cases, we get that @xmath . Thus, @xmath . Note
however that we must have either @xmath or @xmath . Indeed, the point is
that since all three prime factors of @xmath are quadratic residues
modulo @xmath , and they are primitive prime factors of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, it follows that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Thus, @xmath , which in turn shows that @xmath . Assume that neither
@xmath nor @xmath . Then relation @xmath implies that @xmath . Thus,
@xmath , leading to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a contradiction. So, indeed either @xmath or @xmath . However, a
computation with Mathematica revealed that there is no prime @xmath such
that @xmath in the interval @xmath . In fact, the first such @xmath is
@xmath , but @xmath is not prime!

This contradiction shows that indeed when @xmath , we cannot have @xmath
. Hence, @xmath and @xmath . We record this as follows.

###### Lemma 32.

The equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has no solution @xmath which is not of the form @xmath or @xmath for
some prime @xmath such that @xmath .

#### 5.3.7 Bounding @xmath

Finally, we bound @xmath . We assume again that @xmath . Equation ( 5.2
) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Throughout this last section, we assume that @xmath . First, we bound
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath . Using the first relation
of ( 5.17 ), we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the argument used when estimating ( 5.18 )–( 5.20 ), we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last inequality holds because @xmath .

We apply Theorem 11 to the left-hand side of ( 5.27 ) The expression
there is nonzero by a previous argument. We take again @xmath for which
@xmath . We take @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Thus, we can take @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . We also take @xmath . We already saw that @xmath .
Now Theorem 11 implies as before that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is at least a lower bound for the left–hand side of ( 5.27 ), hence
inequality ( 5.20 ) implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We use the same argument to bound @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, we get that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last inequality follows again because @xmath .

We apply Theorem 11 to the left–hand side of ( 5.29 ). We take @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , so we take @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Again @xmath and @xmath . Now Theorem 11 implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a lower bound on the left–hand side of ( 5.29 ). Using estimate (
5.28 ), inequality ( 5.29 ) implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using a similar argument, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we can bound @xmath . Equation ( 5.2 ), gives:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can apply Theorem 11 , with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
We take @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We take @xmath . Then
Theorem 11 implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a lower bound on the left–hand side of ( 5.32 ). Using ( 5.32 ) and
inequalities ( 5.28 ), ( 5.30 ), ( 5.31 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives the upper bound. As for the lower bound, a quick check with
Mathematica revealed that the only primes @xmath such that @xmath are
@xmath and none of these has in fact the stronger property that @xmath .

### 5.4 Pell and Pell-Lucas Numbers With Only One Distinct Digit

Here, we show that there are no Pell or Pell-Lucas numbers larger than
@xmath with only one distinct digit.

In this section, we do not use linear forms in logarithms, but show in
an elementary way that @xmath and @xmath are respectively the largest
Pell and Pell-Lucas numbers which has only one distinct digit in their
decimal expansion. The method of the proofs is similar to the method
from [ FL15c ] , paper in which the authors determined in an elementary
way the largest repdigits in the Fibonacci and the Lucas sequences. We
mention that the problem of determining the repdigits in the Fibonacci
and Lucas sequence was revisited in [ FL15a ] , where the authors
determined all the repdigits in all generalized Fibonacci sequences
@xmath , where this sequence starts with @xmath consecutive @xmath ’s
followed by a @xmath and follows the recurrence @xmath for all @xmath .
However, for this generalization, the method used in [ FL15a ] involved
linear forms in logarithms.

Our results are the following.

###### Theorem 18.

If

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath

###### Theorem 19.

If

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath

### Proof of Theorem 18

We start by listing the periods of @xmath modulo @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath since they are useful later

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.35)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

We also compute @xmath for @xmath and conclude that the only solutions
in this interval correspond to @xmath . From now, we suppose that @xmath
. Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath . Now we distinguish several cases according to the value
of @xmath .

Case @xmath

Since @xmath , reducing equation ( 5.33 ) modulo @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A quick look at the first line in ( 5 ) shows that there is no @xmath
such that @xmath .

From now on, @xmath . Before dealing with the remaining cases, let us
prove that @xmath has to be odd. We assume by contradiction that this is
not the case i.e., @xmath is even. Hence, @xmath , therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since, @xmath , it follows that @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the last divisibility is not possible since @xmath cannot be a
multiple of @xmath . Thus, @xmath is odd.

We can now compute the others cases.

Case @xmath .

Reducing equation ( 5.33 ) modulo @xmath , we get @xmath . A quick look
at the first line of ( 5 ) shows that there is no @xmath such that
@xmath . Thus, this case is impossible.

Case @xmath .

Reducing equation ( 5.33 ) modulo @xmath , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A quick look at the first line of ( 5 ) gives @xmath . Reducing also
equation ( 5.33 ) modulo @xmath , we get @xmath , and now line two of (
5 ) gives @xmath . Since also @xmath , we get that @xmath . Thus, @xmath
, and now row three of ( 5 ) shows that @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The left-hand side above is @xmath , so we get @xmath , so @xmath , and
since @xmath is odd we get @xmath . Using also the occurrence @xmath ,
we get from the last row of ( 5 ) that @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

leading to @xmath , so @xmath . This gives @xmath , or @xmath ,
contradicting the previous conclusion that @xmath .

Case @xmath .

In this case, we have that @xmath , therefore @xmath by the third line
of ( 5 ). Further,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first line of ( 5 ) shows that @xmath , contradicting the fact that
@xmath . Therefore, this case cannot occur.

Case @xmath

In this case @xmath , which implies that @xmath . Reducing equation (
5.33 ) modulo @xmath we get that @xmath . Row two of ( 5 ) shows that
@xmath . This is a contradiction with fact that @xmath . Therefore, this
case is not possible.

Case @xmath .

Here, @xmath , therefore @xmath Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is not possible.

Case @xmath .

Here, we have that @xmath , therefore @xmath by row four of ( 5 ).
Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is impossible.

Case @xmath

We have that @xmath , so @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implying @xmath . This last divisibility condition implies that @xmath ,
contradicting the fact that @xmath is odd.

Case @xmath .

We have @xmath , thus @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a contradiction.

This completes the proof of Theorem 18 .

### The proof of Theorem 19

We list the periods of @xmath modulo @xmath and @xmath getting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.36)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

We next compute the first values of @xmath for @xmath and we see that
there is no solution @xmath in this range. Hence, from now on,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath . Further, since @xmath is always even and the quotient @xmath
is always odd, it follows that @xmath Further, from row one of ( 5 ) we
see that @xmath is never divisible by @xmath . Thus, @xmath .

Case @xmath .

Reducing equation ( 5.34 ) modulo @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Row one of ( 5 ) shows that @xmath . Reducing equation ( 5.34 ) modulo
@xmath we get that @xmath , and now row two of ( 5 ) gives that @xmath ,
so in particular @xmath . Thus, we get a contradiction.

Case @xmath

First @xmath , so by row three of ( 5 ), we have that @xmath . Next
reducing ( 5.34 ) modulo @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by the first row of ( 5 ) we get @xmath . Thus, this case cannot
appear.

This finishes the proof of Theorem 19 .

## Chapter 6 On Lehmer’s Conjecture

In this chapter, we are interested in finding members of the Lucas
sequence @xmath and of the Pell sequence @xmath which are Lehmer Numbers
. Namely, we study respectively in Sections 6.1 and 6.2 values of @xmath
for which, the divisibility relations @xmath and @xmath hold and further
such that @xmath and/or @xmath is composite. The contents of this
chapter are respectively the papers [ FL15c ] and [ FL15e ] .

### 6.1 Lucas Numbers with the Lehmer property

We are interested in this section on members of the Lucas sequence
@xmath which are Lehmer numbers. Here, we will use some relations among
Fibonacci and Lucas numbers, that can be easily proved using the Binet
formulas ( 2.3 ) and ( 2.4 ). Our result is the following:

###### Theorem 20.

There is no Lehmer number in the Lucas sequence.

###### Proof.

Assume that @xmath is Lehmer for some @xmath . Clearly, @xmath is odd
and @xmath by the main result from [ Re04 ] . The product of the first
@xmath odd primes exceeds @xmath , so @xmath . Furthermore,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath is even, Lemma 2 @xmath shows that @xmath or @xmath and
numbers of the form @xmath or @xmath for some integer @xmath are never
multiples of @xmath , so divisibility ( 6.1 ) is impossible. If @xmath ,
Lemma 2 (viii) and relation ( 6.1 ) show that @xmath . This is also
impossible since no member of the Lucas sequence is a multiple of @xmath
, fact which can be easily proved by listing its first @xmath members
modulo @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and noting that we have already covered the full period of @xmath modulo
@xmath (of length @xmath ) without having reached any zero.

So, we are left with the case when @xmath

Let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath odd primes and @xmath positive integers. If @xmath , then
@xmath is even, which is not the case. Thus, @xmath .

Here, we use the argument from [ FL15d ] to bound @xmath . Since most of
the details are similar, we only sketch the argument. For @xmath , using
relation (iv) of Lemma 2 , we get that @xmath . In particular, @xmath ,
so by Quadratic Reciprocity also @xmath is a quadratic residue modulo
@xmath . Now let @xmath be any divisor of @xmath which is a multiple of
@xmath . By Lemma 8 , there exists a primitive prime @xmath , such that
@xmath for all positive @xmath Since @xmath is odd and @xmath , we have
@xmath , therefore @xmath . Since @xmath is primitive for @xmath and a
quadratic residue modulo @xmath , we have @xmath (if @xmath were not a
quadratic residue modulo @xmath , then we would have had that @xmath ,
which would be less useful for our problem). In particular,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Collecting the above divisibilities ( 6.2 ) over all divisors @xmath of
@xmath which are multiples of @xmath and using Lemma 2 @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath , then @xmath , therefore @xmath because a Fibonacci number
@xmath is a multiple of @xmath if and only if its index @xmath is a
multiple of @xmath . Thus, @xmath , so @xmath , which is impossible
since @xmath .

Assume now that @xmath . Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

divisibility relation ( 6.3 ) shows that @xmath divides @xmath for some
@xmath . Let @xmath be the order of appearance of @xmath in the
Fibonacci sequence. Write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is coprime to @xmath . If @xmath for some @xmath , then
necessarily @xmath . Since for us @xmath is not a multiple of @xmath
(because @xmath is a multiple of @xmath ), we get that @xmath . In
particular, if @xmath , then @xmath , so @xmath , which is false since
@xmath . So, @xmath . We now follow along the argument from [ FL15d ] to
get that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Further, since @xmath is an integer larger than @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

or

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a divisor @xmath of @xmath , we note @xmath the set of primitive
prime factors of @xmath . Then the argument from [ FL15d ] gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the function @xmath is decreasing for @xmath and all divisors
@xmath of @xmath satisfy @xmath , we have, using ( 6.5 ), that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which together with inequality ( 6.7 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above inequality ( 6.10 ) implies @xmath . Since @xmath , a
calculation of McIntosh and Roettger [ MR07 ] shows that @xmath . Thus,
@xmath , therefore @xmath Since @xmath , we have @xmath . Going back to
the inequalities ( 6.7 ) and ( 6.8 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is false for @xmath . Thus, Theorem ( 20 ) is proved. ∎

### 6.2 Pell Numbers with the Lehmer property

In this section, we study the members of Pell sequence @xmath which are
Lehmer numbers. From relation ( 3.2 ), we have the following inequality:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which hold for all @xmath .

Here, we prove the following result.

###### Theorem 21.

There is no Pell and Pell-Lucas numbers with the Lehmer property.

###### Proof.

Let us recall that if @xmath has the Lehmer property, then @xmath has to
be odd and square-free. In particular, if @xmath has the Lehmer property
for some positive integer @xmath , then Lemma 6 (ii) shows that @xmath
is odd. One checks with the computer that there is no number @xmath with
the Lehmer property with @xmath . So, we can assume that @xmath . Put
@xmath .

From relation ( 2.6 ), we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem 4 in [ Po77 ] , we have that @xmath By ( 6.11 ), we have that
@xmath Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now check that the above inequality implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, ( 6.13 ) follows immediately from ( 6.12 ) when @xmath . On the
other hand, when @xmath , we have @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which holds because @xmath . Then, the relation ( 6.13 ) holds.

Let @xmath be any prime factor of @xmath . Reducing relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

of Lemma 5 modulo @xmath , we get @xmath . Since @xmath is odd, (because
@xmath is odd), we get that @xmath . This is true for all prime factors
@xmath of @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is never divisible by @xmath , we have that @xmath divides
@xmath or @xmath . Hence, @xmath divides @xmath or @xmath . Using
relation ( 6.13 ), we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This last inequality leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

giving that @xmath , a contradiction, which completes the proof of
Theorem 21 . ∎
