## Chapter 1 Introduction \nomenclature

[Z] @xmath Space-time dimensions

\nomenclature

[Z] @xmath Amount of supersymmetry charges

“ Il più nobile dei piaceri è la gioia della conoscenza .”

Leonardo da Vinci

In the following chapter, I discuss the state of the art and give some
motivations to supersymmetry and supergravity, the latter being the
supersymmetric extension of Einstein’s General Relativity. Then, I also
furnish a general introduction to the research activity I have done
during my PhD.

### 1.1 State of the art

Three of the four fundamental forces of Nature (strong nuclear
interaction, weak nuclear interaction, and electromagnetic interaction)
are successfully described by the Standard Model of particle Physics, a
remarkably successful and predictive physical theory. These forces are
related to gauge symmetries, allowing renormalizability and ensuring a
viable quantum theory. On the other hand, gravity is described by
General Relativity, and there is not yet a consistent quantum
description of gravity which would allow a possible unification with the
other interactions.

In order to reach a unified theory, it is necessary to unify the
internal symmetries with the space-time symmetries. A good candidate for
this purpose is supersymmetry (we will give a theoretical background on
supersymmetry in Chapter 2 ; a general introduction to supersymmetry can
be found, for example, in Ref. sohnius ). Supersymmetric theories “put
together” fermions and bosons into multiplets (which are called
supermultiples ). One of the phenomenological advantages of
suspersymmetry is that it allows to cancel quadratic divergences in
quantum corrections to the Higgs mass, helping to solve the so called
hierarchy problem of the Standard Model.

A new algebraic structure, known as Lie superalgebra , is necessary in
order to describe a supersymmetric theory. This requires to generalize
the Poincaré algebra, introducing, besides the bosonic generators, also
fermionic ones (that is, it involves, besides @xmath -numbers, also
Grassmann variables). In particular, a Lie superalgebras has both
commutation and anticommutation relations. The simplest supersymmetric
extension of gravity corresponds to minimal Poincaré supergravity , and
it can be viewed as the “gauge” theory of the Poincaré superalgebra
(more details on supergravity will be furnished in Chapter 2 ; for an
exhaustive review, see, for example, VanNieuwenhuizen:1981ae ).

There is a particular interest in superalgebras going beyond the
super-Poincaré one, which allow to study richer supergravity theories.
Furthermore, there are several physical models depending on the amount
of supersymmetry charges, @xmath , and on the choice of space-time
dimensions, @xmath . The larger @xmath and the larger @xmath , more
constraints are present in the theory. The maximally extended
supergravity theory in four space-time dimensions has @xmath
supersymmetries ( @xmath supercharges), while the maximal space-time
dimensions in which supersymmetry can be realized is @xmath . Moreover,
the inclusion of matter in supergravity theories leads to a vast variety
of supergravity models, with diverse physical implications.

The purpose of my PhD thesis is to investigate different supergravity
theories, using geometrical and group theoretical formulations. The
results obtained during my PhD, with national and international
collaborators, are presented in Minimal ; Hidden ; Gauss ; Analytic ;
GenIW ; SM4 ; Malg . ¹ ¹ 1 In my thesis I have also corrected some typos
that were still present in the aforementioned papers, and also better
clarified and contextualized the analyzes we have done.

### 1.2 Why supergravity? Some motivations

We would like to discuss here why physicists have been interested in
studying supergravity theories.

An important goal of Theoretical Physics is the understanding of the
laws of Physics inside a single, unifying theory.

A first step in this direction has been the unification of electricity
with magnetism in the Maxwell laws, and subsequently the formulation of
the Standard Model, which unifies the theory of strong interactions with
the electroweak one. In the Standard Model of particle Physics, through
the Higgs mechanism the gauge group

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

breaks down to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

(the color, indicated by the sub-index @xmath in @xmath , and the charge
symmetry, indicated by the sub-index @xmath in @xmath , are still
preserved).

A further step has then been that of trying to introduce a Grand Unified
Theory (GUT): The gauge theory of some simple group

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

allowing, through a double, step-wise Higgs mechanism

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

an understanding of the Standard Model and of the strong interactions
from a unifying theory (with a unified coupling constant), unbroken at a
higher energy @xmath GeV.

However, in this context, it becomes difficult to justify the deeply
different energy scales @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV of the GUT and
electroweak breaking respectively, which give particles with very
different masses (in particular, the two Higgs scalars). This is know as
the hierarchy problem . ² ² 2 Moreover, GUTs predict that the proton
will eventually decay (while it is generally supposed to be stable),
even with a very long life-time ( @xmath years for the minimal @xmath
GUT model), which has not yet been experimentally observed.

As we have already mentioned, the hierarchy problem already exists at
the level of the Standard Model, since the Higgs mass is @xmath GeV,
whereas the gravitational scale is of the order of the Plank mass @xmath
GeV, and @xmath . We might expect that, in a fundamental theory, they
should have the same order of magnitude. The Standard Model is
considered to be, in a certain sense, “unnatural”, the loop corrections
to the Higgs mass being much larger than the Higgs mass.

In this scenario, global supersymmetric theories (with “rigid”
supersymmetry) are attractive, because they have better renormalization
properties than non-supersymmetric ones (for example, boson and fermion
loop corrections to the masses of scalars have opposite sign and cancel
each other out). Moreover, the degeneracy in quantum numbers among
bosonic and fermionic (super)partners can justify some particular values
taken by the quantum numbers of the fields. The hierarchy between the
electroweak scale and the Planck scale is achieved in a natural way,
without fine-tuning, as it would be, instead, in the case of the
Standard Model, where it is possible to adjust the loop corrections in
such a way to keep the Higgs light (requiring cancellations between
apparently unrelated tree-level and loop contributions).

For these reasons, supersymmetry is helpful in solving the hierarchy
problem of the Standard Model when it is extended to some GUT, at least
if one supposes that it is unbroken up to the scale @xmath of breaking
of the electroweak symmetry. Furthermore, supersymmetry implements a
unification, since it puts on the same footing bosons (among which the
gauge fields that carry the interactions) and fermions (namely the
matter charged under the gauge group).

However, supersymmetry also introduces some phenomenological problem,
mainly related to the fact that it must be a somehow broken symmetry,
since Nature does not appear to be supersymmetric.

The supersymmetric extension of the Standard Model gives a quite
satisfying understanding of quantum field theory, that is of all quantum
interactions apart from gravitation . The latter appears to be hardly
treated as a quantum field theory, since it is not renormalizable.
However, local supersymmetry automatically includes gravity .

Thus, due to the fact that global supersymmetric theories have better
renormalization properties than non-supersymmetric ones and local
supersymmetry automatically includes gravity, supergravity (the
supersymmetric theory of gravitation) was thought to be, when it was
first formulated in the @xmath s, a suitable bridge between quantum
gravity and unification. Morevoer, supergravity naturally solves the
problems related to the breaking of supersymmetry (even if it is
non-renormalizable, inheriting this from General Relativity).

#### 1.2.1 Supergravity as an effective theory

The hope was that, even if non-renormalizable, supergravity could be
finite, due to a loop-by-loop cancellation of graphs between bosonic and
fermionic degrees of freedom.

However, this turned out not to be the case: Even if the divergences in
supergravity are softened with respect to non-supersymmetric gravity,
supergravity, in general, does not seem to be a finite theory, and,
therefore, it has to be understood as an effective theory : It describes
the interactions of the light degrees of freedom of some more
fundamental underlying quantum theory. The natural candidate for such an
underlying theory is superstring theory : A finite, anomaly free, theory
(as general references on superstring, see, for example, Refs. String ;
String2 ). Actually, it is expected to lead to the fundamental theory of
Nature, not only describing the structure of elementary particles, but
also providing a natural explanation for all interactions in Nature, and
even for the underlying structure of space-time itself.

Until @xmath , superstring theory was only known in its perturbative
formulation. Five different consistent theories were found: Type IIA,
Type IIB, Type I, Heterotic @xmath , Heterotic @xmath . A big effort was
spent in the study of the phenomenological aspects of these theories, in
order to understand which was the one giving rise to our physical world.
The spectrum of each theory contains a finite number of massless states
and an infinite tower of massive excitations, with mass scale of the
order of the Plank mass ( @xmath GeV). A feature that the five
superstring theories have in common is that their massless modes are
described, at low energies (much lower than @xmath ), by effective
supersymmetric field theories, and, in particular, by supergravity
theories in ten space-time dimensions. These theories can be suitable
for the description of our four-dimensional physical world if the
ten-dimensional space-time is thought to be partially compact, with only
four non-compact space-time directions. Indeed, if superstring theory
has to provide an explanation of the interactions in our real world
which, at low energies, looks four-dimensional, then the vacuum
configuration for space-time has to be thought not as a ten-dimensional
Minkowski space, but, instead, it should present the form @xmath , where
@xmath is the @xmath -dimensional space-time, while @xmath is a
six-dimensional compact manifold, so small that it cannot be observed at
the length-scales experimented in our low-energy world.

The main problem in introducing superstring theory as a unifying theory
is that, when going down at low energies, one encounters an enormous
degeneracy of vacua for string theory. In this sense, we do not gain any
predictive power on the quantities characterizing our world. However, we
obtain the very important conceptual achievement of unifying gravity
with the other interactions and of giving a natural understanding of the
origin of all the parameters involved, which are completely arbitrary in
the Standard Model.

The supergravity actions which contain fields up to two derivatives
correspond to the effective actions of superstring theory at the lowest
order in the string-length parameter @xmath .

Nowadays, in the context of superstring, supergravity has taken a rather
prominent role. Indeed, the understanding, in @xmath , of D-branes
(extended objects that are included in “modern” superstring theory) as
non-perturbative objects of string theory has opened the way for the
discovery of a web of dualities relating all the five superstring
theories and supergravity. The current understanding is that the five
superstring theories are actually different vacua of a single underlying
theory, called @xmath -theory , whose low-energy limit is the
supergravity theory in eleven dimensions ( @xmath supergravity, in the
following). In this new perspective, supergravity plays therefore a
central role: Properties of @xmath supergravity can shed light on string
theories in ten dimensions; moreover, D-branes also emerge in
supergravity as solitonic objects (as black-holes or domain-walls),
which are solutions to the supergravity equations of motion.

### 1.3 Overview on my PhD research activity

During my 1st PhD year, I concentrated my research mainly on the study
of supergravity in @xmath dimensions, adopting the so called rheonomic
(or geometric) approach. ³ ³ 3 Also known as (super)group-manifold
approach. In this approach to supergravity, the duality between a
superalgebra and the Maurer-Cartan equations is used for writing the
curvatures in superspace , whose basis is given by the so called
vielbein and gravitino @xmath -forms (for a theoretical background on
this approach, see Chapter 2 ). In particular, the work Minimal I have
done with Professors P. Fré, P.A. Grassi, and M. Trigiante (in which we
have studied some properties of the Arnold-Beltrami flux-brane solutions
to the minimal @xmath , @xmath supergravity), has been my first
opportunity to deal with rheonomy and to understand how to build up
supergravity theories within this approach. Indeed, my main contribution
to this paper has actually been the rheonomic construction of the
minimal @xmath , @xmath supergravity theory. This turned out to be a
necessary step in order to study particular vacuum configurations of the
theory (Arnold-Beltrami fluxes) and their supersymmetry breaking
pattern. I will not concentrate on this topic in this thesis, since the
part I have worked on just involves a lot of cumbersome, heavy
calculations. The interested reader can find the complete rheonomic
construction of the minimal @xmath , @xmath supergravity theory in
Minimal .

In my thesis I will focus, instead, on what I have done in the works
Hidden ; Gauss ; Analytic ; GenIW ; SM4 ; Malg during the second and
third PhD years. The aim is to go beyond the concepts presented above,
exploring the group theoretical hidden structure of supergravity
theories in diverse dimensions. Let me mention, before introducing the
main works I will collect in this thesis, that during the PhD I had two
great opportunities: The first was to work with my supervisors, L.
Andrianopoli and R. D’Auria, to whom I really owe everything. They
introduced me to the world of supergravity and to research topics that I
really enjoyed and which I hope the reader will appreciate in this
thesis.

The second opportunity was to collaborate with Chilean colleagues, who
introduced me (and my PhD colleague F. Lingua) to the @xmath -expansion
method and to its powerful features, such as that of disclosing the
relations among different superalgebras related to supergravity
theories. Thanks to our fortuitous meeting and to willpower, we produced
some papers together, just among us, PhD colleagues and, first of all,
friends. In particular, our aim was to link the pure algebraic aspect of
@xmath -expansion and algebras that can be obtained or related with this
method, to supergravity theories, analyzing the details at the algebraic
level and, in a particular case, also the dynamics. I thanks them all a
lot for the good and fruitful job done together.

After a reading, one could say that the “key word” of this thesis is
“algebra”… And would be right. Indeed, what I worked on is strongly
based on a theoretical study at the algebraic and group level, which, if
successful, allows a profound knowledge of the land in which a physical
theory has its roots. Thus, I would say that, in this sense, “algebra”
is not just a key word, but a true “key” to open the “doors” of the
physical world .

My thesis, in which I collect, reorganize (also correcting some
misprints), and clarify the main results of my PhD research activity in
details, is organized as follows:

-   In Chapter 2 and 3 I furnish some theoretical background on
    supersymmetry and supergravity, focusing on concepts and frameworks
    that are necessary for a clearer understanding of the thesis. I also
    give a review of the @xmath -expansion method, recalling, in
    particular, definitions and useful theorems. Then, I move to the
    original results of my PhD research activity (Chapters 4 to 6 ).

-   Chapter 4 is devoted to the study of the so called @xmath -Lorentz
    supergravity in @xmath , developed by adopting the rheonomic
    (geometric) approach, and to the analysis of the theory in a
    space-time endowed with a non-trivial boundary. In the presence of a
    (non-trivial) boundary, the fields do not asymptotically vanish, and
    this has some consequences on the invariances of the theory; in
    particular, we will concentrate on the supersymmetry invariance of
    the @xmath -Lorentz supergravity theory in @xmath .

-   Chapter 5 contains the core of my research activity, that is an
    analysis of the hidden gauge structure of some supersymmetric Free
    Differential Algebras. In particular, I will concentrate on the
    @xmath and @xmath cases and further present a deeper discussion on
    the symmetries of @xmath supergravity; the aim is a clearer
    understanding of the relations among the hidden superalgebra
    underlying the eleven-dimensional supergravity theory and other
    meaningful superalgebras in this context.

-   In Chapter 6 , moving to the pure algebraic description of
    (super)algebras, I focus on (new) analytic formulations of the
    @xmath -expansion method developed with my PhD colleagues.

-   Finally, Chapter 7 contains the conclusions and some possible future
    developments. In the Appendices, I collect the notation, useful
    formulas, and some detailed calculations.

This is the outline. At the beginning of each chapter, I will provide an
introduction which gives an overview of the content and of the main
results obtained.

## Chapter 2 Theoretical background on supersymmetry and supergravity
\nomenclature

[Z] @xmath Anti-de Sitter

\nomenclature

[Z]CISCartan Integrable Systems

\nomenclature

[Z]CE-cohomologyChevalley-Eilenberg Lie algebras cohomology

\nomenclature

[Z]FDAFree Differential Algebra

In this chapter, we first recall the main aspects of supersymmetry
(following the lines of Ref. sohnius ). Then, we move to supergravity,
reviewing, in particular, its formulation on superspace and the
rheonomic (geometric) approach to supergravity (on the lines of
VanNieuwenhuizen:1981ae ; Libro1 ; Libro2 ). We also explain how to
study @xmath pure supergravity theories in the presence of a boundary
(and of a cosmological constant) in the geometric approach, following
bdy . Finally, we introduce the Free Differential Algebras framework
(see, for example, Ref. Libro2 ), and, considering @xmath supergravity
in this set up, we also review how the supersymmetric Free Differential
Algebra can be traded for an ordinary superalgebra of @xmath -forms (the
hidden superalgebra underlying @xmath supergravity was disclosed in 1982
by R. D’Auria and P. Fré in D'AuriaFre ). This will be useful for a
clearer understanding of Chapter 5 .

### 2.1 Supersymmetry and supergravity in some detail

Before proceeding to discuss supersymmetry (and supergravity) in some
detail, we should first say something about the Fermi-Bose, matter-force
dichotomy (following the discussion presented in sohnius ). Indeed, the
wave-particle duality of Quantum Mechanics, together with the subsequent
concept of the “exchange particle” in perturbative Quantum Field Theory,
seemed to have removed that distinction. However, forces are mediated by
gauge potentials, namely by spin- @xmath vector fields, whereas matter
is made of quarks and leptons, that is to say, from spin- @xmath
fermions. ¹ ¹ 1 Besides integer-spin mesons. The Higgs particles,
mediators of the needed spontaneous breakdown of some of the gauge
invariances, play in some sense an intermediate role and must have zero
spin (they are bosons), but they are not directly related to any of the
forces. Supersymmetric theories “put together” fermions and bosons into
multiplets (which go under the name of supermultiples ), and the
distinction between forces and matter becomes phenomenological: Bosons
manifest themselves as forces because they can build up coherent
classical fields; on the other hand, fermions are seen as matter because
no two identical ones can occupy the same point in space ( Pauli
exclusion principle ).

As recalled in sohnius , there were several attempts to find a unifying
symmetry which would directly relate multiplets with different spins, ²
² 2 Here and in the following, we use the term “spin” while actually
meaning the helicity . but the failure of attempts to make those “spin
symmetries” relativistically covariant led to the formulation of a
series of “no-go” theorems, among which, in particular, the “no-go”
theorem of Coleman and Mandula ( @xmath ) Coleman:1967ad : They proved
the impossibility of combining space-time and internal symmetries in any
but a trivial way. In particular, they showed that a “unifying” group
must necessarily be locally isomorphic to the direct product of an
internal symmetry group and the Poincaré group.

However, one of the assumptions made in the proof presented in
Coleman:1967ad turned out to be unnecessary: Coleman and Mandula had
admitted only those symmetry transformations which form Lie groups with
real parameters, whose generators obey well defined commutation
relations .

It was subsequently shown that different spins in the same multiplet are
allowed if one includes symmetry operations whose generators obey
anticommutation relations . This was first proposed in Golfand:1971iw
and followed up by Volkov:1972jx , where the authors gave what we now
call a non-linear realization of supersymmetry ; their model was
non-renormalizable.

Subsequently, Wess and Zumino disclosed field theoretical models with an
unusual type of symmetry (that was originally named “supergauge
symmetry” and is now known as “supersymmetry”), which connects bosonic
and fermionic fields and is generated by charges transforming like
spinors under the Lorentz group Wess:1973kz ; Wess:1974tw . These
spinorial charges, which may be considered as generators of a continuous
group whose parameters are elements of a Grassmann algebra, give rise to
a closed system of commutation-anticommutation relations. It turned out
that the energy-momentum operators appear among the elements of this
system, so that, in some sense, a (non-trivial) fusion between internal
and rigid space-time geometric symmetries occurs Wess:1973kz ;
Wess:1974tw ; Salam:1974yz .

In particular, in @xmath , Wess and Zumino presented a renormalizable
field theoretical model of a spin- @xmath particle in interaction with
two spin- @xmath particles, in which the particles are related by
symmetry transformations and therefore “sit” in the same multiplet,
which is called in many ways: Chiral multiplet , scalar multiplet (that
is the name which was given by Wess and Zumino in their first paper
Wess:1973kz ), and Wess-Zumino multiplet . The limitations imposed by
the Coleman-Mandula “no-go” theorem were thus circumvented by
introducing a fermionic symmetry operator of spin- @xmath . Such
operators obey anticommutation relations with each other and do not
generate Lie groups; therefore, they are not ruled out by the
Coleman-Mandula “no-go” theorem.

Consequently to this discovery, in @xmath the authors of HLS extended
the results of Coleman and Mandula to include symmetry operations which
obey Fermi statistics. They proved that, in the context of relativistic
field theory, the only models which can lead to a solution of the
unification problems are supersymmetric theories , and they classified
all supersymmetry algebras which can play a role in field theory.

Supersymmetry transformations are generated by quantum spinor operators
@xmath (that are called the supersymmetry charges ) which change
fermionic states into bosonic ones and vice versa. Heuristically:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Which particular bosons and fermions are related to each other and how
many @xmath ’s there are depends on the supersymmetric model under
analysis. However, there are some properties which are common to the
@xmath ’s in any supersymmetric model, such as (see Ref. sohnius for
details):

-   The @xmath ’s combine space-time with internal symmetries.

-   The @xmath ’s behaves like spinors under Lorentz transformations.

-   The @xmath ’s are invariant under translations.

-   The anticommutator of two @xmath ’s is a symmetry generator and, in
    particular, a Hermitian operator with positive definite eigenvalues.

-   The subsequent operation of two finite supersymmetry transformations
    induces a translation in space and time of the states on which they
    operate.

Many of the most important features of supersymmetric theories can be
derived from these crucial properties of the supersymmetry generators by
chain. In particular (see Ref. sohnius for further details):

-   The spectrum of the energy operator (the Hamiltonian) in a
    supersymmetric theory contains no negative eigenvalues.

-   Each supermultiplet must contain at least one boson and one fermion
    whose spins differ by @xmath .

-   All states in a multiplet of unbroken supersymmetry have the same
    mass.

-   Supersymmetry is spontaneously broken if and only if the energy of
    the lowest lying state (the vacuum ) is not exactly zero.

Indeed, referring to the latter feature, since our (low-energy) world
does not appear to be supersymmetric (experiments do not show elementary
particles to be accompanied by superpartners with different spin but
identical mass), if supersymmetry exists and is fundamental to Nature,
it can only be realized as a spontaneously broken symmetry : The
interaction potentials and the basic dynamics are symmetric, but the
state with lowest energy ( ground state or vacuum ) is not. If a
supersymmetry generator acts on the vacuum, the result will not be zero.
Due to the fact that the dynamics retain the essential symmetry of the
theory, states with very high energy tend to “lose the memory” of the
asymmetry of the ground state and the “spontaneously broken
(super)symmetry” “gets re-established”.

The number of superpartners of a particle state depend on how many
generators @xmath ’s are present, as conserved charges, in a
supersymmetric model. As we have already already said, the @xmath ’s are
spinor operators, and a spinor in @xmath space-time dimensions must have
at least four real components. Therefore, the total number of @xmath ’s
must be a multiple of four. A theory with minimal supersymmetry , which
is called a theory with @xmath supersymmetry (being @xmath the number of
supersymmetry charges), would be invariant under the transformations
generated by just the four independent components of a single spinor
operator @xmath , with @xmath , and will thus give rise to a single
superpartner for each particle state. On the other hand, if there is
more supersymmetry, there will be several spinor generators with four
components each, namely @xmath , @xmath ; in this case, we talk about a
theory with @xmath -extended supersymmetry (giving rise to @xmath
superpartners for each particle state).

In supersymmetric theories, the superpartners carry a new quantum
number, which goes under the name of @xmath -charge . Then, the so
called @xmath -symmetry is a global symmetry that transforms (rotates)
the supercharges into each other (these rotations form an internal
symmetry group, in a certain sense like isospin). ³ ³ 3 Typically, it is
@xmath for @xmath supersymmetric theories, while it becomes non-abelian
in @xmath -extended supersymmetry. Most models with extended
supersymmetry are naturally invariant under @xmath -symmetry. Let us
mention that, in the case of supergravity, this invariance can be
“gauged” (made local), and one arrives at a natural link between
space-time symmetries (general coordinate invariance and supersymmetry)
and gauge interactions. This speaks very much in favor of extended
supergravities.

On the other hand, an important argument against extended supersymmetry
is that it does not allow for chiral fermions as they are observed in
Nature (neutrinos) (see Ref. sohnius for details on this topic). This
and other arguments of this type hold strictly only in the absence of
gravity. In the context of supergravity, it is possible to overcome such
difficulties. For example, in Kaluza-Klein supergravities Duff:1986hr ,
which are characterized by additional spatial dimensions in which the
space is very highly curved (radii in the region of the Planck length),
deviations from the phenomenology of flat space are particularly large,
and many “no-go theorems” can be overcome.

Furthermore, from the experimental point of view, referring, in
particular, to experimental set up for detecting elementary particles
such as the LHC ( Large Hadron Collider ) at CERN, due to the fact that
at the energy level currently reached there has been no evidence for
supersymmetry, it seems that proper supersymmetric models allowing to
describe Nature should be @xmath -extended ones, that means more
complicated theories with respect to the @xmath case.

Any multiplet of @xmath -extended supersymmetry contains particles with
spins (helicities) at least as large as @xmath (see sohnius for
details).

In particular, the following limits arise (in four dimensions):

-   @xmath for flat-space renormalizable field theories
    (super-Yang-Mills);

-   @xmath for supergravity.

More precisely, if the maximum helicity @xmath of a massless multiplet
is

-   @xmath , then @xmath ;

-   @xmath , then @xmath ;

-   @xmath , then @xmath .

As we are going to show in some detail, considering local supersymmetry
implies to include, together with what we will call the gravitino (with
helicity @xmath ), also the so called graviton (with helicity @xmath )
(plus, for extended supergravity, lower helicity states). Then, in order
to have a supermultiplet with maximal helicity @xmath , the maximally
extended theory in four dimensions has @xmath supersymmetries ( @xmath
supercharges).

Actually, one could in principle try to couple supergravity with higher
helicity states, by considering @xmath supergravity; however, no
consistent interacting field theory can be constructed for spins higher
than two, unless they appear in an infinite number (as it happens for
the complete spectrum of superstring theory).

Let us mention here (without going deep in details) that, concerning
supergravity, a peculiar feature which distinguishes extended
supergravities from the minimal @xmath theory is the fact that for
@xmath the vector multiplets include scalars, which can be interpreted,
at least locally, as the coordinates of an appropriate Riemannian
manifold (called the scalar-manifold ). Let @xmath be the group of
isometries (if any) of the scalar metric defined on the scalar-manifold.
The elements of @xmath correspond to global symmetries of the @xmath
-model Lagrangian describing the scalar kinetic term. In @xmath ,
Gaillard and Zumino discovered that the scalar-manifold isometries
@xmath act as duality rotations, interchanging electric with magnetic
field-strengths gaillardzumino . This fact gives a strong constraint on
the geometry of the scalar-manifolds. In particular, the isometry group
has to be a subgroup, for all @xmath -extended theories in @xmath , of
the symplectic group @xmath ( symplectic embedding ), where @xmath is
the number of vectors in the theory.

Due to this fact, in @xmath -extended (supergravity) theories, the
existence of so called ‘t Hooft-Polyakov monopoles ⁴ ⁴ 4 A ‘t
Hooft-Polyakov monopole is a topological soliton similar to the Dirac
monopole, but without any singularities; ‘t Hooft-Polyakov monopoles are
non-singular, solitonic monopole-like solutions appearing in non-abelian
gauge theories with the key request that the gauge fields are
interacting with scalar fields in the adjoint representation of the
gauge group. tHooft:1974kcl ; Polyakov:1974ek is a concept implemented
in a natural way, and monopoles of such type are always present: Indeed,
a crucial point for the existence of ‘t Hooft-Polyakov monopole like
solutions in non-abelian gauge theories (and therefore for having
electric-magnetic duality) is the presence in the theory of Higgs fields
(scalars) transforming in the adjoint representation of the gauge group
@xmath .

One can then switch on charges (“do the gauging”) with respect to a
gauge group. A global symmetry of the action is promoted to be a gauge
symmetry gauged by (some of) the vectors of the theory. In a
supersymmetric theory, the global symmetries which are present are the
isometries of the scalar-manifold. In doing the gauging, the interplay
between fields of different spin (in particular, vectors and scalars) is
always at work. Strictly speaking, what happens is that one chooses a
subgroup of the isometries of the scalar-manifold that wishes to treat
as gauge symmetry, and requires that (some of) the vector fields present
in the spectrum of the theory are considered as gauge fields, in the
adjoint representation of the selected group of isometries; then, the
interactions with the corresponding gauge fields are turned on. When
this is performed, the theory results to be modified. In particular, it
is no more supersymmetric invariant, and the composite connections and
vielbein on the scalar-manifold get modified, so that the theory needs
further modifications in order to recover supersymmetry invariance.

For the case of @xmath supergravity, for example, the fermions
transformation laws get modified and, in order to restore the invariance
under local supersymmetry, the supersymmetry variations of the spin-
@xmath and @xmath fermions acquire a shift term (the so called fermionic
shift ). Also the Lagrangian acquires extra terms. In particular, it
gets a scalar potential , which appears as a scalar-dependent
cosmological constant . Then, a gauged supergravity with general
background configurations for the scalar fields has a vacuum with
non-zero cosmological constant. We are not going to explain these
aspects in details, since it would require a rather long discussion and
it would risky to go astray from the guidelines of the thesis. The
interested reader can find more details on these topics in Ref.
Trigiante2 , where dual gauged supergravities are formulated in a
particular fruitful framework which goes under the name of the embedding
tensor formalism .

Let us now move to the algebraic structure of supersymmetric theories,
recalling some technical aspects of Lie superalgebras .

#### 2.1.1 Lie superalgebras

A Lie superalgebra (also called graded Lie algebra ) @xmath presents
both commutation and anticommutation relations and can be decomposed in
subspaces as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have denoted by @xmath the subspace generated by the bosonic
generators and by @xmath the subspace generated by the fermionic ones
(associated to Grassmann variables).

Then, the product @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfies the following properties MullerKirsten:1986cw :

-   Grading: @xmath , @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

    namely @xmath is a graded Lie algebra.

-   (Anti)commutation properties: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   Generalized Jacobi identities: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

Thus, the generators of a Lie superalgebra are closed under
(anti)commutation relations of the (schematic) type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where with @xmath we have denoted the bosonic generators, while @xmath
denotes the fermionic ones.

##### Super-Poincaré algebra

One of the simplest supersymmetry algebras corresponds to the Poincaré
superalgebra (or super-Poincaré algebra ). In particular, the
four-dimensional Poincaré superalgebra is given by the Lorentz
transformations @xmath , the space-time translations @xmath , with
@xmath ( @xmath and @xmath are the generators of the Poincaré algebra),
and the @xmath -component Majorana spinor charge @xmath (in the
following, we neglect the spinor index @xmath , for simplicity)
satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The super-Poincaré (anti)commutation relations read as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath      (2.10)
     @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath      (2.12)
     @xmath      (2.13)
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Minkowski space-time metric in @xmath , @xmath are
Dirac gamma matrices in @xmath satisfying the Clifford algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the charge conjugation matrix satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, the structure of the super-Poincaré algebra implies that
the combination of two supersymmetry transformations gives the generator
of a space-time translation, namely @xmath . On the other hand, the
commutativity of the fermionic generator @xmath with the bosonic @xmath
’s implies that the supermultiplets contain one-particle states with the
same mass but different spins.

#### 2.1.2 Local supersymmetry and supergravity

Now, considering supersymmetry, carried by the supercharge @xmath , as a
local symmetry, implies considering also the translations @xmath as
generators of local transformations, which can be strictly related to a
general coordinate transformation. ⁵ ⁵ 5 When the torsion is zero. In
the following we will call these local transformations “gauge”
transformations. In this sense, one can say that local supersymmetry
somehow involves gravity.

We are thus facing supergravity , which conciliates supersymmetry with
General Relativity, being the supersymmetric extension of the latter.
The first publications on supergravity date back to @xmath and
correspond to Freedman:1976xh ; Deser:1976eh ; Freedman:1976py .

Actually, local supersymmetry needs gravity , and we can also say that
“local supersymmetry and gravity imply each other”
VanNieuwenhuizen:1981ae . The aforementioned interplay can be explicitly
seen by looking at an example given in VanNieuwenhuizen:1981ae , in
which the author considered the simplest model of global supersymmetry,
namely the Wess-Zumino model Wess:1973kz ; Wess:1974tw , describing the
propagation of a massless supermultiplet, consisting of a scalar, a
pseudo-scalar, and a spin- @xmath field, in four-dimensional space-time.
The action is left invariant (up to total derivatives) by global
supersymmetry transformations; then, if one considers local
supersymmetry transformations (that is the spinor parameter involved in
the supersymmetry transformations is considered as a space-time
dependent parameter), one can show that, in order to recover the
invariance of the action, we have to introduce the interaction with the
corresponding “gauge” field (that is a vectorial spinor, or, if
preferred, spinorial vector), the so called gravitino @xmath , which
carries spin @xmath ; but its effect is consistently included only by
introducing the interaction with gravity as well, through a new extra
tensor field @xmath , which can be then identified with the metric
tensor of space-time. One then finds that the spin- @xmath field @xmath
(where @xmath is the Minkowski metric) is the quantum gravitational
field, called the graviton .

In this sense, supergravity is the “gauge” theory of supersymmetry: It
describes systems which are left invariant by the action on space-time
of local supersymmetry transformations. The Lagrangian one ends up with
is precisely the contribution of a complex scalar and a Majorana spinor
to the Lagrangian of General Relativity (actually, plus extra terms ,
but no new fields have to be introduced).

The simplest supergravity action consists of the coupling of a field
with spin (helicity) @xmath (called the gravitino field ) to gravity.
This can be done by considering the so called Einstein-Hilbert term plus
a further term, named the Rarita-Schwinger term Freedman:1976xh ;
Deser:1976eh ; Freedman:1976py .

Let us mention here that the fields of a supersymmetric theory form a
representation of the Poincaré superalgebra given in ( 2.9 )-( 2.14 ).
When this representation is restricted to a specific value of the mass
operator @xmath , the representation is called an on-shell
representation multiplet . On-shell representations are characterized by
the equality of the number of bosonic and fermionic states. When trying
to construct a supersymmetric Lagrangian based on the fields from the
on-shell representation multiplets, one observes that the algebra of the
super-Poincaré Noether charges closes only for field configurations
satisfying the equations of motion . ⁶ ⁶ 6 The field equations constrain
the fields of different spins in different ways, and the pairing of
bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom is therefore no more realized
in the off-shell theory. For this reason, such actions are called
on-shell actions and we say that the supersymmetry algebra is an
on-shell symmetry ; then, the supersymmetry transformations close
on-shell, on the equations of motion. The consequence is that the
supersymmetry algebra is an “ open algebra ”: When it is realized as an
algebra of transformations on the fields, the “structure constants” are
not, in fact, constant, but functions of the point, and the superalgebra
closes only when the equations of motion are satisfied; then, the
“Jacobi identities” are not identities anymore, but they are, instead,
equations containing the information about the field equations and
becoming identically zero on-shell.

However, with the inclusion of extra auxiliary fields , that is to say,
by introducing in the Lagrangian non-dynamical degrees of freedom (whose
equations of motion do not describe propagation in space-time) which are
then fixed, by their field equations, as functions of the physical
fields Nieuwenhuizen:1978 ; Stelle:1978 , one can then write a theory
which is off-shell invariant under local supersymmetry and where
supersymmetry is linearly realized. In other words, the auxiliary fields
can be eliminated from the Lagrangian and from the equations of motion
by use of their own field equations. The result of their elimination
gives the on-shell Lagrangian.

### 2.2 The group-manifold approach

Let us now move to the theoretical formulation of (super)gravity
theories .

One would need a framework for formulating (super)gravity theories in a
general and basis-independent way, exploiting in some way the power of
the symmetries involved in these theories.

This is the case of the so called (super)group-manifold approach to
(super)gravity theories VanNieuwenhuizen:1981ae ; Libro1 ; Libro2 ;
Neeman:1978zvv ; DAdda:1980axn , where the theory is formulated only in
terms of external derivatives among differential forms and wedge
products among them, in a frame that is completely
coordinate-independent.

Before moving to the case of supergravity theories in the aforementioned
geometric approach, it is better to first review the basic features of
the group-manifold approach , and, in particular, the geometric, (soft)
group-manifold formulation of General Relativity , fixing conventions
and definitions.

Previous knowledge of a bit of group theory and of (Euclidean and)
Riemannian geometry in the vielbein basis is required. ⁷ ⁷ 7 Let us
mention that the main geometric difference between the linear spaces
(Euclidean geometry) and the Riemannian manifolds (Riemannian geometry)
is that for linear spaces we have the vanishing of the torsion and
curvature @xmath -forms, while in Riemannian geometry the torsion and
the curvature @xmath -forms, in general, do not vanish (even if one can
consistently set the torsion to zero, in which case the Christoffel
symbol of the natural frame @xmath results to be symmetric in its lower
indexes). The reader can find a review of the geometry of linear spaces
and Riemannian manifolds in the vielbein basis in Appendix A , on the
same the lines of Libro1 .

#### 2.2.1 Group-manifolds and Maurer-Cartan equations

We will now start by showing how the concept of group-manifold leads to
discuss the Lie algebras associated to Lie groups and to the dual
concept of Maurer-Cartan equations (the presentation we give strictly
follows the lines of Ref. Libro1 ).

Lie groups have a natural manifold structure associated with them, and
one can describe Lie groups under a differential geometric point of
view. In this sense, the terms Lie group and group-manifold are kind of
synonyms, and the left and right translations of a fixed element @xmath
of a Lie group @xmath are diffeomorphisms (strictly speaking, general
coordinate transformations on Riemannian manifolds).

A peculiar property of group-manifolds is the existence of left- and
right-invariant vector fields or, in the dual vector space language,
left- and right-invariant @xmath -forms .

Since the left and right translations are diffeomorphisms, by taking
into account the fact that the Lie bracket operation is invariant under
diffeomorphisms (see Ref. Libro1 ), the subset of left- (right-)
invariant vector fields results to be closed under the Lie bracket
operation. Hence, the left- (right-) invariant vector fields on @xmath
form the Lie algebra @xmath of the group @xmath . According with the
convention of Libro1 , in the following we refer to the left-invariant
vector fields.

Since any left-invariant vector field is uniquely determined by its
value at @xmath (the identity element of @xmath ), @xmath can be
identified with the tangent space at the identity, @xmath .

Let us now introduce a basis @xmath ( @xmath ) on @xmath . The
generators @xmath close the Lie algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are constants called the structure constants of the Lie
algebra @xmath of the group @xmath . The closure of the algebra is
encoded in the Jacobi identities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Lie algebra of @xmath can also be expressed in the dual vector space
of left-invariant @xmath -forms .

In particular, considering the basis @xmath ( @xmath ) of left-invariant
@xmath -forms at @xmath (cotangent space at the identity @xmath ), we
can expand @xmath in the complete basis of @xmath -forms at @xmath ,
obtaining the so called Maurer-Cartan equations for the left-invariant
@xmath -forms @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where “ @xmath ” is the wedge product between differential forms and
where the @xmath functions, being left-invariant, are actually
constants.

The content of the Maurer-Cartan equations ( 2.19 ) is completely
equivalent to that of equations ( 2.17 ). We say that equations ( 2.19 )
give the dual formulation of the Lie algebra of @xmath . This can be
shown by introducing the basis of left-invariant vectors @xmath dual to
the cotangent basis @xmath of the left-invariant @xmath -forms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The label @xmath is a reminder that the vectors @xmath generate right
translations on @xmath ; for notational simplicity, in the sequel we
will omit the label @xmath . Now, evaluating both sides of ( 2.19 ) on
the vectors @xmath and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, using the following identity (which gives the link between the
exterior derivative on forms and the bracket operation on vector
fields):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, since @xmath because of ( 2.20 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the constants entering the Maurer-Cartan equations are the
structure constants defined by the Lie algebra.

In this formulation, the closure of the algebra is encoded into the
following identity (that is the intergrability condition @xmath of the
Maurer-Cartan equations):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

since it gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is satisfied when ( 2.18 ) holds.

Now, a set of independent @xmath -forms (namely a cotangent basis on
@xmath ) can be obtained in terms of the group element @xmath . Let us
consider the @xmath -form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is the @xmath -form @xmath is left-invariant. Since ( 2.28 ) is a
Lie algebra valued matrix of @xmath -forms, it can be expanded along the
set of generators @xmath (in their matrix representation):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Introducing ( 2.30 ) in ( 2.29 ), and using ( 2.17 ), one obtains again
the Maurer-Cartan equations ( 2.19 ). In a matrix representation of
@xmath , equation ( 2.29 ) is a matrix equation for a set of @xmath
linearly independent @xmath -forms, and it can be used to explicitly
compute the structure constants of @xmath (see Libro1 for an example in
which the Maurer-Cartan equations and the commutation relations for the
Poincaré group in @xmath dimensions, that is the group of rigid motion
in @xmath dimensions, are derived).

Let us mention that one can introduce a metric on @xmath which is
biinvariant, namely is both left- and right-invariant. This is the so
called Killing metric (actually, Killing form , ⁸ ⁸ 8 The Killing form
is bilinear and symmetric, and therefore defines a metric on @xmath ;
moreover, one can prove that it is also biinvariant. if one refers to
the Lie algebra @xmath of @xmath ), which we denote by @xmath . One can
then show that (see Ref. Libro1 for details):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the Killing metric (Killing form) is non-degenerate, the Lie group
(Lie algebra) is said to be semisimple. For compact groups, one can
prove that the Killing metric @xmath is negative definite. One can also
show that the biinvariance of @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into account the antisymmetry of @xmath in the indexes @xmath and
@xmath , equation ( 2.34 ) implies complete antisymmetry of the lowered
structure constants ( 2.33 ). For semisimple groups, the Killing metric
can be used to lower or raise the indexes of the Lie algebra. ⁹ ⁹ 9 In
particular, the adjoint and coadjoint representations of the algebra are
equivalent, as shown in Ref. Libro1 .

##### Soft group-manifolds

Since the left- (right-) invariant vector fields and @xmath -forms have,
in a given chart, a fixed coordinate dependence and, moreover, one can
show that the Riemannian geometry of a group-manifold @xmath is
(locally) fixed in terms of its structure constants (see Ref. Libro1 for
details), we say that group-manifolds @xmath have a “ rigid ” structure.
As such, group-manifolds cannot be used as domains of definition of
fields describing in a dynamical way the structure of space-time.

Nevertheless, a group-manifold @xmath can be identified with the vacuum
configuration of a gravitational theory. We are thus led to consider
soft group-manifolds @xmath , according with the notation of Libro1 , in
which the rigid metric structure of @xmath has been “ softened ” in
order to describe non-trivial physical configurations. Soft
group-manifolds @xmath are locally diffeomorphic to group-manifolds
@xmath .

An example of soft group-manifold is the non-rigid four-dimensional
space-time itself (namely, the space-time considered as a Riemannian
manifold or, in other words, the space-time of General Relativity),
which, being diffeomorphic to @xmath , can be thought of as the soft
group-manifold of the local four-dimensional translations.

A further example is given by the soft Poincaré group-manifold . Let us
first consider a flat Minkoskian space-time in four-dimensions, @xmath ,
whose geometry can described in terms of the vielbein ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In
German, the term “vielbein” literally means “many legs” (and covers all
dimensions), referring to its property of connecting the natural frame
and the moving frame, having indexes (“legs”) of both types. Quite
commonly in the literature, in four dimensions the more specific term
“vierbein” (“four legs”) is adopted. The vierbeins are sometimes also
called the tetrads . @xmath and a spin connection @xmath fulfilling the
following equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is called the torsion (sometimes also denoted by @xmath )
and @xmath is called the curvature . ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 From now on, we use Greek
indexes to denote the so called coordinate indexes, while the Latin
indexes @xmath will label the vielbein basis of @xmath -forms @xmath
(see Appendix A ). They are @xmath -forms and we will also refer to both
of them together as the curvatures. In a particular Lorentz gauge the
solution to the above equations is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

while in a general Lorentz gauge the solution reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath the Lorentz parameters. One can prove that ( 2.39 ) and (
2.40 ) correspond to the left-invariant @xmath -forms of the Poincaré
group in four dimensions, @xmath (indeed, we can identify the @xmath ’s
and the @xmath ’s with the parameters associated to translations and
Lorentz rotations, respectively) and, therefore, ( 2.39 ) and ( 2.40 )
satisfy the Maurer-Cartan equations associated. Moreover, since @xmath
is locally isomorphic to @xmath , it can also be considered as a
(trivial) principal bundle , @xmath , with base space given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath as fiber .

Let us now suppose that the space-time @xmath is not flat . In this
case, the fields @xmath and @xmath , subject to the gauge transformation
laws

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively (see Appendix A ), are defined on a fiber bundle @xmath
that is not isomorphic , but just locally diffeomorphic to @xmath , due
to the diffeomorphism @xmath . We can say that we have “softened” the
rigid structure of the base space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

maintaining the structural group @xmath , which guarantees Lorentz
covariance.

Observe that the @xmath -form curvatures @xmath and @xmath associated to
the @xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath are defined on the bundle through
the gauge transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

(they transform in the vector and in the adjoint representation of
@xmath , respectively). These, in turn, imply “ horizontality ”: The
@xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath do not contain the differential @xmath .
This is expressed by the following equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the left-invariant vector field associated to the fiber
@xmath and where we have denoted by @xmath and @xmath the contraction of
the vector @xmath on the curvatures @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

A simpler way to obtain this is to start directly with @xmath and @xmath
defined on the principal bundle @xmath . In this thesis, in particular,
we will adopt this point of view. Let us mention that in Ref. Libro1 the
interested reader can also find a description of the way in which the
fiber bundle structure can also be obtained from the variational
principle, starting with an action defined on the soft group-manifold.

In Section 2.3 we will see that in supergravity theories one does not
factorize all the coordinates which are not associated with the
translations: Starting from the super-Poincaré group , only the Lorentz
gauge transformations will be factorized; the gauge transformation of
supersymmetry will not . The resulting theory will be described on a
principal fiber bundle @xmath (in four dimensions), whose base space is
called the superspace @xmath , where the first “ @xmath ” in @xmath
refers to the bosonic dimensions, while the second “ @xmath ” refers to
the Grassmannian dimensions (as we will specify in Section 2.3 ).

With this in mind, let us now turn to a formal description of soft
group-manifolds and, in particular, of the Cartan geometric formulation
of General Relativity (where the group-manifold @xmath is the Poincaré
group @xmath in four dimensions), reaching the geometric Einstein
Lagrangian for General Relativity. Again, we will strictly follow the
lines of Libro1 , where the interested reader can find more details on
this formulation.

#### 2.2.2 Cartan geometric formulation of General Relativity

We start with a rigid group @xmath , that will soon be identified with
the Poincaré group. As we have already seen, the group-manifold
structure can be described in terms of the set of left-invariant @xmath
-forms @xmath ( @xmath ) satisfying the Maurer-Cartan equations ( 2.19
).

Then, let us “soften” @xmath to the locally diffeomorphic soft
group-manifold @xmath , by introducing new Lie algebra valued @xmath
-forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The “ soft ” (non left-invariant) @xmath -forms @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath
) do not satisfy the Maurer-Cartan equations, while developing a
non-vanishing right-hand side. We can thus write the geometry of @xmath
in terms of a curvature :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath ’s span a basis of the cotangent plane of @xmath and they
are, in fact, vielbeins on @xmath (see Figure 2.1 , reproduced from
Libro1 , for a graphic representation). We can then define covariant
derivatives for a general covariant @xmath -form @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for a general contravariant @xmath -form @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced a covariant derivative operator @xmath .

Now, taking the exterior derivative of both sides of equation ( 2.49 ),
from the request of closure of the algebra ( @xmath ) we get the so
called Bianchi identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can also be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have already said, the set of @xmath -forms @xmath forms a basis
for the cotangent space to @xmath . Thus, the @xmath -form @xmath can be
expanded along the intrinsic basis @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, equation ( 2.49 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, one can derive the commutation relations between the vector
fields @xmath dual to the @xmath ’s

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

obtaining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe that here the structure functions (that are not constant) are
given in terms of the curvature intrinsic components @xmath .

For any transformation @xmath , the curvature transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now consider a gauge transformation on @xmath . It acts on @xmath
as (in a matrix notation):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, for an infinitesimal gauge transformation generated by @xmath (where
@xmath is the infinitesimal parameter associated to the gauge
transformation), as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, under a general coordinate transformation @xmath on
the manifold @xmath (with @xmath ), that is, if we prefer, under a
generic infinitesimal diffeomorphism on @xmath generated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the infinitesimal parameter associated to the shift
@xmath , the @xmath ’s transform with the Lie derivative @xmath , since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can then be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe that the first term @xmath in ( 2.63 ) corresponds to an
infinitesimal gauge transformation on @xmath . Hence, we can say that “
an infinitesimal diffeomorphism on the soft manifold @xmath is a @xmath
-gauge transformation plus curvature correction terms ” Libro1 .

In ( 2.63 ) we have introduced the contraction @xmath of the vector
field @xmath on the curvature @xmath . It is defined by @xmath , so that
@xmath , and it gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, if the curvature @xmath has a vanishing projection along
the tangent vector, that is to say if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

then the action of the Lie derivative @xmath coincides with a gauge
transformation .

Let us observe that the general coordinate transformation on the @xmath
’s can still be written as some sort of “covariant derivative”

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms, however, of structure functions @xmath and @xmath .

The algebra generated by general coordinate transformations on @xmath
(diffeomorphisms) is closed:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

(which, indeed, is also one of the properties of the Lie derivatives),
with the closure condition on the exterior derivative @xmath provided
that the curvatures satisfy the Bianchi identities @xmath . ¹² ¹² 12 The
Lie derivatives close an algebra @xmath provided that they are
consistently defined, namely provided that the operator used in their
definitions is a true exterior derivative satisfying the integrability
condition @xmath . Then, the same is inherited by diffeomorphisms.

##### Case of the Poincaré group

Let us carry on our discussion considering the case in which the group
@xmath is a semidirect product:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a subgroup. In particular, we consider the case of the
Poincaré group @xmath , where @xmath and where @xmath is generated by
the translations @xmath ( @xmath in four dimensions). Then, for the
Poincaré algebra we have (schematically):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

otherwise zero, where @xmath and @xmath .

It is then possible to perform the following decomposition on the soft
group-manifold @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

We call @xmath , and @xmath .

We can now ask for factorization , that is to say we can ask the theory
to be invariant under the Lorentz group @xmath . As we have already
mentioned, factorization means that we are considering @xmath as a
principal bundle with base space @xmath and fiber @xmath .

The @xmath ’s on the principal bundle become the spin connection @xmath
and the vielbein @xmath , whose curvatures are given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The associated Bianchi identities are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Factorization implies that the general coordinate transformations with
parameter @xmath , are, indeed, gauge transformations, and, by
comparison of ( 2.63 ) with ( 2.66 ), this implies the following (gauge)
constraint on the curvature components:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

This means that, as a consequence of the gauge invariance (namely, as a
consequence of the constraint ( 2.77 )), the curvature @xmath -forms can
be expanded on the basis @xmath of the vielbeins, without the inclusion
of the spin connection directions.

Let us now consider the Einstein-Cartan action (in @xmath space-time
dimensions) written in the vielbein frame, which reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

The variation of the action ( 2.78 ) with respect to the fields @xmath
and @xmath gives, respectively, the following @xmath -form equations of
motion: ¹³ ¹³ 13 Here we can also use the formula @xmath for computing
the variations.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last implications can be proven by expanding along the
vielbeins, with a few calculations. The above equations are the usual
Einstein’s equations of gravity in the first order formalism (in which
the vierbein and the spin connection are treated as independent fields
in the Lagrangian).

The Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

appearing in ( 2.78 ) can be uniquely determined by using a set of “
building rules ” (different from the ones used in the derivation of the
Einstein action in the theory of gravitation). The formal nature of this
principles, which can be found in Ref. Libro1 , is useful for finding
generalizations of gravity Lagrangians to supergravity ones. We will
explore the aforementioned rules in some detail when moving to the
geometric approach to supergravity.

The Lagrangian ( 2.81 ) is exactly the Einstein’s Lagrangian for General
Relativity. Indeed, expanding @xmath on the complete @xmath -form basis
@xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the definition @xmath of the scalar curvature; @xmath is the square
root of the metric determinant ( @xmath ).

Thus, the Einstein’s Lagrangian for General Relativity immediately
appears to be geometrical , since it can be put in the form ( 2.81 ),
that is the most general (and simplest) @xmath -form written by only
using the differential operator “ @xmath ” and the wedge product “
@xmath ” between differential forms. Then, being @xmath a @xmath -form,
it must be integrated on a @xmath -dimensional submanifold of the soft
group-manifold @xmath or, if horizontality has been assumed (which will
always be our case), to its restriction to @xmath . We are thus left
with the Einstein-Cartan action as written in ( 2.78 ).

The Lagrangian of gravity is constructed using the fields of the
Poincaré group, but it is invariant only under @xmath . This is the
reason why the action from which we deduce the gravitational field
equations is essentially different from the Yang-Mills action utilized
in ordinary gauge theories, that are, instead, invariant under the whole
symmetry group.

One can also extend the Einstein-Cartan Lagrangian to the case where the
@xmath ’s are defined on a de Sitter or anti-de Sitter soft
group-manifold. The new Lagrangian corresponds, in tensor calculus
formalism, to ordinary gravity plus a cosmological term (see Libro1 for
details).

We now move to the description of the geometric approach to supergravity
theories.

### 2.3 Supergravity in superspace and rheonomy

The construction of supergravity theories from the technical point of
view is a non-trivial task.

In particular, technical complications arise from the fact that this
construction involves fermionic representations. Then, in order to show,
for example, that the Lagrangian is supersymmetric, one has often to
face with Fierz identities (which give the decomposition of products of
spinor representations into irreducible factors). This may involve long
and cumbersome calculations. It is therefore particularly useful to find
an efficient method to deal with the technical labor in constructing
supergravity theories.

In this section, we will describe the so called rheonomic (geometric)
approach to supergravity theories in superspace . Before moving to
superspace, let us quickly recall the @xmath , @xmath pure supergravity
theory in space-time .

#### 2.3.1 Review of @xmath, @xmath supergravity in space-time

We have previously seen that local supersymmetry requires the
introduction of a spin- @xmath field @xmath dual to the supersymmetry
charge @xmath . Hence, the problem of constructing @xmath supergravity
(the “gauge” action of the @xmath supersymmetry algebra) turns into the
problem of coupling the Rarita-Schwinger field to Einstein gravity. The
space-time action of the @xmath , @xmath supergravity theory, describing
the coupling of the spin- @xmath (graviton) and spin- @xmath (gravitino)
fields, can be written (in the vielbein basis) as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the exterior covariant derivative and where we have
defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

This action contains one more local invariance besides general
coordinate and Lorentz gauge invariance, namely local supersymmetry
invariance . Indeed, one can prove that (see Libro2 for details), if the
coefficient @xmath in ( 2.85 ) is @xmath , the action ( 2.85 ) is
invariant under the local supersymmetry transformations ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 We have
written the local supersymmetry transformations in the second order
formalism , in which the vielbein and the spin connection are considered
as a single entity.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
     @xmath      (2.89)
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath the local spinorial parameter of the local supersymmetry
transformations. The terms @xmath and @xmath appearing in the pure
@xmath supergravity action are called the Einstein-Hilbert and the
Rarita-Schwinger terms, respectively.

One can then write the equations of motion of @xmath , @xmath
supergravity. Varying the action with respect to the spin connection
@xmath , one obtains:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the supertorsion @xmath -form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 2.91 ) can be manipulated exactly in the same way as equation
( 2.79 ) of pure gravity, the only difference relying in the different
definition of @xmath . Thus, similarly to the case of pure gravity, one
obtains:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us observe that @xmath is a non-Riemannian connection, being @xmath
different from zero. After a suitable decomposition of the spin
connection, one can show that the (non-Riemannian) spin connection
@xmath is completely determined in terms of the other two fields @xmath
and @xmath and, consequently, it does not carry any further physical
degree of freedom (see Libro2 for details).

The condition @xmath is called the on-shell condition for the connection
(it arises where the equations of motion hold, namely on-shell). When we
keep @xmath , we are working in the so called second order formalism ,
where the spin connection is torsionless and given in terms of the
vielbein of space-time. When we do not require @xmath , the spin
connection is an independent field and we are working in the first order
formalism ; in this case, the field equations of @xmath fixes it as a
function of both the vielbein and the gravitino, @xmath . In the sequel
of this short review, we will adopt the second order formalism.

Varying the vielbein and the @xmath -field, after some calculations one
ends up with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. Notice that equation ( 2.94 ) looks formally the same as
in pure gravity; however, the connection, in the present case, is
different, and one can show that equation ( 2.94 ) produces the expected
interaction between the vielbein field and @xmath . The same remark
applies to ( 2.95 ), in which case one also finds a self-interaction of
the gravitino field.

Thus, the Lagrangian in ( 2.85 ) describes a consistent coupling of the
Rarita-Schwinger field @xmath to gravity. This suggests the existence of
an extra symmetry, extending the gauge invariance of the free field spin
Lagrangian (Rarita-Schwinger Lagrangian) to the interacting case. This
symmetry results to be, indeed, supersymmetry .

Now, the Lagrangian in ( 2.85 ) is invariant under local Lorentz
transformations and diffeomorphisms. The next step is to investigate
whether one can define suitable supersymmetry transformations leaving (
2.85 ) invariant and representing the supersymmetry algebra on the
on-shell states.

Let us recall that @xmath is an off-shell symmetry of the theory, while
supersymmetry is an on-shell one (closing only on the equation of
motions). ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 This not only holds for the Maurer-Cartan equations,
but also when one considers the Free Differential Algebras framework
(which will be recalled in the sequel).

Let us now compare the supersymmetry transformations ( 2.88 )-( 2.90 )
with the gauge transformations of the supersymmetry derived from the
super-Poincaré algebra, that are given by (see Libro2 for details):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
     @xmath      (2.97)
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing ( 2.88 )-( 2.90 ) with ( 2.96 )-( 2.98 ), one can see that (
2.88 ) and ( 2.96 ) coincides. The same holds for ( 2.89 ) and ( 2.97 ).
On the other hand, the gauge and local supersymmetry transformations for
@xmath are different, since ( 2.90 ) is different from zero.
Furthermore, let us mention that equation ( 2.97 ) resembles the gauge
transformation of a gauge field, but this is only due to the fact that
we are now considering the simplest, minimal @xmath , @xmath , pure
supergravity theory (without matter). In more complicated cases, other
terms would appear in ( 2.97 ), making the difference between ( 2.97 )
and the transformation of a true gauge field manifest.

Thus, the local supersymmetry transformations leaving the supergravity
action invariant are not gauge supersymmetry transformations . ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16
This is strictly analogous to what happens in the case of pure gravity,
where one finds that the action is not invariant under gauge
translations, while it is invariant against diffeomorphisms (under which
the connection transforms with the Lie derivative), the two
transformation laws differing on the spin connection.

Moreover, one can prove that the local supersymmetry transformations
close on-shell with structure functions , rather than with structure
constants, as it would be the case for a genuine gauge transformation,
and that a gauge translation leaves the field @xmath inert.

The supersymmetry algebra (which closes on-shell) can be interpreted, on
space-time, in terms of the general algebra of space-time
diffeomorphisms supplemented by super-Poincaré gauge transformations
with field-dependent parameter Libro2 .

As we will discuss in a while, we can say that the on-shell
supersymmetry algebra is the algebra of diffeomorphisms in superspace .

#### 2.3.2 The concept of superspace

Let us summarize what we have learned till now: If our aim is local ,
rather than global, supersymmetry invariance, this requires the
introduction of the spin- @xmath field @xmath dual to the supersymmetry
charge @xmath . In this set up, the @xmath , @xmath supergravity action
describing the coupling of the Rarita-Schwinger field to Einstein’s
gravity is given by ( 2.85 ) (with @xmath ). Studying the local
supersymmetry transformations of the theory, one obtains that these
transformations are not gauge transformations of the super-Poincaré
algebra (except in the case of the linearized theory).

Now, a key point in the formulation of supergravity theories is a more
satisfactory understanding of the (local) supersymmetry transformations
rule.

To this aim, a formulation of supergravity which appears natural and
particularly useful is based on the concept of superspace (I have
adopted this formulation in the research carried on during the PhD).
Superspace has as coordinates not only the ordinary ones, but, in
addition, @xmath spinorial anticommuting coordinates @xmath ( @xmath and
@xmath ; if @xmath , we do not write the index @xmath ).

There are various approaches to superspace, based on different
geometrical ideas, but they all have in common the fact that the notion
of Grassmann variables (anticommuting @xmath -numbers) as coordinates is
essential. In rigid supersymmetry, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.99)
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the case of supergravity , these same degrees of freedom are
dynamical .

The approaches on ordinary space-time are equivalent to the approaches
in superspace, but the superspace framework gives a better geometrical
insight (see, for example, Refs. VanNieuwenhuizen:1981ae ; Libro1 ;
Libro2 for details on the geometry of superspace). In particular, on
superspace we may have an understanding of supergravity analogous to
that of General Relativity on space-time. Indeed, at each point @xmath
on superspace, we can erect a local tangent frame and consider general
coordinate transformations on the base manifold (the superspace), with
parameter @xmath , where @xmath . Then, the @xmath ’s generate ordinary
general coordinate transformations on space-time, while the @xmath ’s
generate local supersymmetry transformations.

One can extend in an appropriate way the space-time fields @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath to @xmath -form fields defined over superspace .
These @xmath -form fields are called superfields . In this way, one can
reinterpret the supersymmetry transformations as superspace Lie
derivatives .

All the approaches to supergravity in superspace involve a large
symmetry group and a large number of fields, so that one eventually has
to impose constraints in order to recover ordinary supergravity on
space-time. On the other hand, one can exploit the power of symmetry to
construct general theories in a systematic and straightforward way.

In this scenario, the so called “ rheonomy principle ” (see Ref. Libro2
) makes the extension from space-time to superspace uniquely defined,
allowing for a geometric interpretation of the supersymmetry rules. The
rheonomy principle can be summarized in one sentence as follows: “We
demand the @xmath -dependence of every superfield to be determined by
the @xmath -dependence of all the superfields in our stock” Libro2 .

Exploiting the principle of rheonomy to get rid of the unwanted degrees
of freedom, we can identify supergravity with the geometric theory of
superspace in the same way as Einstein’s gravity is the geometric theory
of space-time . Indeed, the pair of @xmath -forms @xmath , once extended
to superspace, can be viewed as a single object, called the
supervielbein : A local contangent frame on the superspace @xmath . More
generally, the @xmath -forms @xmath constitute an intrinsic reference
frame in the cotangent plane to the soft super-Poincaré group.

In the following, we review the rheonomy principle, on the same lines of
Ref. Libro2 .

#### 2.3.3 Superspace geometry and the rheonomy principle

As suggested by the name, the key point of the geometric approach to
supergravity in superspace is “geometricity”: The idea is to formulate
an extension of General Relativity which is generally covariant over
superspace, so that the diffeomorphisms in the fermionic directions of
superspace correspond to supersymmetry transformations on space-time .

In order to do this, one has to introduce a set of differential forms on
space-time, @xmath , and lift them to forms on superspace, namely to
@xmath . The introduction of the superfields @xmath leads to extra
degrees of freedom (corresponding to the components in the @xmath
-expansion of the superfields) which are spurious. Then, in order to
have the same physical content for the theory extended to superspace as
for the theory on space-time, one has to impose some constraints on the
supercurvatures (that is on the field-strengths). As we will see, these
constraints turn out to be physically equivalent to the on-shell
constraints , that is to say, to the equations of motion .

This is the way in which the on-shell closure of the supersymmetry
algebra is implemented within this approach, and we will see that it
allows to find field equations, supersymmetry transformations and,
eventually, also the Lagrangian for completely general supergravity
theories, by the request of closure of the superalgebra.

Now we have all the ingredients for generalizing the discussion of
Section 2.2 to the case of a geometrical formulation of supergravity. ¹⁷
¹⁷ 17 An extended study of different supergravity theories in this
geometrical formulation can be found in Ref. Libro2 . The presentation
we give strictly follows the lines of Ref. Libro2 .

In order to introduce the technical aspects of the rheonomic framework,
let us start with a supergroup-manifold , instead of a group-manifold,
whose corresponding superalgebra is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We start from rigid superspace and, in particular, we specialize to the
case in which @xmath , that is to say, to the @xmath super-Poincaré
group (in @xmath ), whose superalgebra is given in equations ( 2.9 )-(
2.14 ). The aforementioned superalgebra is naturally factorized in
@xmath . In particular, @xmath is the subalgebra spanned by the Lorentz
generators @xmath , ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 For @xmath -extended supergravity theories,
the @xmath subalgebra is @xmath , for some @xmath . and @xmath is split
into a bosonic (inner) subspace @xmath , spanned by the translations
@xmath , and a fermionic (outer) subspace @xmath , spanned by the
supercharge @xmath . Then, the superalgebra can be schematically written
as follows:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The structure constants in equations ( 2.9 )-( 2.14 ) obey graded Jacobi
identities :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

All the construction described in Section 2.2 can now be repeated (see
Libro1 ; Libro2 for more details):

-   We consider a basis of bosonic and fermionic @xmath -forms @xmath on
    the deformed, soft supergroup-manifold @xmath , with curvatures
    defined as in ( 2.49 ), and define covariant and contravariant
    derivatives as in ( 2.50 ) and ( 2.51 ). We call the @xmath ’s as
    follows:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.104)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    with corresponding supercurvatures

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.105)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    In particular, the gravitino @xmath is a spinor @xmath -form and,
    correspondingly, its supercurvature @xmath is a spinorial @xmath
    -form (in the following, for simplifying the notation, we will
    neglect the spinor index @xmath ). The supercurvatures obey the
    Bianchi identities

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.106)
      -- -------- -- ---------

-   Then, since the Lorentz group is a gauge symmetry of the theory, we
    require factorization , which allows to work on the fiber bundle
    with the Lorentz group as fiber and the superspace as base space ,
    namely we require the constraint

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.107)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    on the components of the curvatures as @xmath -forms on the
    supergroup-manifold. From now on, fields and curvatures will be
    functions of the superspace coordinates @xmath . In particular, we
    find:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.108)
         @xmath      (2.109)
         @xmath      (2.110)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where we have introduced the Lorentz covariant derivative @xmath .
    These supercurvatures subject to the following Bianchi identities :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.111)
         @xmath      (2.112)
         @xmath      (2.113)
      -- -------- -- ---------

-   Finally, the peculiar feature of the rheonomic approach is the
    following one: The @xmath -forms @xmath described so far are defined
    on superspace; however, in order to reproduce the physical content
    of supergravity on space-time , we have to relate the
    field-strengths along the fermionic vielbein to the curvatures along
    the bosonic vielbein @xmath , getting rid of the extra degrees of
    freedom arising in the extension to superspace. Therefore, we have
    to introduce some sort of “factorization”, as we have done for the
    @xmath coordinates in the Lorentz directions. The constraints we
    will introduce relate the components of the supercurvatures along
    the basis @xmath or @xmath to their components along the @xmath
    basis in algebraic way, actually linearly.

    Will see in a while that the so called rheonomy principle is
    equivalent to supersymmetry on space-time . As we have already
    mentioned, the local supersymmetry transformations are not gauge
    transformations of the super-Poincaré algebra, but have to be
    thought, instead, as diffeomorphisms in the fermionic directions of
    superspace .

    Let us explicitly see what we mean, by first considering the @xmath
    -gauge transformations of @xmath , where @xmath (rigid superspace).

    Recall that a @xmath -gauge transformation of the fields @xmath is
    given by the @xmath -covariant derivative of @xmath , where @xmath
    is a parameter in the adjoint representation of @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.114)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    The Lorentz content of the @xmath derivative, when acting on the
    adjoint multiplet, can be directly read off from the explicit form
    of the Bianchi identities ( 2.111 )-( 2.113 ). We obtain:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.115)
         @xmath      (2.116)
         @xmath      (2.117)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where @xmath and @xmath represents the @xmath and @xmath covariant
    derivatives, respectively.

    In particular, if @xmath we get the explicit form of a gauge
    supersymmetry transformation :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.118)
         @xmath      (2.119)
         @xmath      (2.120)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Setting instead @xmath yields the form of a Lorentz gauge
    transformation :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.121)
         @xmath      (2.122)
         @xmath      (2.123)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    while setting @xmath yields the form of a translation gauge
    transformation :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.124)
         @xmath      (2.125)
         @xmath      (2.126)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Observe that local supersymmetry transformations are not gauge
    transformations of the super-Poincaré algebra.

    Let us also write the transformation law of @xmath under
    (infinitesimal) diffeomorphisms . Indeed, as we have already
    mentioned, this will be very important in the sequel for the
    interpretation of supersymmetry.

    Let

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.127)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    be a general tangent vector on @xmath , with @xmath dual to @xmath :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.128)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Here and in the following, according with the same notation of
    Libro2 , we denote by ( @xmath ) @xmath the tangent vector on the
    (soft) group-manifold dual to the (non) left-invariant @xmath -forms
    ( @xmath ) @xmath . We reserve the symbol @xmath to the abstract Lie
    algebra generators (when thought as vector fields, they are
    left-invariant and @xmath ).

    As we have already seen in Section 2.2 , an infinitesimal
    diffeomorphism on @xmath is given by the Lie derivative :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.129)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Alternatively (see Section 2.2 ), we may rewrite

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.130)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    and, making the Lorentz content explicit, we find:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.131)
         @xmath      (2.132)
         @xmath      (2.133)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Thus, if we know the on-shell parametrization of the supercurvatures
    @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , then we also know the supersymmetry
    transformations leaving the theory invariant.

    Now, if @xmath , equations ( 2.131 )-( 2.133 ) describe a
    diffeomorphism in superspace @xmath , which cannot be interpreted as
    a pure gauge transformation of the super-Poincaré algebra, unless we
    also impose the further horizontality constraints @xmath .

    However, if these conditions were to be imposed, the fields @xmath
    would have a trivial (factorized) dependence on the superspace
    coordinates @xmath , and the soft (super)-coset @xmath would reduce
    to the rigid superspace @xmath .

    Therefore, in the construction of a physical theory, we need
    non-vanishing curvature-terms in ( 2.131 )-( 2.133 ). In this way,
    the fields @xmath can exhibit a non-trivial (that is, dynamical)
    dependence on their argument.

    Thus, we have seen that we cannot impose factorization and “gauge
    away” the fermionic degrees of freedom, since the fundamental forms
    @xmath have a non-trivial, physical dependence on all the
    coordinates of superspace, which explicitly reads: ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 We adopt
    the same convention of Libro2 , in which the indexes labeling the
    spinorial coordinates are denoted by a lower case Greek letter with
    a bar, while the unbarred Greek indexes will be reserved to describe
    intrinsic fermionic indexes.

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.134)
         @xmath      (2.135)
         @xmath      (2.136)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    On the other hand, in order to have a consistent theory on
    space-time, with fields having the same number of physical degrees
    of freedom of the space-time fields

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.137)
         @xmath      (2.138)
         @xmath      (2.139)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    all the space-time fields in the @xmath -expansion of the superfield
    @xmath , and all its @xmath -components, have to be expressed in
    terms of the space-time restriction @xmath .

    Recalling ( 2.130 ), for an infinitesimal diffeomorphism in a
    fermionic direction with parameter @xmath we have:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.140)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    with @xmath .

    The constraint that we have to impose, from the request that in the
    projection to space-time we do not loose physical degrees of
    freedom, is the following one:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.141)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where, according to our convention, @xmath and @xmath are indexes
    labeling the space-time (bosonic) coordinates, @xmath is a spinorial
    index associated to the @xmath coordinates, @xmath , and @xmath and
    @xmath are super-Lie algebra indexes.

    The constraints in ( 2.141 ) which relate the inner @xmath and the
    outer @xmath components of the curvatures @xmath are named rheonomic
    constraints (the property expressed by ( 2.141 ) is referred to as “
    rheonomy ” and a theory admitting a set of rheonomic constraints is
    likewise named a rheonomic theory). As we have previously
    anticipated, through the rheonomic constraints the components along
    at least one fermionic vielbein @xmath are linearly expressed in
    terms of the components along the bosonic vielbeins. Indeed, these
    constraints state that the fermionic components of the curvatures
    (in their decomposition on a basis of @xmath -forms @xmath ) can be
    expressed algebraically in terms of the space-time components @xmath
    . In other words, this means that the derivatives of the fields in
    the @xmath -directions are expressed, through ( 2.141 ), as linear
    combinations of their derivatives in the space-time directions.

    Thus, one can see that, when the constraint ( 2.141 ) hold, the
    knowledge of a purely space-time configuration @xmath determines in
    a complete way the so called rheonomic extension mapping :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.142)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Indeed, inserting ( 2.141 ) into ( 2.140 ), we find

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.143)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Thus, if rheonomy holds, ( 2.140 ) is equivalent to the passive
    point of view for the Lie derivative (a flow , through fermionic
    diffeomporphisms, from an hypersurface to another which is
    translated by @xmath ). ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 In fact, the term “ rheonomy ”
    takes its origin from the Greek words “ @xmath ” @xmath “flow” and “
    @xmath ó @xmath ” @xmath “law”, referring to the flow law for moving
    from one hypersurface to another (through fermionic
    diffeomorphisms).

    Therefore, the complete @xmath -dependence of the superfield @xmath
    can be recovered starting from the initial purely space-time (
    @xmath ) configuration. In other words, @xmath and the space-time
    tangent derivatives @xmath (or, equivalently, @xmath and @xmath )
    constitute a complete set of Cauchy data on @xmath once ( 2.141 ) is
    satisfied. Indeed, one can show that, when the constraints ( 2.141 )
    hold, the space-time normal derivatives @xmath are expressible in
    terms of @xmath and @xmath . The rheonomic constraints ( 2.141 ) are
    constraints between inner @xmath and outer @xmath , and this is
    analogous to the Cauchy-Riemann equations for an analytic function:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.144)
         @xmath      (2.145)
         @xmath      (2.146)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    According to this analogy, we have

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.147)
         @xmath      (2.148)
         @xmath      (2.149)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Moreover, just as the analycity of a function allows for its
    determination in the whole complex plane once its boundary value on
    any line (say @xmath ) is given, in the same way rheonomy allows to
    reconstruct the superfield potential @xmath from its boundary value
    (say @xmath ) (see Refs. Libro2 ; Fre:2013ika for details on this
    analogy).

    The idea of rheonomy, together with a “visualization” of superspace,
    is graphically summarized in Figure 2.2 , previously proposed in
    Ref. Fre:2013ika .

    What we have shown till now is that the physical content of a
    rheonomic theory in superspace is completely determined by means of
    a purely space-time description , through the “flow laws” that
    connect the two spaces.

    Alternatively, if we regard the Lie derivative as the generator of
    the functional change of @xmath at the same coordinate point:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.150)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    that is if we consider an active point of view for the Lie
    derivative, sticking to the four-dimensional space-time ( @xmath ),
    then the rheonomic mapping ( 2.143 ) can be rewritten as follows:

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.151)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    We can thus say that, written in this form, the rheonomic mapping
    maps a space-time configuration into a new space-time configuration
    . In particular, if the theory described by the fields @xmath is
    invariant under superspace diffeomorphism , then it can be
    restricted to space-time , and ( 2.151 ) will appear as a symmetry
    transformation of the space-time theory .

    Now, since @xmath is a spinorial parameter, the rheonomic mapping
    realized on space-time field configurations will be identified as a
    supersymmetry transformation .

    Note that rheonomy does not depend on the particular basis chosen
    for the @xmath -forms: The coordinate basis used above, @xmath , and
    the anholonomic supervielbein basis, @xmath , are equally viable. In
    the following, we shall need the expression of the rheonomic
    constraints using intrinsic components of the curvatures.

    We can now rewrite the supersymmetry transformations as follows:

      -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
         @xmath   @xmath            (2.152)
                           @xmath   
                           @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

    where we have used @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . It is in this
    intrinsic form that the supersymmetry transformations appear in
    supergravity theories.

Summarizing, we have seen that a geometric formulation of supegravity as
a theory on the super-Poincaré group can be done when one imposes
factorization in the Lorentz directions and rheonomy (precisely, the
rheonomic constraints ( 2.141 )) on the odd directions.

Let us now look better inside ( 2.141 ): In the general discussion of
the group-manifold approach, we have seen that general coordinate
transformations on @xmath (diffeomorphisms) close an algebra

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the closure condition on the exterior derivative @xmath if the
curvatures satisfy the Bianchi identities @xmath .

However, the rheonomic constraints ( 2.141 ) among the holonomic outer
and inner components @xmath and @xmath imply an analogous relation among
the intrinsic components @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are constant anholonomic tensors (precisely, the @xmath ’s
appearing in ( 2.141 ), evaluated in their intrinsic basis), and, in the
presence of ( 2.154 ), the Bianchi identities loose their character of
identities , becoming integrability equations for the constraints. Since
the rheonomic constraints express each outer component @xmath in terms
of the inner ones @xmath , then the Bianchi integrability equations are
(differential) equations among the space-time components of the
curvatures which must be valid everywhere in superspace and, in
particular, on the restriction to the space-time hypersurface.

Hence, we reach the conclusion that the supersymmetry transformations (
2.152 ) close an algebra only if the space-time curvatures @xmath
satisfy certain integrability equations encoded in the Bianchi
identities. These equations are the space-time equations of motion of
the theory, ²¹ ²¹ 21 In the absence of auxiliary fields, which are
indeed introduced to obtain an off-shell closure of the supersymmetry
algebra. and any different equation of motion would be inconsistent with
the Bianchi identities.

Summarizing, in a rheonomic theory we expect that the supersymmetry
transformations ( 2.152 ) close an algebra only when the field-strengths
satisfy the on-shell constraints (on-shell configurations of the fields
@xmath ). Therefore, the requirement of the rheonomy projection has the
same physical content as the request that the equations of motions are
satisfied , in order to end up with a consistently defined supergravity
theory.

Thus, we can now say that the constraints ( 2.141 ) implement the
requirement of (on-shell) matching of the bosonic and fermionic degrees
of freedom, allowing to produce a supersymmetric theory in a geometric
setting. When this is imposed, we can think of supergravity as a direct
extension of General Relativity, where the manifold which must be
described has both bosonic and fermionic coordinates. For a graphic
representation summarizing the scenario we have just described, see
Figure 2.3 (reproduced from Ref. Libro2 ).

The Lie derivative formula

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , supplemented with the horizontality and the rheonomic
constraints , gives:

-   The Lorentz gauge transformations ( @xmath ):

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.156)
      -- -------- -- ---------

-   The general diffeomorphisms on space-time :

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.157)
      -- -------- -- ---------

-   The supersymmetry transformations ( @xmath ):

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.158)
      -- -------- -- ---------

As we have already pointed out, the closure of the supersymmetry algebra
requires, in general, further constraints on the space-time components
@xmath , and these constraints are identified with the space-time
equations of motion ; on the other hand, the closure of the gauge
transformations ( 2.156 ) and of the space-time diffeomorphisms ( 2.157
) does not give further constraints. This is the main difference between
supersymmetry and all the other symmetries of a physical theory.

In the above discussion, we have considered the @xmath super-Poincaré
group, which is the basis of the simplest supergravity theory. The whole
procedure can then be generalized to any supergroup in any space-time
dimension @xmath (see, for example, Libro2 and also the work I have done
during my first PhD year, Minimal , in which minimal @xmath , @xmath
supergravity is constructed within this framework). In @xmath
dimensions, the superspace will be given by @xmath , @xmath being the
supergroup and @xmath the factorized subgroup which should always
contain the Lorentz group @xmath . This formulation can thus be used for
constructing any supergravity theory. To this aim, we have to find the
expansion of the curvatures @xmath in terms of the vielbein @xmath of
superspace (supervielbein). This is done by imposing that the Bianchi
equations are satisfied. After that, we have at once the supersymmetry
transformation laws of the fields, encoded in ( 2.152 ), and the field
equations.

##### Lagrangian formulation in the rheonomic framework

When working in the rheonomic framework, we have a geometrical
understanding of the theory, where all the ingredients have a clear
(physical and geometrical) meaning. This is the main peculiarity of the
rheonomic approach to supergravity theories. In line of principle, there
is no need of a Lagrangian formulation for describing the theory.
However, even if the Lagrangian in superspace is not necessary, it is
extremely useful in order to determine the rheonomic constraints and the
space-time Lagrangian.

In fact, a Lagrangian formulation can however be given to supergravity,
and, in particular, it is often very useful for writing the equations of
motion of the fields, since finding them from the solutions of the
Bianchi identities is usually very complicated.

The idea is to find an extended action principle , that is a variational
principle giving as variational equations both the space-time equations
of motion of the fields and the rheonomic constraints (and the
supersymmetry transformation laws). The geometric approach discussed so
far allows a flexible action principle, which cannot be given in other
approaches .

Suppose to construct a Lagrangian in terms of differential forms (which
are invariant under diffeomorphisms) and by only using diffeomorphisms
invariant operators among them. Then, the four-dimensional space-time
surface can be considered as a hypersurface embedded in the appropriate
superspace @xmath , and we can construct an action by integrating the
Lagrangian density which, in @xmath , is a @xmath -form, on the @xmath
-dimensional submanifold @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When studying the variation of the action, in line of principle one
should also vary @xmath , but, since @xmath is geometrical (it is
constructed only with forms and using the differential operator “ @xmath
” and the wedge product “ @xmath ”, without using the Hodge duality
operator), any deformation of @xmath can be compensated by a
diffeomorphism on the fields (the whole discussion can be extended to
@xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath ). Then, the equations of
motion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

can be found at fixed submanifold @xmath , but recalling that, since
they are equations on exterior forms, they actually hold over all the
manifold @xmath .

For this reason, when constructing a geometric Lagrangian for
supergravity, we have to avoid the use of the Hodge duality operator,
since it involves the notion of a metric, and does not allow the smooth
variation of integration manifold (besides the fact that it is not clear
how to extend its notion to a supermanifold).

In order to construct a geometric Lagrangian , one can follow a set of “
building rules ” allowing to write the most general Lagrangian with the
expected good properties. Let us list the general building rules for a
supergravity Lagrangian in @xmath (see Ref. Libro2 for more details on
these rules):

1.   Geometricity : The Lagrangian should be a @xmath -form, constructed
    with the soft @xmath -forms @xmath (and, when scalars and spin-
    @xmath fields are present, also with the corresponding @xmath
    -forms) using only the diffeomorphic invariant operators @xmath and
    @xmath (excluding the Hodge duality operator), that is coordinate
    invariance is required.

    Explicitly, the Lagrangian will be written as a polynomial in the
    curvatures @xmath , namely (in @xmath ) as

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.161)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where the @xmath -forms @xmath have the general expression @xmath ,
    with the quantities @xmath possibly depending on the scalars and
    spin- @xmath fields, when they are present. The degree in @xmath is
    at most @xmath for supergravity theories, also when dealing with
    higher dimensions. This comes from the request of having a
    Lagrangian with at most @xmath derivatives (in order to have field
    equations up to order @xmath ).

2.  @xmath -gauge invariance : The Lagrangian must be @xmath -invariant,
    with @xmath given by @xmath (where, in @xmath supergravities, @xmath
    ). ²² ²² 22 In order to implement this principle, each term in the
    Lagrangian must clearly be an @xmath -scalar .

3.   Homogeneous scaling law : All fields must scale in such a way to
    leave invariant the curvatures and the Bianchi identities.
    Precisely, the equations defining the curvatures @xmath are left
    invariant when the @xmath -forms @xmath are rescaled according to

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.162)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    and the corresponding (super)curvatures as

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.163)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Then, the Bianchi identities are independent on @xmath , and, as a
    consequence, also the field equations have to be independent on
    @xmath . Therefore, each term in the Lagrangian must scale
    homogeneously under the above scaling law.

    In particular, in @xmath dimensions, each term must scale as @xmath
    , which is the scale weight of the Einstein term.

4.   Existence of the vacuum : The defining equations for the curvatures
    @xmath always admit the solution @xmath ( vacuum solution ), in
    which case they reduce to the Maurer-Cartan equations of the super
    group-manifold @xmath for the left-invariant forms @xmath . We then
    ask that also the field equations should admit the vacuum solution
    @xmath , where we recover a flat superspace . Therefore, the field
    equations have to be at least linear in @xmath .

5.   Rheonomy : We assume that in the field equations the
    parametrizations of the curvatures obey the constraints

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.164)
      -- -------- -- ---------

Note that all these axioms are required for finding a locally
supersymmetric Lagrangian .

In order to obtain the space-time Lagrangian from the rheonomic one
defined on superspace, one has to restrict all the terms to the @xmath ,
@xmath hypersurface @xmath . In practice, we restrict all the
superfields to their lowest ( @xmath ) component and to the space-time
bosonic vielbein or differentials. This gives the Lagrangian @xmath
-form on space-time (that is, the Lagrangian restricted from superspace
to space-time).

Let us finally recall that, in some supergravity theories ²³ ²³ 23 In
particular, auxiliary fields can be introduced in @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath supergravity theories. , one can also add auxiliary fields ,
which allow the matching of the number of bosonic and fermionic degrees
of freedom off-shell . When this happens, the Bianchi identities are
really identities, they do not imply the equations of motion, and one
can construct a Lagrangian in which supersymmetry transformations close
off-shell.

#### 2.3.4 Geometrical approach for the description of @xmath pure
supergravity theories on a manifold with boundary

Let us now introduce @xmath supergravity theories in the presence of a
(non-trivial) space-time boundary in the geometric approach discussed
above. We will strictly follow the lines of bdy , and this short review
will be useful for a clear understanding of the new (original) results
we will present in Chapter 4 of this thesis.

Before moving to the technical aspects of this formulation, let us
introduce the scenario and give some motivations to the study of
supergravity theories in the presence of a space-time boundary.

The presence of a boundary in (super)gravity theories has been studied
with great interest from the ‘70s. In particular, in Refs. York:1972sj ;
Gibbons:1976ue ; Brown:1992br the authors pointed out the necessity of
adding a boundary term to the gravity action in such a way to implement
Dirichlet boundary conditions for the metric field, in attempts to study
the quantization of gravity with a path integral approach, in order to
have an action depending only on the first derivatives of the metric.
Subsequently, the addition of boundary terms was considered in
Horava:1996ma by Horava and Witten, to cancel gauge and gravitational
anomalies in eleven-dimensional supergravity.

The inclusion of boundary terms has proved to be fundamental for the
study of the so called @xmath /CFT duality, a duality between string
theory on asymptotically @xmath space-time (times a compact manifold)
and a (conformal) quantum field theory living on the boundary (see, for
example, Maldacena:1997re ; Gubser:1998bc ; Witten:1998qj ;
Aharony:1999ti ; DHoker:2002nbb and references therein). In the
supergravity limit of string theory (that is, in the low-energy limit of
the latter), the aforementioned duality implies a one-to-one
correspondence between quantum operators in the conformal field theory
(CFT) living on the boundary and the fields of the supergravity theory
living in the bulk. In this scenario, the duality requires to supplement
the supergravity action functional with appropriate boundary conditions
for the supergravity fields, the latter acting as sources for the CFT
operators. In particular, the divergences presented by the bulk metric
near the boundary can be eliminated through the so called “holographic
renormalization” (see, for example, Ref. Skenderis:2002wp for a review
on this topic), with the inclusion of appropriate counterterms at the
boundary.

The inclusion of boundary terms and counterterms to the bosonic sector
of @xmath supergravity has been studied in many different contexts. Of
particular relevance are the works Aros:1999id ; Aros:1999kt ;
Mora:2004kb ; Olea:2005gb ; Jatkar:2014npa , in which it was shown that
the addition of the topological Euler-Gauss-Bonnet term to the Einstein
action of @xmath @xmath gravity leads to a background-independent
definition of Noether charges, without the necessity of imposing
Dirichlet boundary conditions on the fields. The Euler-Gauss-Bonnet
boundary term regularizes the action and the related
(background-independent) conserved charges.

In the context of full supergravity, boundary contributions were
considered from several authors, adopting different approaches. In
particular, in Refs. vanNieuwenhuizen:2005kg ; Belyaev:2005rt ;
Belyaev:2007bg ; Belyaev:2008ex ; Grumiller:2009dx ; Belyaev:2010as it
was pointed out that the supergravity action should be invariant under
local supersymmetry without imposing Dirichlet boundary conditions on
the fields, in contrast to the Gibbons-Hawking prescription
Gibbons:1976ue .

From the above results, one can conclude that, in order to restore all
the invariances of a (super)gravity Lagrangian with cosmological
constant in the presence of a non-trivial space-time boundary, one needs
to add topological (boundary) contributions, also providing the
counterterms necessary for regularizing the action and the conserved
charges.

More recently, in bdy the authors worked out the construction of the
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath supergravity theories with negative
cosmological constant in the presence a non-trivial boundary
(generalizing, in this way, to @xmath extended supergravity the results
of Aros:1999id ; Aros:1999kt ; Mora:2004kb ; Olea:2005gb ;
Jatkar:2014npa and vanNieuwenhuizen:2005kg ; Belyaev:2005rt ;
Belyaev:2007bg ; Belyaev:2008ex ; Grumiller:2009dx ; Belyaev:2010as ),
using a different approach with respect to that of
vanNieuwenhuizen:2005kg ; Belyaev:2005rt ; Belyaev:2007bg ;
Belyaev:2008ex ; Grumiller:2009dx ; Belyaev:2010as and extending to
superspace the geometric approach of Aros:1999id ; Aros:1999kt ;
Mora:2004kb ; Olea:2005gb ; Jatkar:2014npa : Precisely, they introduced
in a geometric way (generalizing the rheonomic approach to supergravity
we have introduced so far to the case in which a non-trivial space-time
boundary is present) appropriate boundary terms to the Lagrangian in
such a way to end up with an action (including the boundary
contributions) invariant under supersymmetry transformations.

We now recall, on the same lines of Ref. bdy , what happens in the
geometric approach when considering @xmath simple supergravity theories
in the presence of a (non-trivial) space-time boundary, in view of a
clearer understanding of the analysis we will perform in Chapter 4 .

Let @xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ) be the bosonic and
fermionic vielbein @xmath -forms in superspace , respectively. The index
@xmath is the @xmath @xmath -symmetry index, while @xmath is a
four-dimensional spinor index. In the @xmath case (which is the one we
will consider in Chapter 4 ), we have just @xmath , being @xmath .

In any supergravity theory, the Lagrangian @xmath must be invariant
under supersymmetry transformations. As we have previously discussed, in
the rheonomic (geometric) set up, supersymmetry transformations in
space-time are interpreted as diffeomorphisms in the fermionic
directions of superspace; they are generated by Lie derivatives with
fermionic parameter @xmath . In other words, the rheonomy principle is
equivalent to the requirement of space-time supersymmetry. It follows
that the supersymmetry invariance of the Lagrangian is accounted for by
requiring that the Lie derivative @xmath of the Lagrangian vanishes for
infinitesimal diffeomorphisms in the fermionic directions of superspace
:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the fermionic parameter along the tangent vector @xmath
dual to the gravitino @xmath , @xmath . In particular, we have @xmath
and @xmath , where @xmath denotes, as usual, the contraction operator.

Now, since @xmath is a @xmath -form in superspace , the first
contribution, that is @xmath , which would be identically zero in
space-time, is not trivial here. The second contribution, namely @xmath
, is a boundary term and does not affect the bulk result. Then, a
necessary condition for a supergravity Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which corresponds to require supersymmetry invariance in the bulk. We
will assume in the sequel that the condition ( 2.166 ) always holds.
Under the condition ( 2.166 ), the supersymmetry transformation of the
action reduces to

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.167)
  -- -- -- ---------

When considering a supergravity theory on Minkowski background or,
generally, on a space-time with boundary at infinity, the fields
asymptotically vanish, so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.168)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.169)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this case, equation ( 2.166 ) is also a sufficient condition for the
supersymmetry invariance of the Lagrangian.

On the other hand, when the background space-time has a non-trivial
boundary , the condition ( 2.168 ), modulo an exact differential,
becomes non-trivial, and it is necessary to check it in an explicit way
in order to get supersymmetry invariance of the action.

Let us mention that in the cases considered by the authors of bdy (that
is to say, the @xmath and the @xmath pure supergravity theories in
@xmath with negative cosmological constant), the bulk Lagrangian @xmath
is not supersymmetric when a non-trivial boundary of space-time is
present. The authors of bdy showed that, in this case, supersymmetry
invariance is recovered by adding topological (boundary) contributions
@xmath to the bulk Lagrangian: Even if these contributions do not affect
the bulk, they restore the supersymmetry invariance of the total
Lagrangian (bulk and boundary), besides modifying the boundary dynamics.
They found that the boundary values of the superspace curvatures are
dynamically fixed by the field equations of the full Lagrangian, and
that the introduction of a supersymmetric extension of the Gauss-Bonnet
term allows to recover supersymmetry invariance.

As the Gauss-Bonnet term in pure gravity allows to recover invariance of
the theory under all the bosonic symmetries (lost in the presence of a
boundary), and further regularizes the action Aros:1999id ; Aros:1999kt
; Mora:2004kb ; Olea:2005gb ; Jatkar:2014npa , the authors of bdy argued
that the same mechanism should also take place in the @xmath
supersymmetric case.

The authors of bdy also showed that the total Lagrangian @xmath they
obtained can be rewritten in a suggestive way as a sum of quadratic
terms in @xmath -covariant super field-strengths (the same structure
should appear also for higher @xmath theories). In particular, for the
@xmath case the result presented in bdy reproduce the MacDowell-Mansouri
action MM .

### 2.4 Free Differential Algebras and Lie algebras cohomology

Let us briefly introduce, in this section, the concept of Free
Differential Algebra (FDA in the following), since it will be a key
concept in this thesis (mainly in Chapter 5 ). The presentation we give
here strictly follows the lines of Hidden .

The concept of FDA was introduced by Sullivan in Sullivan .
Subsequently, the FDA framework was applied to the study of supergravity
theories by R. D’Auria and P. Fré, in particular in D'AuriaFre , in
which the FDA was referred to as Cartan Integrable System (CIS), since
the authors were unaware of the previous work by Sullivan Sullivan .
Actually, FDA and CIS are equivalent concepts DAuria:1982ada . The
latter is also known as the Chevalley-Eilenberg Lie algebras cohomology
framework in supergravity (CE-cohomolgy in the following).

FDAs, which accomodate forms of degree higher than two, extending the
concept of Lie algebras, emerged as underlying symmetries of field
theories containing antisymmetric tensors, that is to say, theories such
as supergravity and superstring. ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 In particular, antisymmetric
tensors are naturally contained in supergravity theories in @xmath
space-time dimensions. Indeed, FDAs extend the Maurer-Cartan equations
of ordinary Lie (super)algebras by incorporating @xmath -form
potentials, with @xmath , that are associated to @xmath -index
antisymmetric tensors.

We now shortly recall the standard procedure for the construction of a
minimal FDA (a minimal FDA is one where the differential of any @xmath
-form does not contain forms of degree greater than @xmath ), starting
from an ordinary Lie algebra (see, for example, Ref. Libro2 for more
details on FDAs).

Let us thus start by considering the Maurer-Cartan @xmath -forms @xmath
of a Lie algebra, and let us construct the so called @xmath -cochains (
Chevalley cochains ) @xmath in some representation @xmath of the Lie
group, that is to say, @xmath -forms of the type

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.170)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant tensor.

If the above cochains are closed:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.171)
  -- -------- -- ---------

they are called cocycles . If a cochain is exact, it is called a
coboundary .

Of particular interest are those cocycles that are not coboundaries ,
which are elements of the CE-cohomology. ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 If the closed cocycles
are also coboundaries (exact cochains), then the cohomology class is
trivial. In the case in which this happens, we can introduce a @xmath
-form @xmath and write the following closed equation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.172)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, together with the Maurer-Cartan equations of the Lie algebra, is
the first germ of a FDA, containing, besides the Maurer-Cartan @xmath
-forms @xmath , also the new @xmath -form @xmath .

This procedure can be now iterated taking as basis of new cochains
@xmath the full set of forms, namely @xmath and @xmath , and looking
again for cocycles. If a new cocycle @xmath exists, then we can add
again to the FDA a new equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.173)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The procedure can be iterated again and again, till no more cocycles can
be found. In this way, we obtain the largest FDA associated with the
initial Lie algebra.

Of particular relevance (at least for a clearer understanding of this
thesis) is the following Chevalley-Eilenberg theorem (see Libro2 for
more details on the Chevalley-Eilenberg theorems):

###### Theorem 1.

If a Lie algebra @xmath is semisimple and @xmath is the (trivial)
identity representation, then there are no non-trivial @xmath -form and
@xmath -form cohomology classes.

There is, however, always a non-trivial @xmath -form cohomology class,
namely:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.174)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the structure constants with all the indexes lowered.

This means that for @xmath semisimple every closed @xmath -form or
@xmath -form is also exact.

#### 2.4.1 Extension to supersymmetric theories

The extension of this method to Lie superalgebras is straightforward.
Actually, in the supersymmetric case a set of non-trivial cocycles is
generally present in superspace due to the existence of Fierz identities
obeyed by the wedge products of gravitino @xmath -forms.

In the case of supersymmetric theories, the @xmath -form fields of the
superalgebra we start from are the vielbein @xmath , the gravitino
@xmath , the spin connection @xmath , and, possibly, a set of gauge
fields. However, we should further impose the physical request that the
FDA should be described in terms of fields living in ordinary superspace
, whose cotangent space is spanned by the supervielbein @xmath , dual to
supertranslations.

This corresponds to the physical request that the Lie superalgebra has a
fiber bundle structure , whose base space is spanned by the
supervielbein, the rest of the fields spanning a fiber @xmath . This
fact implies an horizontality condition on the FDA, corresponding to
gauge invariance : The gauge fields and the Lorentz spin connection
belonging to @xmath must be excluded from the construction of the
cochains.

Under a geometrical point of view, this corresponds to require the
CE-cohomology to be restricted to the so called @xmath -relative
CE-cohomology .

### 2.5 @xmath supergravity and its hidden superalgebra

We now have the ingredients for moving to a review (on the same lines of
Section @xmath of Ref. Hidden ) of the work D'AuriaFre concerning the
hidden superalgebra underlying @xmath supergravity in the FDAs
framework. This is necessary for a clearer understanding of some of the
original results we will present in this thesis (see Chapter 5 ). To
this aim, let us first introduce the physical context. Then we will
recall the FDA construction of @xmath supergravity. The presentation
given here strictly follows the lines of Hidden .

In supergravity theories in @xmath space-time dimensions, the bosonic
field content is given by the metric, a set of @xmath -form gauge
potentials, and @xmath -form gauge potentials of various @xmath .
Therefore, these theories are appropriately discussed in the context of
FDAs.

The action of @xmath supergravity was first constructed in Cremmer . The
theory has a bosonic field content given by the metric @xmath and a
@xmath -index antisymmetric tensor @xmath (where @xmath ); the theory is
also endowed with a single Majorana gravitino @xmath in the fermionic
sector. By dimensional reduction, the @xmath theory yields @xmath
supergravity in four dimensions, which is considered as a possible
unifying theory of all interactions.

An important task to accomplish in the context of @xmath supergravity
was the identification of the supergroup underlying the theory. The
authors of Cremmer proposed @xmath as the most likely candidate.
However, the field @xmath ( @xmath -index photon) of the
Cremmer-Julia-Scherk theory is a @xmath -form rather than a @xmath
-form, and therefore it cannot be interpreted as the potential of a
generator in a supergroup.

The structure of the @xmath Cremmer-Julia-Scherk theory was then
reconsidered in D'AuriaFre , in the (supersymmetric) FDAs framework,
using the superspace geometric approach (namely, in its dual
Maurer-Cartan formulation, introducing the notion of Cartan Integrable
Systems). ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 As we have already said, in the original paper
D'AuriaFre the FDA was referred to as Cartan Integrable System, since
the authors were unaware of the previous work by Sullivan Sullivan , who
introduced the mathematical concept of FDAs to which the CIS are
equivalent.

In this scenario, its bosonic sector includes, besides the supervielbein
@xmath , a @xmath -form potential @xmath (whose pull-back on space-time
is @xmath ), with field-strength @xmath (modulo fermionic bilinears in
terms of the gravitino @xmath -form), together with its Hodge dual
@xmath , defined in such a way that its space-time components are
related to the ones of the @xmath -form by @xmath . This amounts to say
that it is associated with a @xmath -form potential @xmath in
superspace. The on-shell closure of the supersymmetric theory relies on
Fierz identities involving three gravitinos, and requires @xmath (modulo
fermionic currents).

In D'AuriaFre , the supersymmetric @xmath FDA was introduced and
investigated in order to see whether the FDA formulation could be
interpreted in terms of an ordinary Lie superalgebra (in its dual
Maurer-Cartan formulation). Interestingly, this was proven to be true:
The existence of a superalgebra underlying the @xmath supergravity
theory was presented for the first time (the authors of D'AuriaFre got a
dichotomic solution, consisting in two different supergroups, whose
@xmath -form potentials can be alternatively used to parametrize the
@xmath -form).

The superalgebra found in D'AuriaFre includes, as a subalgebra, the
super-Poincaré algebra of the eleven-dimensional theory, but it also
contains two extra bosonic generators, called @xmath and @xmath (with
@xmath ), which commute with the @xmath -momentum @xmath , while having
appropriate commutators with the eleven-dimensional Lorentz generators
@xmath . Generators that commute with all the superalgebra but the
Lorentz generators will be named “almost-central”. Moreover, in
D'AuriaFre the authors showed that, in order to have a superalgebra that
reproduce the FDA, an extra, nilpotent, fermionic generator, named
@xmath , must be included.

Indeed, besides the standard Poincaré Lie algebra, the superalgebra of
D'AuriaFre presents the following structure of (anti)commutators:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.175)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.176)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.177)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.178)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.179)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

together with the (Lorentz) commutation relations involving @xmath , the
other (anti)commutation relations being zero. The structure of the full
superalgebra hidden in the superymmetric @xmath FDA also requires, for
being equivalent to the FDA in superspace, the presence of a nilpotent
fermionic charge , which has been named @xmath in Ref. D'AuriaFre and is
dual to a spinor @xmath -form @xmath . ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 Actually, as we will
explicitly show in Chapter 5 , the extra spinor @xmath -form @xmath
(dual to the nilpotent fermionic generator @xmath ) can be parted into
two different spinors, whose integrability conditions ( @xmath ) close
separately.

The consistency of the @xmath theory fully relies on @xmath -fermions
Fierz identities obeyed by the gravitino @xmath -forms.

The anticommutation relation ( 2.175 ) generalizes to almost-central
charges the central extension of the supersymmetry algebra HLS , which,
in Witten:1978mh , was shown to be associated with topologically
non-trivial configurations of the bosonic fields. The possible extension
( 2.175 ) of the supersymmetry algebra for supergravity theories in
@xmath dimensions was later widely considered (see, in particular, Refs.
vanHolten:1982mx ; Achucarro:1987nc ; deAzcarraga:1989mza ;
Abraham:1990nz ; Bandos:2004xw ; Bandos:2005 ). After the discovery of D
@xmath -branes as sources for the Ramond-Ramond gauge potentials
Polchinski:1995mt and the subsequent understanding of the duality
relation occurring between @xmath supergravity and the Type IIA theory
in @xmath , the (extra) bosonic generators @xmath and @xmath were
understood as @xmath -brane charges, sources of the dual potentials
@xmath and @xmath , respectively Hull:1994ys ; Townsend:1995gp .
Equation ( 2.175 ) was then interpreted as the natural generalization of
the supersymmetry algebra in higher dimensions, in the presence of
non-trivial topological extended sources (black @xmath -branes).

The role played by the nilpotent fermionic generator @xmath and its
group-theoretical and physical meaning was much less investigated with
respect to that of the almost-central bosonic charges. The most relevant
contributions were given in vanHolten:1982mx ; Bandos:2004xw ;
Bandos:2005 , where the results obtained in D'AuriaFre were further
analyzed and generalized. However, the physical meaning of @xmath
remained obscure. In Chapter 5 of this thesis, following the discussion
we have presented in the work Hidden , we will shed some light on this
topic.

Let us mention that the Lie superalgebra ( 2.175 ) was rediscovered some
years after the publication of D'AuriaFre and named @xmath -algebra
deAzcarraga:1989mza ; Sezgin:1996cj ; Townsend:1997wg ; Hassaine:2003vq
; Hassaine:2004pp . It is commonly considered as the Lie superalgebra
underlying @xmath -theory Schwarz:1995jq ; Duff:1996aw ; Townsend:1996xj
in its low-energy limit, corresponding to supergravity in eleven
dimensions in the presence of non-trivial @xmath -brane sources
Achucarro:1987nc ; Townsend:1995gp ; Bergshoeff:1987cm ; Duff:1987bx ;
Bergshoeff:1987qx ; Townsend:1995kk . The superalgebra disclosed in
D'AuriaFre can thus be viewed as a (Lorentz-valued) central extension of
the @xmath -algebra including a nilpotent fermionic generator, @xmath .

Here and in the following, we refer to a superalgebra descending from a
given FDA as a hidden superalgebra . The set of generators @xmath span
an abelian ideal of the hidden superalgebra written above (that is, the
hidden superalgebra is non-(semi)simple ). The generators @xmath will
also be referred to as hidden generators .

#### 2.5.1 Review of the hidden superalgebra in @xmath

We will now review in detail (on the same lines of Hidden ) the complete
disclosure of the hidden superalgebra found in D'AuriaFre (namely, the
hidden superalgebra underlying @xmath supergravity).

In the approach adopted in D'AuriaFre , the vielbein @xmath ( @xmath )
and the gravitino @xmath span a basis of the cotangent superspace @xmath
, where also the superspace @xmath -form @xmath is defined. Actually, as
stressed in D'AuriaFre , one can fully extend the FDA to include also a
(magnetic) @xmath -form potential @xmath , related to @xmath by Hodge
duality of the corresponding field-strengths. Then, the supersymmetric
FDA defining the ground state of the @xmath theory is given by the
vanishing of the following supercurvatures:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.180)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.181)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.182)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.183)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.184)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath ( @xmath , according with the convention of Hidden ;
D'AuriaFre ) denotes the Lorentz-covariant derivative in eleven
dimensions. The closure ( @xmath ) of this FDA is a consequence of
@xmath -gravitinos Fierz identities in @xmath (see Section B.1 of
Appendix B ).

As mentioned above, the authors of D'AuriaFre found that one can trade
the FDA structure on which the theory is based with an ordinary Lie
superalgebra, written in its dual Maurer-Cartan formulation, namely in
terms of @xmath -form gauge fields valued in non-trivial tensor
representations of Lorentz group @xmath , allowing the disclosure of the
fully extended superalgebra hidden in the supersymmetric FDA.

In particular, the authors of D'AuriaFre reached this result in the
following way: First of all, they associated to the forms @xmath and
@xmath the bosonic @xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath (in the antisymmetric
representations of @xmath ), respectively. Their corresponding
Maurer-Cartan equations read

  -- -- -------- -------- ---------
        @xmath            (2.185)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath is the Lorentz-covariant derivative. Then, they presented a
general decomposition of the @xmath -form @xmath in terms of the @xmath
-forms @xmath and @xmath (and of the supervielbein), by requiring the
Bianchi identities of the @xmath -form ( @xmath ) to be satisfied also
when @xmath is decomposed in terms of @xmath -forms. They showed that
this can be accomplished if and only if one also introduces an extra
spinor @xmath -form @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.186)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The consistency of the theory requires the @xmath -closure of @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . For the two bosonic @xmath -form fields, the
@xmath -closure is trivial in the ground state, due to the vanishing of
the curvatures @xmath and @xmath , while on @xmath it requires the
following condition:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.187)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, the authors of D'AuriaFre found that the most general ansatz for
the @xmath -form @xmath (written in terms of @xmath -forms) satisfying
all the above requirements is the following one: ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 Here and in
the following, with @xmath we mean @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
Minkowski metric.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.188)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The requirement that @xmath in ( 2.188 ) satisfies equation ( 2.183 )
fixes the constants @xmath and @xmath in terms of the structure
constants @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

The final result, obtained in D'AuriaFre by also taking into account
condition ( 2.187 ), reads as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.189)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the constants @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath now define the new
structure constants of the hidden superalgebra. The reader can find some
details concerning this calculation in Section B.3 of Appendix B .

Let us mention that in D'AuriaFre the first coefficient @xmath was
arbitrarily fixed to @xmath , leading, in this way, only to two possible
solutions for the set of parameters @xmath . As it was later pointed out
in Bandos:2004xw , this restriction (due to the particular choice @xmath
on the coefficient @xmath ) can be relaxed, thus giving the general
solution ( 2.189 ). Indeed, one of the @xmath ’s can be reabsorbed in
the normalization of @xmath , so that, owing to the relation ( 2.186 ),
we are left with one free parameter, which can be written, for example,
as @xmath . ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 In Ref. Bandos:2004xw , the free parameter @xmath
is related to @xmath by @xmath .

The full Maurer-Cartan equations of the hidden superalgebra (in its dual
formulation) are then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.190)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.191)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.192)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.193)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.194)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.195)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We can finally write the hidden superalgebra in terms of generators
closing a set of commutation (and anticommutation) relations. For a
generic set of @xmath -forms @xmath satisfying the Maurer-Cartan
equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.196)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in terms of structure constants @xmath , this is performed by
introducing a set of dual generators @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.197)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that the @xmath ’s close the algebra @xmath . In the case under
analysis, the @xmath -forms @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.198)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to recover the superalgebra in terms of (anti)commutators of
the dual Lie superalgebra generators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.199)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we use the duality between @xmath -forms and generators, which is
defined by the conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.200)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the unity in the spinor representation.

Then, the @xmath FDA corresponds to the following hidden contributions
to the superalgebra (besides the Poincaré algebra):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.201)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

All the other (anti)commutators (beyond the Poincaré part) vanish. As
said before, the @xmath ’s satisfy equation ( 2.187 ) and one of them
can be reabsorbed in the normalization of the spinor @xmath -form @xmath
. The closure of the superalgebra under super-Jacobi identities is a
consequence of the @xmath -closure of the Maurer-Cartan @xmath -forms
equations.

In the following, we will refer to the hidden @xmath superalgebra
disclosed in D'AuriaFre as the “DF-algebra” (the acronym “DF” stands for
“D’Auria-Fré”). Let us mention that the DF-algebra has recently raised a
certain interest in the Mathematical-Physicists community, due to the
fact that it can be reformulated in terms of @xmath algebras, or “
strong homotopy Lie algebras ” (a comprehensive reference to this
approach can be found in Refs. Sati:2015yda ; stronghom ).

Note that the procedure introduced in D'AuriaFre can be thought of as
the reverse of the construction of a FDA from a given Lie superalgebra:
Indeed, in the set up of D'AuriaFre , one starts from the physical FDA
as it was given a priori , and then tries to reconstruct the hidden Lie
superalgebra that could have originated it, using the algorithm of the
CE-cohomology we have previously recalled.

## Chapter 3 Algebraic background on @xmath-expansion \nomenclature

[Z]IW contractionInönü-Wigner contraction

In Mathematics as well as in Physics, there is a great interest in
studying the relations among different Lie (super)algebras related to
the symmetries of different physical theories, since this can disclose
connections among these theories. Furthermore, finding a new Lie
(super)algebra from an already known one also means that a new physical
theory could emerge. There are many different methods for obtaining new
Lie (super)algebras from given ones, for example deformations,
extensions, expansions, and contractions (for short reviews on these
topics see, for example, Azca1 ; Azca2 ; Azca3 ).

Referring to the latter, of particular relevance is the so called
Inönü-Wigner contraction IW1 (for short, IW contraction). It has a lot
of applications in Mathematics and in Physics, among which, for example,
the well known case of the Poincaré algebra as an Inönü-Wigner
contraction the Anti-de Sitter algebra.

On the other hand, in @xmath , a new expansion approach, which goes
under the name of semigroup expansion ( @xmath -expansion , for short),
was developed Iza1 and subsequently further enhanced, for example in
Iza2 ; Iza3 ; Caroca:2010ax . The @xmath -expansion method is based on
combining the structure constants of an initial Lie (super)algebra
@xmath with the inner multiplication law of a discrete set @xmath ,
endowed with the structure of a semigroup, in such a way to define the
Lie bracket of a new, larger, expanded (super)algebra; the new Lie
algebra obtained through this procedure is called @xmath -expanded
(super)algebra , and it is commonly written as @xmath . In other words,
the @xmath -expansion method replicates through the elements of a
semigroup the structure of the original Lie (super)algebra into a new
one.

From the physical point of view, several (super)gravity theories have
been extensively studied and analyzed in the context of expansions and
contractions, enabling numerous results over recent years (among which,
for example, those presented in Refs. Azca1 ; Azca2 ; Azca3 ; Iza4 ;
Fierro2 ; Salgado ; Fierro1 ; Concha:2013uhq ; Concha1 ; Concha2 ; CR2 ;
Concha:2014zsa ; CRSnew ; Concha:2016hbt ; Concha:2016tms ).

The @xmath -expansion procedure turns out to be especially suitable for
the construction of Chern-Simons Lagrangians for the expanded
(super)algebras. The reason is that, for Chern-Simons forms, the key
ingredient in the construction is the invariant tensor, and in the
@xmath -expansion set up general theorems have been developed, allowing
for non-trivial invariant tensors for the @xmath -expanded
(super)algebras to be systematically constructed (see Iza1 for details).

In this chapter, we first give a brief review of Inönü-Wigner
contractions of Lie (super)algebras; then, we furnish the group
theoretical background on @xmath -expansion, since it will be useful in
the last part of this thesis, where we will present some new (original)
results regarding analytic formulations of this expansion method.

### 3.1 Inönü-Wigner contractions of Lie (super)algebras

The Inönü-Wigner contraction IW1 of a Lie (super)algebra @xmath with
respect to a subalgebra @xmath is performed by rescaling the generators
of the coset @xmath , and by subsequently taking a singular limit for
the rescaling parameter. The generators in @xmath become abelian in the
contracted algebra; the contracted algebra has a semidirect structure
and the abelian generators determine an ideal of it. The contracted
algebra has the same dimension as @xmath . This procedure is also
referred to as standard Inönü-Wigner contraction .

The concept of standard IW contraction can then be extended to the so
called generalized Inönü-Wigner contraction ( i.e. a contraction that
rescales the algebra generators through different powers of the
contraction parameter), in the sense intended in WW1 ; WW2 , by Evelyn
Weimar-Woods. ¹ ¹ 1 Any contraction is equivalent to a generalized
Inönü-Wigner contraction with integer exponents WW1 ; WW2 .

More technically, the generalized IW contractions are defined when the
Lie (super)algebra @xmath can be decomposed in a direct sum of @xmath
vector subspaces

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

being @xmath the vector space of the subalgebra @xmath of @xmath and
@xmath , such that the following (Weimar-Woods) conditions are
satisfied:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath , or, in other words,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath labels the generators @xmath of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
are the structure constants of @xmath . Then, the Weimar-Woods
contracted algebra WW1 ; WW2 is obtained by rescaling the generators of
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and by subsequently taking a singular limit for @xmath . The case @xmath
corresponds to the standard IW contraction.

### 3.2 @xmath-expansion for an arbitrary semigroup @xmath

As we have already mentioned, the @xmath -expansion consists in
combining the structure constants of a Lie (super)algebra @xmath with
the inner multiplication law of an abelian semigroup @xmath , in such a
way to define the Lie bracket of a new, @xmath -expanded (super)algebra
@xmath . Let us now reformulate this statement more technically through
the following definition (form Ref. Iza1 ):

###### Definition 1.

Let @xmath , with @xmath , be a finite, abelian semigroup with @xmath
-selector @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let @xmath be a Lie (super)algebra with basis @xmath and structure
constants @xmath , defined by the commutation relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Denote a basis element of the direct product @xmath by @xmath , and
consider the induced commutation relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the direct product

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

corresponds to the Lie (super)algebra given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

whose structure constants can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, for every abelian semigroup @xmath and Lie (super)algebra @xmath ,
the algebra @xmath obtained through the product ( 3.8 ) is also a Lie
(super)algebra, with a Lie bracket given by ( 3.9 ). The new, larger Lie
(super)algebra obtained in this way is called @xmath -expanded
(super)algebra, and it is commonly written as @xmath .

Imposing extra conditions, relevant (sub)algebras can be systematically
extracted from @xmath . In particular, let us describe in some detail
the cases of reduced algebras and resonant subalgebras, because of their
particular relevance for the research on this topic presented in this
thesis.

### 3.3 Reduced algebras

We recall the following definition from Ref. Iza1 :

###### Definition 2.

Let us consider a Lie (super)algebra @xmath of the form @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath are two subspaces given by @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. When @xmath , namely when the commutation relations
between generators present the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath      (3.12)
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

the structure constants @xmath satisfy the Jacobi identities. Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

itself corresponds to a Lie (super)algebra, which is called a reduced
algebra of @xmath and is commonly symbolized as @xmath .

Let us observe that, in general, a reduced algebra does not correspond
to a subalgebra of @xmath .

#### 3.3.1 @xmath-reduction of @xmath-expanded algebras

The so called @xmath -reduction Iza1 consists in the extraction of a
smaller (super)algebra from an @xmath -expanded Lie (super)algebra
@xmath , when certain conditions are met.

Let us consider a Lie (super)algebra @xmath , an abelian semigroup
@xmath , and the @xmath -expanded (super)algebra @xmath . The abelian
semigroup @xmath can also be provided with a unique zero element @xmath
(also indicated with the symbol @xmath in the literature), defined as
one for which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

for each @xmath .

If the semigroup @xmath has a zero element @xmath , then this element
plays a peculiar role in the @xmath -expanded (super)algebra. Let us see
what we mean, following Ref. Iza1 .

We can split the semigroup @xmath into non-zero elements @xmath , @xmath
, and a zero element @xmath . Correspondingly, we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Then, the @xmath -selector of @xmath satisfies the
relations

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.17)
  -- -- -- --------

which mean, when written in terms of multiplication rules,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, for the (super)algebra @xmath we can write the following
commutation relations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
     @xmath      (3.21)
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we now compare these commutation relations with ( 3.11 ), ( 3.12 ),
and ( 3.13 ), we can see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

are those of a reduced Lie algebra of @xmath generated by @xmath , whose
structure constants are given by @xmath .

Now, let us observe that the reduction procedure, in this particular
case, results to be tantamount to impose the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, in this case, the reduction abelianizes large sectors of the
(super)algebra, and, for each @xmath satisfying @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the reduced algebra of @xmath .

The above considerations led the authors of Ref. Iza1 to the formulation
of the following definition:

###### Definition 3.

Let @xmath be an abelian semigroup with a zero element @xmath and @xmath
be an @xmath -expanded algebra. Then, the algebra obtained by imposing
the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

on @xmath (or on a subalgebra of it) is called the @xmath -reduced
algebra of @xmath (or of the subalgebra).

When a @xmath -reduced (super)algebra presents a decomposition into
subspaces which is resonant with respect to the partition of the
semigroup involved in the @xmath -expansion process (we will define the
concept of resonant subalgebra in a while), the whole procedure goes
under the name of @xmath -resonant-reduction .

### 3.4 Resonant subalgebras

Another way for obtaining smaller algebras (in this case, subalgebras)
from @xmath -expanded ones, is described in the definitions below (again
from Ref. Iza1 ).

###### Definition 4.

Let @xmath be a decomposition of @xmath into subspaces @xmath , where
@xmath is a set of indexes. For each @xmath , it is always possible to
define the subsets @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subsets @xmath store the information on the subspace structure
of @xmath .

Now, let @xmath be a subset decomposition of the abelian semigroup
@xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the product @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

When such a subset decomposition @xmath exists, with the same @xmath of
( 3.27 ), it is said to be in resonance with the decomposition of @xmath
into subspaces, that is with @xmath .

The resonant subset decomposition is essential in order to
systematically extract subalgebras from @xmath -expanded algebras, as it
was enunciated and proven in Ref. Iza1 with the following theorem (which
corresponds to Theorem IV.2 of Iza1 ):

###### Theorem 2.

Let @xmath be a subspace decomposition of @xmath , with a structure as
the one described by equation ( 3.27 ). Let @xmath be a resonant subset
decomposition of the abelian semigroup @xmath , with the structure given
in equation ( 3.28 ). Define the subspaces of the @xmath -expanded
algebra @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a subalgebra of @xmath , called resonant subalgebra of @xmath .

### 3.5 Reduction of resonant subalgebras

@xmath -expanded (super)algebras have, in general, larger dimensions
than the original ones. However, the @xmath -expansion method can
reproduce the Inönü-Wigner contractions when certain conditions are met.
In particular, the standard IW contraction can be reproduced by
performing a (finite) @xmath -expansion involving resonance and @xmath
-reduction; on the other hand, the generalized IW contraction (in the
sense intended in WW1 ; WW2 ) fits within the scheme described in Iza1
when it is possible to extract reduced algebras from resonant
subalgebras of (finite) @xmath -expanded algebras. Then, the generalized
Inönü-Wigner contraction does not correspond to a resonant subalgebra,
but to its reduction Iza1 .

Let us report in the following Theorem VII.1 of Ref. Iza1 , which
provides necessary conditions under which a reduced algebra can be
extracted from a resonant subalgebra:

###### Theorem 3.

Let @xmath be a resonant subalgebra of @xmath . Let @xmath be a
partition of the subset @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Conditions ( 3.32 ) and ( 3.33 ) induce the decomposition @xmath on the
resonant subalgebra, where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

When the conditions ( 3.32 ) and ( 3.33 ) hold, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore @xmath corresponds to a reduced algebra of @xmath .

As shown in Iza1 , from the structure constants for the resonant
subalgebra it is then possible to write the structure constants for the
reduced algebra @xmath .

Observe that, when every @xmath of a resonant subalgebra includes the
zero element @xmath , the choice @xmath automatically satisfies the
conditions ( 3.32 ) and ( 3.33 ). As a consequence of this, the @xmath
-reduction can be regarded as a particular case of Theorem 3 .

Theorem 3 will be useful in the last part of this thesis, in particular
when we will present a new prescription for @xmath -expansion, involving
an infinite abelian semigroup and the subtraction of an infinite ideal
subalgebra from an infinite resonant subalgebra of the infinitely @xmath
-expanded (super)algebra.

## Chapter 4 @xmath-Lorentz supergravity in the presence of a
non-trivial boundary

In this chapter, our aim is to explore the supersymmetry invariance of a
particular supergravity theory in the presence of a non-trivial boundary
(namely, when the boundary is not thought of as to be set at infinity).
The discussion will be based on the work Gauss that I have done in
collaboration with M. C. Ipinza, P. K. Concha, and E. K. Rodríguez. Some
motivations to our study can be found in Chapter 2 , where he have spent
a few words on the context in which such an analysis can be located. We
have also recalled the geometrical approach for the description of
@xmath pure supergravity on a manifold with boundary, on the same lines
of bdy .

In particular, in Gauss , using the rheonomic (geometric) approach
reviewed in Chapter 2 of this thesis, we have explored the boundary
terms needed in order to restore, in the presence of a non-trivial
boundary, a particular enlarged supersymmetry, known as “ @xmath
-Lorentz”. We have first of all performed the explicit geometric
construction of a bulk Lagrangian based on this enlarged superalgebra (
@xmath -Lorentz superalgebra) and then we have shown that the
supersymmetric extension of a Gauss-Bonnet like term is required in
order to restore the supersymmetry invariance of the theory in the
presence of a non-trivial boundary.

The @xmath -Lorentz (super)algebra was obtained as a tensorial
semisimple extension of the (super)Poincaré algebra Sorokas , and it can
be alternatively derived through an @xmath -expansion (see Chapter 3 for
a review of @xmath -expansion) of the @xmath (super)algebra Fierro2 ;
Salgado ; Fierro1 (see also CRSnew ; Concha:2016hbt and references
therein). The super @xmath -Lorentz algebra can also be viewed as a
deformation of the Maxwell (super)symmetries Durka:2011nf .

Here, let us just open a small parenthesis, spending a few words on the
Maxwell (super)algebras and on their interest in Physics, before
proceeding with our discussion on the @xmath -Lorentz (super)algebra.

The Maxwell algebra is a non-central extension of Poincaré algebra. In
particular, it is obtained by replacing the commutator @xmath of the
Poincaré algebra with @xmath , where @xmath are abelian generators
commuting with translations and behaving like a tensor with respect to
Lorentz transformations. This extension of the Poincaré algebra arises
when considering symmetries of systems evolving in flat Minkowski space
filled in by constant electromagnetic background bacry ; schrader .
Indeed, in order to interpret the Maxwell algebra and the corresponding
Maxwell group, a Maxwell group-invariant particle model was studied on
an extended space-time with coordinates @xmath , where the translations
of @xmath are generated by @xmath galalg ; gomis0 ; gomis1 ;
Bonanos:2008ez ; gibbons . The interaction term described by a
Maxwell-invariant @xmath -form introduces new tensor degrees of freedom,
momenta conjugate to @xmath , and, in the equations of motion, they play
the role of a background electromagnetic field which is constant
on-shell and leads to a closed, Maxwell-invariant @xmath -form.

Subsequently, the Maxwell algebra attracted some attention due to the
fact that its supersymmetrization leads to a new form of @xmath , @xmath
superalgebra, containing the super-Poincaré algebra gomis2 . The so
called super-Maxwell algebra introduced in gomis2 (and, subsequently,
further discussed and deformed in gomis3 ) is a minimal super-extension
of the Maxwell algebra and can be considered as an enlargement of the so
called Green algebra green . In particular, the @xmath , @xmath
super-Maxwell algebra describes the supersymmetries of a generalized
@xmath , @xmath superspace in the presence of a constant, abelian,
supersymmetric field-strength background. Further generalizations of
Maxwell (super)algebras where then derived and studied in the context of
expansion of Lie (super)algebras deAzcarraga:2012zv . Lately, in CR2 the
authors presented the construction of the @xmath pure supergravity
action (plus boundary terms) starting from a minimal Maxwell
superalgebra (which can be derived from @xmath by applying the @xmath
-expansion procedure), showing, in particular, that the @xmath , @xmath
pure supergravity theory can be alternatively obtained as the
MacDowell-Mansouri like action built from the curvatures of this minimal
Maxwell superalgebra. Remarkably, in this context the Maxwell-like
fields do not contribute to the dynamics of the theory, appearing only
in the boundary terms .

Coming back to the non-supersymmetric case, in deAzcarraga:2010sw ,
driven by the fact that it is often thought that the cosmological
constant problem may require an alternative approach to gravity, the
authors presented a geometric framework based on the @xmath gauged
Maxwell algebra, involving six new gauge fields associated with their
abelian generators, and described its application as source of an
additional contribution to the cosmological term in Einstein gravity,
namely as a generalization of the cosmological term. Subsequently, in
Durka:2011nf the authors deformed the @xmath algebra by adding extra
non-abelian @xmath generators, forming, in this way, the negative
cosmological constant counterpart of the Maxwell algebra. Then, they
gauged this algebra and constructed a dynamical model; in the resulting
theory, the gauge fields associated with the Maxwell-like generators
@xmath appear only in topological terms that do not influence dynamical
field equations .

Let us stress that a good candidate for describing the dark energy
corresponds to the cosmological constant Frieman:2008sn ; padme . It is
well known that we can introduce a cosmological term in a gravitational
theory in four space-time dimensions by considering the @xmath algebra.
In particular, one can obtain the supersymmetric extension of gravity
including a cosmological term in a geometric formulation. In this
framework, the supergravity theory is built from the curvatures of the
@xmath superalgebra, and the resulting action is known as the
MacDowell-Mansouri action MM .

In Refs. Salgado ; Concha:2016tms , the authors showed that it is
possible to introduce a generalized cosmological constant term in a
Born-Infeld like gravity action when the so called @xmath -Lorentz
algebra is considered. Lately, in CRSnew the authors showed that,
analogously, the supersymmetric extension of the @xmath -Lorentz algebra
(namely, the @xmath -Lorentz superalgebra we are going to consider)
allows to introduce a generalized supersymmetric cosmological constant
term in a geometric four-dimensional supergravity theory. In particular,
in CRSnew the @xmath , @xmath supergravity action is built only from the
curvatures of the @xmath -Lorentz superalgebra, and it corresponds to a
MacDowell-Mansouri like action MM .

In the following, recalling what we have done in Gauss , we will first
introduce the so called @xmath -Lorentz superalgebra . Then, we shall
present the explicit construction of the bulk Lagrangian in the
rheonomic framework (see Chapter 2 for a review on this geometric
approach). The rheonomic approach to the construction of @xmath
supergravity theories was generalized to the case of theories with
(non-trivial) boundaries in bdy .

Subsequently, we will study the supersymmetry invariance of the
Lagrangian in the presence of a non-trivial boundary . In particular, we
will show that the supersymmetric extension of a Gauss-Bonnet like term
is required in order to restore the supersymmetry invariance of the full
Lagrangian (bulk plus boundary). The supergravity action finally
obtained can be written as a MacDowell-Mansouri like action MM .

### 4.1 The @xmath-Lorentz superalgebra

The @xmath @xmath -Lorentz superalgebra is generated by @xmath , it is
semisimple, and its (anti)commutation relations read as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the charge conjugation matrix and @xmath , @xmath are
Dirac gamma matrices in four dimensions; @xmath and @xmath are the
Lorentz and translations generators, respectively, @xmath ( @xmath ) is
the supersymmetry charge, and @xmath are non-abelian Lorentz-like
generators.

The presence of @xmath implies the introduction of its dual, new,
bosonic @xmath -form field @xmath (which modifies the definition of the
curvatures) in the supergravity theory based on the @xmath -Lorentz
superalgebra.

Notice that the Lorentz-type algebra @xmath is a subalgebra of the above
superalgebra and that the generators @xmath span a non-abelian ideal of
the @xmath -Lorentz superalgebra.

The @xmath -Lorentz superalgebra written above and its extensions to
higher dimensions have been useful to derive General Relativity from
Born-Infeld gravity theories Concha:2013uhq ; Concha1 ; Concha:2014zsa .
Further generalizations of the @xmath -Lorentz superalgebra containing
more than one spinor charge can be found in Ref. CRSnew and they can be
seen as deformations of the minimal Maxwell superalgebras Concha2 ;
gomis2 ; deAzcarraga:2012zv . Let us finally mention that the following
redefinition of the generators: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
provides the so called non-standard Maxwell superalgebra (see, for
example, GenIW ; Lukierski:2010dy ) in the limit @xmath .

### 4.2 @xmath-Lorentz supergravity and rheonomy

In @xmath , @xmath supergravity in superspace, the bosonic @xmath -forms
@xmath ( @xmath ) and the fermionic ones @xmath ( @xmath ) define the
supervielbein basis in superspace.

As we have seen in Chapter 2 , in the rheonomic (geometric) approach to
supergravity in superspace the supersymmetry transformations in
space-time are interpreted as diffeomorphisms in the fermionic
directions of superspace, and they are generated by Lie derivatives with
fermionic parameter @xmath (in the sequel, we will neglect the spinor
index @xmath , for simplicity). In this framework, the supersymmetry
invariance of the theory is satisfied requiring that the Lie derivative
of the Lagrangian vanishes for diffeomorphisms in the fermionic
directions of superspace, that is equation ( 2.165 ) of Chapter 2 ,
which we also report here, for the sake of completeness:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have already discussed in Chapter 2 , the second contribution
@xmath in ( 4.11 ) is a boundary term and does not affect the bulk
result, and a necessary condition for a supergravity Lagrangian turns
out to be the following one:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which corresponds to require supersymmetry invariance in the bulk .
Under the condition ( 4.12 ), the supersymmetry transformation of the
action reduces to @xmath and, when we consider a supergravity theory on
a space-time with boundary at infinity, the fields are asymptotically
vanishing, so that we have @xmath and, then, @xmath .

When the background space-time has, instead, a non-trivial boundary , in
order to get the supersymmetry invariance of the action we need to check
explicitly the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

(modulo an exact differential).

Before analyzing the @xmath , @xmath @xmath -Lorentz supergravity theory
in the presence of a non-trivial boundary, we will study the geometric
construction of the bulk Lagrangian and the corresponding supersymmetry
transformation laws. In the sequel, we first apply the rheonomic
approach to derive the parametrization of Lorentz-like curvatures
involving the extra bosonic @xmath -form @xmath by studying the
different sectors of the on-shell Bianchi identities. Then, we will show
that by constructing in a geometric way the @xmath , @xmath @xmath
-Lorentz supergravity bulk Lagrangian, we end up with a Lagrangian
written in terms of the aforementioned Lorentz-like curvatures: This is
an alternative way to introduce a generalized supersymmetric
cosmological term to supergravity. After that, we will write the
supersymmetry transformation laws and subsequently move to the analysis
of the theory in the presence of a non-trivial boundary.

#### 4.2.1 Curvatures parametrization

Let us consider the following Lorentz-type curvatures in superspace: ¹ ¹
1 Observe that the Lorentz-type curvatures ( 4.14 )-( 4.17 ) can also be
viewed as a “torsion-deformed” version of the super-Poincaré curvatures
in @xmath , in the sense intended in Chapter 5 of this thesis, where we
will analyze some superalgebras related to @xmath supergravity.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
     @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, according with the convention we have adopted in Gauss , @xmath
is the Lorentz covariant exterior derivative. Let us observe that they
can be viewed as an extension involving the @xmath -form @xmath (and the
corresponding super field-strength @xmath ) of the Lorentz-covariant
field-strengths in superspace considered, for example, in bdy .

The supercurvatures ( 4.14 )-( 4.17 ) satisfy the Bianchi identities (
@xmath , where @xmath is the gauge covariant derivative):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
     @xmath      (4.19)
     @xmath      (4.20)
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The most general ansatz for the Lorentz-type curvatures in the
supervielbein basis @xmath of superspace is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
     @xmath      (4.23)
     @xmath      (4.24)
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath (that has the dimension of a mass) is the rescaling
parameter. Setting @xmath ( on-shell condition), we can withdraw some
terms appearing in the above ansatz for the curvatures through the study
of the scaling constraints. On the other hand, the coefficients @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath appearing in the ansatz can be determined
from the study of the various sectors of the Bianchi identities in
superspace ( 4.18 )-( 4.21 ).

One can show that the Bianchi identities in superspace ( 4.18 )-( 4.21 )
are solved by parametrizing (on-shell) the full set of field-strengths
in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
     @xmath      (4.27)
     @xmath      (4.28)
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

In this way, we have found the parametrization of the Lorentz-type
curvatures ( 4.14 )-( 4.17 ) on a basis of superspace. We can now move
to the geometric construction of the bulk @xmath -Lorentz Lagrangian.

#### 4.2.2 Rheonomic construction of the Lagrangian

We can write the most general ansatz for the @xmath -Lorentz Lagrangian
as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the upper index @xmath denotes @xmath -forms; the @xmath ’s are
the super @xmath -Lorentz Lie algebra valued curvatures defined by: ² ²
2 The super @xmath -Lorentz Lie algebra valued curvatures can also be
viewed as a “torsion-deformed” version of the @xmath curvatures, again
in the sense intended in Chapter 5 of this thesis.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
     @xmath      (4.32)
     @xmath      (4.33)
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the bosonic @xmath -form dual to the Lorentz-like
generator @xmath appearing in the @xmath -superalgebra, while @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath are, as usual, the @xmath -forms dual to the generators
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , respectively (see Chapter 2 for details
on this dual formulation involving differential forms). Here we have
used the symbols @xmath and @xmath to denote the @xmath -Lorentz super
field-strengths, in order to avoid confusion with the Lorentz-type ones
( 4.16 ) and ( 4.17 ), denoted by @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

The terms appearing in ( 4.30 ) explicitly read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.35)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.36)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

the @xmath ’s, @xmath ’s, and @xmath ’s being constants.

The curvatures ( 4.31 )-( 4.34 ) are invariant under the rescaling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Additionally, the Lagrangian must scale with @xmath , being @xmath the
scale-weight of the Einstein term. One can prove that the term @xmath in
( 4.37 ) is linear in the curvature. Furthermore, due to the scaling
constraints reasons recalled in Chapter 2 , some of the terms in ( 4.37
) disappear.

Let us remind that a theory in @xmath space includes a cosmological
constant and, since the coefficients appearing in the Lagrangian can be
dimensional objects and scale with negative powers of @xmath , some of
the terms in @xmath can survive the scaling and contribute to the
Lagrangian as total derivatives. However, since we are now just
constructing the bulk Lagrangian, we can neglect them and simply set
@xmath . These terms, however, will be fundamental for the construction
of the boundary contributions needed in order to restore supersymmetry
invariance of the full Lagrangian (bulk plus boundary) in the presence
of a non-trivial space-time boundary.

Let us now analyze the scaling of the terms in ( 4.35 ), whose
coefficients must be redefined as follows in order to give non-vanishing
contributions to the Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way, all the terms in @xmath result to scale as @xmath . Then,
applying the scaling and the parity conservation law to ( 4.35 ) and (
4.36 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we are left with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have also consistently set @xmath . Using the definition of the
@xmath -Lorentz curvatures ( 4.31 )-( 4.34 ) and the gamma matrices
identities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can then write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath (here and in the following, for simplicity, we omit the
lower index @xmath denoting the Lorentz covariant exterior derivative).

We can now determine the coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath through the study of the field equations. In order to find them
out, let us compute the variation of the Lagrangian with respect to the
different fields. The variation of the Lagrangian with respect to the
spin connection @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we see that, if @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath leads to the field
equation for the @xmath -Lorentz supertorsion:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The variation of the Lagrangian with respect to @xmath gives the same
result. This means that the @xmath -form field @xmath does not add any
constraints to the on-shell theory.

On the other hand, by varying the Lagrangian with respect to the
vielbein @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have exploited

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and where we have set @xmath and @xmath , in order to recover the @xmath
-Lorentz curvatures.

Finally, from the variation with respect to the gravitino field @xmath ,
we find the field equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Summarizing, we have found the following values for the coefficients:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have thus completely determined the bulk Lagrangian @xmath of the
theory, which can be written in terms of the Lorentz-type curvatures (
4.14 )-( 4.17 ) as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note the presence in ( 4.51 ) of @xmath , being @xmath the radius of the
asymptotic @xmath geometry; the equations of motion of the Lagrangian
admit an @xmath vacuum solution with cosmological constant (proportional
to @xmath ).

Notice that ( 4.51 ) has been written as a first-order Lagrangian, and
the field equations for the spin connection @xmath implies (up to
boundary terms, which will be considered in a while) the vanishing
on-shell of the supertorsion @xmath defined in equation ( 4.15 ). This
is in agreement with the condition @xmath that we have previously
imposed ³ ³ 3 When this on-shell condition is imposed, we say that we
are working in the second order formalism, where the spin connection
@xmath is torsionless and given in terms of the vielbein of space-time.
in order to find the on-shell curvature parametrizations ( 4.26 )-( 4.29
) by studying the (on-shell) Bianchi identities.

In this way, we have introduced a generalized supersymmetric
cosmological constant term to a supergravity theory in an alternative
way.

Let us also observe that the bosonic @xmath -form field @xmath appears,
through the Lorentz-type curvatures, in the bulk Lagrangian ( 4.51 )
and, as we have previously said, the field equation we obtain from the
variation of the bulk Lagrangian with respect to @xmath is just a double
of the one obtained by varying the Lagrangian with respect to @xmath ,
namely the field equation for the @xmath -Lorentz supertorsion: @xmath .

#### 4.2.3 Supersymmetry transformation laws

The parametrizations ( 4.26 )-( 4.29 ) that we have previously obtained
allow to write the supersymmetry transformation laws in a direct way.
Indeed, in the rheonomic formalism, the transformations on space-time
are given by (see Chapter 2 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ; then, restricting to supersymmetry transformations, we
have @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

which provide the following supersymmetry transformation laws:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
     @xmath      (4.55)
     @xmath      (4.56)
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under these supersymmetry transformations of the fields on space-time,
the space-time Lagrangian previously introduced results to be invariant
up to boundary terms. As we have already mentioned, in the case in which
the space-time background has a non-trivial boundary we have to check
explicitly the condition ( 4.13 ).

### 4.3 Including boundary (topological) terms

In the following, on the same lines of bdy , we analyze the
supersymmetry invariance of the Lagrangian in the presence of a
non-trivial space-time boundary and, in particular, we present the
explicit boundary terms required to recover the supersymmetry invariance
of the full Lagrangian (bulk plus boundary).

Let us consider the bulk Lagrangian ( 4.51 ), which we report here for
completeness:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The supersymmetry invariance in the bulk is satisfied on-shell (where
@xmath ). Nevertheless, for this theory the boundary invariance of the
Lagrangian under supersymmetry is not trivially satisfied, and the
condition ( 4.13 ) has to be checked in an explicit way (see Chapter 2
for details). In fact, we find that, if the fields do not asymptotically
vanish at the boundary, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to restore the supersymmetry invariance of the theory, we must
provide a more subtle approach. In particular, it is possible to modify
the bulk Lagrangian by adding boundary (topological) terms , which do
not alter the bulk Lagrangian and only affect the boundary Lagrangian,
so that the condition ( 4.11 ), which is the condition for the
supersymmetry invariance of the theory in our geometric framework, is
still satisfied.

The only possible boundary contributions (topological @xmath -forms)
that are compatible with parity, Lorentz-like invariance, and @xmath
supersymmetry are the following ones:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath given
by equations ( 4.14 ) and ( 4.16 ), respectively. Note that @xmath and
@xmath can be thought as related to a Lorentz-like generator @xmath (see
equations ( 4.1 )-( 4.10 )).

The boundary terms written above correspond to the following boundary
Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Observe that the structure of a supersymmetric Gauss-Bonnet like term
appears.

Let us then consider the following “full” Lagrangian (bulk plus
boundary):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Due to the @xmath -homogeneous scaling of the Lagrangian, we have that
the coefficients @xmath and @xmath must be proportional to @xmath and
@xmath , respectively.

Let us now study the conditions under which the full Lagrangian ( 4.3 )
is invariant under supersymmetry.

As we have previously pointed out, the supersymmetry invariance of the
full Lagrangian @xmath requires

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, since the boundary terms that we have introduced, namely ( 4.60 )
and ( 4.61 ), are total differentials, the condition for supersymmetry
in the bulk, that is @xmath , is trivially satisfied. Thus, the
supersymmetry invariance of the full Lagrangian @xmath just requires to
verify that, for a suitable choice of @xmath and @xmath , the condition
@xmath (modulo an exact differential) holds on the boundary , namely
@xmath . We have:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In general, this is not zero, but its projection on the boundary should
be zero . Indeed, in the presence of a boundary, the field equations in
superspace for the Lagrangian ( 4.3 ) acquire non-trivial boundary
contributions, that result in the following constraints (which hold on
the boundary):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can thus see that the supercurvatures on the boundary are not
dynamical, but fixed to constant values in the anholonomic basis of the
bosonic and fermionic vielbein (analogously to what was found in Ref.
bdy ). Then, upon use of ( 4.66 ), on the boundary we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Subsequently, using the Fierz identity @xmath , ⁴ ⁴ 4 The other useful
Fierz identity for the study of the @xmath , @xmath theory is @xmath .
we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

After that, using the gamma matrices identity ( 4.42 ), we find that
@xmath if the following relation between the coefficients @xmath and
@xmath holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving the above equation for @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Interestingly, by setting the square root to zero, which implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

we recover the following @xmath -form supercurvatures:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
     @xmath      (4.73)
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

which reproduce the @xmath -Lorentz curvatures with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the full Lagrangian ( 4.3 ), written in terms of the @xmath
-form supercurvatures ( 4.72 ) and ( 4.73 ), can be recast as a
MacDowell-Mansouri like form MM , that is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose boundary term corresponds to a supersymmetric Gauss-Bonnet like
term:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We have thus shown that this topological Gauss-Bonnet like term allows
to recover the supersymmetry invariance of the (on-shell) theory in the
presence of a non-trivial boundary. As we have already mentioned, the
same phenomenon occurs in pure gravity, where the Gauss-Bonnet term
ensures the invariance of the Lagrangian in the presence of a
non-trivial space-time boundary.

The supersymmetric extension of the Gauss-Bonnet term was also
introduced in bdy in order to restore the supersymmetry invariance of
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath supergravities in the presence of a
non-trivial boundary.

Notice that, in terms of the supercurvatures ( 4.72 ) and ( 4.73 ), the
boundary conditions on the field-strengths ( 4.66 ) take the following
simple form: @xmath and @xmath . This means that the linear combination
@xmath of the @xmath -Lorentz supercurvatures and the @xmath -Lorentz
supercurvature @xmath vanish at the boundary (analogously to what was
found in Ref. bdy in the case of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath
supergravities).

Concerning the bulk Lagrangian, let us observe that it reproduces the
generalized supersymmetric cosmological terms presented in CRSnew and
that it corresponds to a supersymmetric extension of the results found
in Salgado ; deAzcarraga:2010sw .

Summarizing our results, in this chapter (following Gauss ) we have
presented the explicit construction of the @xmath , @xmath @xmath
-Lorentz supergravity bulk Lagragian in the rheonomic framework. In
particular, we have shown an alternative way to introduce a generalized
supersymmetric cosmological term to supergravity. Subsequently, we have
studied the supersymmetry invariance of the Lagrangian in the presence
of a non-trivial boundary, and we have found that the supersymmetric
extension of a Gauss-Bonnet like term is required in order to restore
the supersymmetry invariance of the full Lagrangian (bulk plus
boundary).

As we have already said in Chapter 2 , the inclusion of boundary terms
has proved to be fundamental for the study of the so called @xmath /CFT
duality. In this context, as far as the metric field is concerned, the
bulk metric is divergent near the boundary; however, these divergences
can be successfully eliminated through a procedure called “holographic
renormalization” (see, for example, Ref. Skenderis:2002wp ), with the
inclusion of appropriate counterterms at the boundary. In this scenario,
we argue that the presence in the boundary of the @xmath fields
appearing in our model could somehow play a role in allowing the
regularization of the action in the holographic renormalization
language.

## Chapter 5 Hidden gauge structure of Free Differential Algebras

In this chapter, I will discuss the core of my PhD research, basing my
discussion on the works Hidden and Malg that I have done in
collaboration with L. Andrianopoli and R. D’Auria. An introduction to
the physical context and a detailed review of the hidden superalgebra
underlying @xmath supergravity can be found in Section 2.5 of Chapter 2
.

As shown in Ref. D'AuriaFre and recalled in Chapter 2 , the structure of
the full superalgebra hidden in the superymmetric FDA describing @xmath
supergravity also requires, for being equivalent to the FDA in
superspace, the presence of a fermionic nilpotent charge , that has been
named @xmath . This fact is fully general, and a hidden superalgebra
underlying the supersymmetric FDA (containing, at least, one nilpotent
fermionic generator) can be constructed for any supergravity theory in
the presence of antisymmetric tensor fields.

As we have already mentioned in Chapter 2 , the role of the extra,
nilpotent, fermionic generator @xmath and its physical meaning was much
less investigated with respect to that of the bosonic almost-central
charges.

In the present chapter, following the work Hidden , we further analyze
the superalgebra hidden in all the supersymmetric FDAs and clarify the
role played by its generators (mainly, the extra, nilpotent, fermionic
ones). In particular, we will discuss in detail the gauge structure of
the supersymmetric @xmath FDA in relation to its hidden gauge
superalgebra, focusing on the role played by the nilpotent generator
@xmath . Then, we will consider minimal @xmath supergravity in @xmath in
order to test the universality of the construction and to investigate
possible extensions of the underlying superalgebra of D'AuriaFre (as we
have already said in Chapter 2 , we refer to this latter superalgebra as
“DF-algebra”).

The FDA of the minimal @xmath , @xmath supergravity theory is
particularly rich, since it includes, besides a triplet of gauge vectors
@xmath , also a @xmath -form @xmath , a @xmath -form @xmath (related to
@xmath by Hodge duality of the corresponding field-strengths), and a
triplet of @xmath -forms @xmath (related to @xmath by Hodge duality of
the corresponding field-strengths). This theory can be obtained by
dimensional reduction, on a four-dimensional compact manifold,
preserving only half of the supersymmetries, from @xmath supergravity.
We will give the parametrization in terms of @xmath -forms of the
mutually non-local fields @xmath and @xmath , obtaining, in this way,
the corresponding superalgebra hidden in the supersymmetric @xmath FDA.

We will also consider the dimensional reduction of the @xmath FDA to the
@xmath one on an orbifold @xmath , showing the conditions under which
the @xmath theory can be obtained by dimensional reduction of the
eleven-dimensional one of Section 2.5 of Chapter 2 .

We will see that, in general, one needs more than one nilpotent
fermionic generator to construct the fully extended superalgebra hidden
in the supersymmetric FDA (this will be the case, for example, of the
minimal supersymmetric @xmath FDA, where we will find that two nilpotent
fermionic generators are required for the equivalence of the hidden
superalgebra to the FDA). Actually, as we have subsequently shown in
Malg , also the @xmath case admits the presence of (at least) two extra,
nilpotent, fermionic generators, in the sense that the @xmath -form
@xmath dual to the nilpotent fermionic generator @xmath can be parted
into two contributions, which close separately (that is, which have two
different integrability conditions). We will recall in some detail this
aspect in Section 5.4 of the current chapter.

The main result of Hidden has been to disclose the physical
interpretation of the fermionic hidden generators: As we will recall and
review in detail in the following, they have a cohomological meaning. In
particular, to clarify the crucial role played by the nilpotent hidden
fermionic generator(s), we will consider a singular limit, where the
associated spinor @xmath -form(s) goes to zero. In this limit, the
unphysical degrees of freedom get mixed with the physical directions of
the superspace, and all the generators of the hidden superalgebra act as
generators of external diffeomorphisms. On the contrary, in the presence
of the spinor @xmath -form(s), the hidden supergroup acquires a
principal fiber bundle structure , allowing to separate in a dynamical
way the physical directions of superspace, generated by the
supervielbein @xmath , from the non-physical ones, such that one
recovers the gauge invariance of the FDA.

On the other hand, considering the bosonic hidden generators of the
hidden algebra (we will call @xmath the corresponding tangent space
directions of the hidden group manifold), we will show that they are
associated with internal diffeomorphisms of the supersymmetric FDA in
@xmath dimensions. More precisely, once a @xmath -form @xmath of the FDA
is parametrized in terms of the hidden @xmath -forms, the contraction of
@xmath along a generic tangent vector @xmath gives a @xmath -form gauge
parameter, and the Lie derivative of the FDA along a tangent vector
@xmath gives a gauge transformation leaving the FDA invariant.

This construction is not limited to the supergravity theories we have
considered in Hidden . In particular, the FDA of @xmath Type IIA
supergravity, which naturally descends from the @xmath theory, includes
a @xmath -form field @xmath (also appearing in all superstring-related
supergravities), which has a natural understanding in terms of the
antisymmetric @xmath -form @xmath of @xmath supergravity. The
corresponding hidden bosonic @xmath -form field, @xmath , is associated
with a charge @xmath which carries a Lorentz index. In the fully
extended hidden superalgebra in any space-time dimension @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath appear on the same footing, and the action of the hidden
superalgebra includes automorphisms interchanging them. When some of the
space-time directions are compactified on circles, these automorphisms
are associated with T-duality transformations interchanging momentum
with winding in the compact directions.

The structure described above appears to be strongly related to the one
of the generalized geometry framework Hitchin:2004ut ; Gualtieri:2003dx
; Hull:2005hk ; Dabholkar:2005ve ; Grana:2008yw and to its extensions to
@xmath -theory Hull:2007zu ; Pacheco:2008ps ; Coimbra:2012af , Double
Field Theory (DFT) Hull:2009mi ; lust ; Hull:2009zb ; Hohm:2010jy ;
Hohm:2010pp ; Hull:2014mxa , and Exceptional Field Theory (EFT)
Hohm:2013pua ; Hohm:2013uia ; Hohm:2014qga . Thus, we expect that our
approach and formalism could be useful in these contexts.

In Section 5.4 of this chapter, we will clarify the relations occurring
among the @xmath superalgebra, the @xmath -algebra, and the DF-algebra.
In this context, we will also further discuss on the crucial role played
by the @xmath -form spinor @xmath for the @xmath -form cohomology of the
@xmath theory on superspace (basing our discussion on the work Malg ).

We will limit ourselves to consider FDAs and underlying superalgebras
corresponding to the ground state of supergravity theories, that is the
“vacuum” (defined by the condition that all the supercurvatures vanish).
We will not consider the full dynamical content of the theories (out of
the vacuum); some progress on this topic were obtained in Bandos:2005 .

Our notations, conventions, and some technical details, can be found in
Appendix B (as well as in Ref. Hidden ).

### 5.1 FDA gauge structure and @xmath supergravity

As we have already said in Chapter 2 , the action of @xmath supergravity
was first constructed in Cremmer . The theory has a field content given
by the metric @xmath , a @xmath -index antisymmetric tensor @xmath (
@xmath ), and a single Majorana gravitino @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 We denote by
capital case @xmath the gravitino in eleven dimensions.

An important task to accomplish in the context of @xmath supergravity
was the identification of the supergroup underlying the theory. The
authors of Cremmer proposed @xmath as the most likely candidate.
However, the field @xmath cannot be interpreted as the potential of a
generator in a supergroup.

The structure of this same theory was reconsidered in D'AuriaFre , in
the (supersymmetric) FDAs framework, using the superspace geometric
approach (namely, in its dual Maurer-Cartan formulation), and the
existence of a superalgebra underlying the @xmath supergravity theory
was presented for the first time (for details, see the review in Chapter
2 ).

The aim of this section is to analyze in detail the hidden gauge
structure of the FDA describing @xmath supergravity, in the case in
which the exterior @xmath -forms are parametrized in terms of the hidden
@xmath -forms @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (plus, as obvious, the
supervielbein). In particular, we will investigate the conditions under
which the gauge invariance of the FDA is realized once @xmath is
expressed in terms of hidden @xmath -forms (see the theoretical
background in Chapter 2 ).

Let us start by recalling and discussing some aspects of the
construction of @xmath supergravity in the FDA framework, playing
particular attention to its structure once the parametrization in terms
of @xmath -forms has been implemented.

In the case of @xmath supergravity, the first step of the construction
outlined in Section 2.4 of Chapter 2 is the introduction of the @xmath
-relative @xmath -cocycle

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which allows to define the 3-form @xmath that appears in the FDA
satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

(that is equation ( 2.183 ) of Chapter 2 ). Including this @xmath -form
@xmath in the basis of the relative cohomology of the supersymmetric
FDA, we can perform a second step and construct a new cocycle of order
seven (allowing the introduction of the @xmath -form @xmath ), namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

(that is equation ( 2.184 ) of Chapter 2 ). The fact that the two
cochains ( 5.2 ) and ( 5.4 ) are indeed cocycles is due to Fierz
identities in @xmath (see Section B.1 of Appendix B ). As we can see,
the second step defined above requires to enlarge the CE-relative
cohomolgy to include the @xmath -form @xmath .

We wish to remark that the inclusion of a new @xmath -form, which is a
gauge potential enjoying a gauge freedom, in the basis of the @xmath
-relative CE-cohomology of the FDA, is physically meaningful only if the
whole of the FDA is gauge invariant ; this, in particular, requires that
the non-physical degrees of freedom in @xmath and @xmath are projected
out from the FDA.

Let us now consider the supersymmetric FDA describing @xmath
supergravity parametrized in terms of @xmath -forms (see Section 2.5 of
Chapter 2 for details). In this set up, the symmetry structure is based
on the hidden supergroup manifold, that we call @xmath , which extends
the super-Poincaré Lie group to include the extra hidden directions
associated with the higher @xmath -forms.

The hidden supergroup @xmath has the structure of a principal fiber
bundle @xmath , where @xmath corresponds to superspace; in this case,
the fiber @xmath includes, besides the Lorentz transformations, also the
hidden generators. More explicitly, let us now rewrite the hidden Lie
superalgebra @xmath associated with @xmath as @xmath , and decompose
@xmath , so that the generators @xmath are grouped in the following way:
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . ² ² 2 Here and in the following,
with an abuse of notation, we will use for the cotangent space of the
group manifold @xmath , spanned by the @xmath -forms @xmath , the same
symbols defined above for the tangent space of @xmath , spanned by the
vector fields @xmath . The subalgebra @xmath defines an abelian ideal of
@xmath .

The physical condition under which the CE-cohomology is restricted to
the @xmath -relative CE-cohomology corresponds now to request the FDA to
be described in terms of @xmath -form fields living on @xmath . This
implies that the hidden @xmath -forms in @xmath and @xmath (related to
the tangent space sectors @xmath and @xmath , respectively), necessary
for the parametrization of @xmath in terms of @xmath -forms, do not
appear in @xmath (see equation ( 5.2 )). As we will see in a while, the
presence of the spinor @xmath -form @xmath is exactly what makes it
possible to express @xmath in terms of the relative cohomology only
(that is to say, just in terms of the supervielbein).

#### 5.1.1 Analysis of the gauge transformations

Taking into account the hidden @xmath superalgebra reviewed in Chapter 2
, we now consider in detail the relation between the FDA gauge
transformations and those of its hidden supergroup @xmath .

The @xmath supersymmetric FDA given in equations ( 2.180 )-( 2.184 ) of
Chapter 2 is invariant under the gauge transformations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

generated by the arbitrary forms @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath - and @xmath
-form, respectively).

On the other hand, the bosonic hidden @xmath -forms in @xmath are
abelian gauge fields, whose gauge transformations read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

being @xmath and @xmath arbitrary Lorentz-valued scalar functions (
@xmath -forms).

Now, the requirement that @xmath , parametrized in terms of @xmath
-forms, transforms as written in ( 5.5 ) under the gauge transformations
( 5.6 ) of the hidden @xmath -forms, implies the (bosonic) gauge
transformation of @xmath to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

consistently with the condition @xmath .

In this case, it turns out that the corresponding @xmath -form gauge
parameter of @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Then, considering also the gauge transformation of the spinor @xmath
-form @xmath generated by the tangent vector in @xmath , overall we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have introduced the infinitesimal spinor parameter @xmath .

We can then write the @xmath -form gauge parameter @xmath corresponding
to the transformation in @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the sequel, we will show that all the diffeomorphisms in the hidden
supergroup @xmath , generated by Lie derivatives, are invariances of the
FDA, the ones in the fiber @xmath directions being associated with a
particular form of the gauge parameters of the FDA gauge transformations
( 5.5 ).

To this aim, let us first show that equation ( 5.8 ) can be rewritten in
a rather simple way, using the contraction operator in the hidden Lie
superalgebra @xmath associated with @xmath . Defining the tangent vector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

a gauge transformation leaving the @xmath FDA invariant is recovered,
once @xmath is parametrized in terms of @xmath -forms, if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where with @xmath we have denoted the contraction operator. ³ ³ 3 This
result is true as a consequence of the set of relations in ( B.15 ) of
Appendix B obeyed by the coefficients of the @xmath -forms
parametrization of @xmath given in ( 2.188 ) of Chapter 2 , that is to
say, under the same conditions required by supersymmetry for the
consistency of the parametrization ( 2.188 ). Introducing the Lie
derivative @xmath , we find that the corresponding gauge transformation
of @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

(gauge invariance and diffeomorphisms coincides in the group Lie
algebra). Then, the equality @xmath follows from the fact that @xmath ,
as given in equation ( 2.183 ) of Chapter 2 , is invariant under
transformations generated by @xmath corresponding to the gauge
invariance of the supervielbein. ⁴ ⁴ 4 This is in agreement with the
fact that the right-hand side of @xmath is in the @xmath -relative
CE-cohomology.

Concerning the @xmath -form @xmath , to recover the general gauge
transformation of @xmath in terms of the hidden algebra would require
the knowledge of its explicit parametrization in terms of @xmath -forms,
which, at the moment, we ignore (some work is in progress on this
topic). However, if we assume its behavior under gauge transformations
to be analogous to the one of the @xmath -form @xmath , namely if we
require

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

(where @xmath is intended as parametrized in terms of @xmath -forms),
then, a simple computation gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which indeed reproduces equation ( 5.5 ). The assumption ( 5.14 ) will
be corroborated by the analogous computation we will do for the
seven-dimensional model we will consider later. Indeed, in that case we
can use, together with the explicit parametrization of @xmath , also the
one of its Hodge dual-related @xmath (appearing in the dimensional
reduction of the eleven-dimensional @xmath -form @xmath ), and, as we
will see, the assumption ( 5.14 ) can be fully justified if we think of
@xmath as a remnant of @xmath in the dimensional reduction. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Notice
that the gauge transformations ( 5.13 ) and ( 5.15 ) are not fully
general, since the corresponding gauge parameters are not (they are
indeed restricted to the ones satisfying ( 5.12 ) and ( 5.14 )).

We still have to consider the gauge transformations generated by the
other elements of @xmath . Due to the fact that the Lorentz
transformations, belonging to @xmath , are not effective on the FDA (all
the higher @xmath -forms being Lorentz invariant), this analysis reduces
to consider the transformations induced by the tangent vector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, for the spinor @xmath -form @xmath dual to @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where in the second line, after integration by parts, we have used the
following relation on the parameters @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which derives from @xmath -gravitinos Fierz identities (see Appendix B
for details). Note that, indeed, equation ( 5.1.1 ) reproduces @xmath ,
in terms of @xmath defined in equation ( 5.10 ).

#### 5.1.2 Role of the nilpotent fermionic generator @xmath

In deriving the gauge transformations leaving invariant the
supersymmetric FDA, in terms of hidden @xmath -forms, a crucial role is
played by the spinor @xmath -form @xmath , dual to the nilpotent
generator @xmath . Indeed, besides it is required for the equivalence of
the hidden superalgebra to the FDA, it also guarantees the gauge
invariance of the supersymmetric FDA, due to its non-trivial gauge
transformation ( 5.7 ).

Actually, we can think of @xmath as a spinor @xmath -form playing the
role of an intertwining field between the base superspace and the fiber
@xmath of the principal fiber bundle corresponding to the hidden
supergroup manifold @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 This can also be understood from the
covariant differential @xmath , given in equation ( 2.186 ) of Chapter 2
, which is parametrized not only in terms of the supervielbein (as it
happens for all the fields of the FDA and for @xmath and @xmath , see
the equations in ( 2.185 ) of Chapter 2 ), but also in terms of the
gauge fields in @xmath , as we can see in equation ( 2.195 ). The spinor
@xmath -form @xmath has a cohomological meaning .

A clarifying example corresponds to considering the singular limit
@xmath , so that its dual generator @xmath can be dropped out from the
hidden superalgebra. This limit can be obtained, in its simplest form,
by redefining the coefficients appearing in the parametrization of
@xmath (see Chapter 2 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and then taking the limit @xmath . In this way, we find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

while @xmath in this limit.

Now, recalling the parametrization ( 2.188 ) of @xmath , we can see
that, setting @xmath , the following finite limit can be obtained for
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that its differential gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now observe that the parametrization ( 5.22 ) does not reproduce
the sector of the FDA given in ( 2.183 ) of Chapter 2 , being in fact
obtained by a singular limit; however, this different FDA is based on
the same hidden superalgebra @xmath , where now the cocycles are in the
@xmath -relative CE-cohomology. Indeed, @xmath is now expanded on a
basis of the enlarged superspace @xmath , which includes, besides the
supervielbein, also the bosonic hidden @xmath -form @xmath .

The case where all the @xmath ’s are proportional to the same power of
@xmath can be done in an analogous way: It again requires @xmath and
leads to an @xmath with all @xmath , @xmath . In this case, @xmath is
expanded on a basis of @xmath that also includes the @xmath -form @xmath
.

Let us mention that a singular limit of the parametrization of @xmath
was already considered by the authors of Bandos:2004xw . ⁷ ⁷ 7 More
precisely, the singular limit considered in Ref. Bandos:2004xw is given
in terms of a parameter @xmath and the relation between their parameter
and our ones is @xmath , being @xmath . In particular, in Bandos:2004xw
the authors were studying the description of the hidden superalgebra as
an expansion of @xmath . They observed that a singular limit exists
(which includes our limit as a special case), such that the
authomorphism group of the FDA is enlarged from what we have called
@xmath to @xmath , but where the trivialization of the FDA in terms of
an explicit @xmath , written in terms of @xmath -forms, breaks down.
From the analysis we have carried on above, we can see that, at least
for the restriction of the limit considered here, what actually breaks
down is the trivialization of the FDA on ordinary superspace , while a
trivialization on the enlarged superspace @xmath is still possible.

Notice that, however, in this latter case, the gauge invariance of the
new FDA requires that @xmath (and, analogously, @xmath ) is not a gauge
field anymore. Correspondingly, @xmath does not enjoy gauge freedom, all
of its degrees of freedom propagating in @xmath . @xmath may then be
interpreted as a gauge-fixed form of @xmath . Indeed, it is precisely
the gauge transformation of @xmath , given in equation ( 5.7 ), that
guarantees the gauge transformation of @xmath to be the one written in (
5.5 ); actually, this relies on the fact that @xmath .

Note that the transformation ( 5.6 ), even if it is not a gauge
transformation in this limit case, still generates a diffeomorphism
leaving invariant the new FDA (that is indeed based on the same
supergroup @xmath ), since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can now associate with the transformations generated by the tangent
vector @xmath (introduced in ( 5.16 )), in the particular case @xmath ,
a gauge transformation bringing @xmath to @xmath and, more generally, a
gauge transformation such that @xmath .

We can then conclude that the role of the extra, nilpotent, fermionic
generator amounts to require the hidden @xmath -forms of the Lie
superalgebra to be true gauge fields living on the fiber @xmath of the
associated principal fiber bundle @xmath . ⁸ ⁸ 8 Let us observe that
this is equivalent to require the construction of the FDA starting from
the Lie algebra associated with the supergroup @xmath to be done using
the @xmath -relative CE-cohomology of the hidden superalgebra @xmath .
In this sense, we can say that the behavior of the extra fermionic
generator has some analogy with the one of a BRST ghost ⁹ ⁹ 9 BRST
symmetry, from Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin, may be taken to be the basic
invariance of quantum mechanics of a geometrical system. It contains
(and extends) the concept of gauge invariance and, in its set up, the
“original fields” get mixed with (non-physical) fields called “ghosts”.
For an interesting and physically clear introduction to BRST symmetry
see, for example, Ref. BRSTlect . , since it guarantees that only the
physical degrees of freedom of the exterior forms appear in the
supersymmetric FDA in a “dynamical” way. This amounts to say that, once
the superspace is enlarged to @xmath , in the presence of @xmath (and,
more generally, of a non empty @xmath ) no explicit constraint has to be
imposed on the fields, since the non-physical degrees of freedom of the
fields in @xmath and in @xmath transform into each other and do not
contribute to the FDA.

Figure 5.1 offers a figurative tangent space description of the hidden
gauge structure of the FDA (in the @xmath case), in which we can
“visualize” what has been stated above about the role of the extra,
nilpotent, fermionic generator @xmath .

### 5.2 Hidden gauge algebra of the @xmath, @xmath Fda

The same procedure explained in the eleven-dimensional case can be
applied to lower-dimensional supergravity theories containing @xmath
-forms ( @xmath ), in order to associate to any such theory a hidden Lie
superalgebra containing, as a subalgebra, the super-Poincaré algebra. In
particular, since in the theory in eleven dimensions the closure of the
supersymmetric FDA and of the corresponding hidden superalgebra are
strictly related to @xmath -gravitinos Fierz identities, the same must
happen in any lower dimensions.

As an interesting example, in Hidden we have considered the minimal
@xmath , @xmath theory (not coupled to matter), in which the hidden
structure turned out to be particularly rich since, in its most general
form, it includes two nilpotent fermionic generators. In this section,
we recall this @xmath example in details.

Let us start by giving the physical content of the @xmath supergravity
theory: It is given by the vielbein @xmath -form @xmath , a triplet of
vectors @xmath -forms @xmath ( @xmath ), a @xmath -form @xmath , and a
gravitino @xmath -form Dirac spinor, which we describe as a couple of
@xmath -components spin- @xmath pseudo-Majorana fields @xmath ( @xmath )
satisfying the reality condition @xmath . ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The charge
conjugation matrix in @xmath can always be chosen to be @xmath . Here
and in the following, we will denote by lower case @xmath the gravitino
in seven dimensions, in order to avoid confusion with the capital case
@xmath denoting the gravitino field in eleven dimensions.

The interacting minimal @xmath theory was studied, at the Lagrangian
level, in many works Minimal ; bershoffo1 ; Townsend:1983kk ;
SalamSezgin . In particular, in Townsend:1983kk the authors observed
that one can trade the @xmath -form formulation of the theory by a
formulation in terms of a @xmath -form, @xmath , the two being related
by Hodge duality of the corresponding field-strengths on space-time and
giving rise to different Lagrangians. From our point of view, where we
consider the FDA rather than a Lagrangian description, both the @xmath
and the @xmath -form are required for a fully general formulation,
together with a triplet of @xmath -forms, @xmath , whose field-strengths
are Hodge dual to the gauge vectors @xmath .

One of the main reasons for choosing the minimal @xmath model is related
to the fact that, in this case, we will be able to find an explicit
parametrization in terms of @xmath -forms of both @xmath and @xmath . In
this case, as we will see, a general parametrization requires the
presence of two independent hidden spinor @xmath -forms . Since @xmath
in @xmath can be obtained through dimensional reduction of @xmath in the
@xmath FDA, this investigation also sheds some light on the extension of
the hidden superalgebra of @xmath supergravity when also the
parametrization of @xmath , still unknown, would be considered (see
Section 5.3 for further details on this aspect).

#### 5.2.1 @xmath FDA in terms of @xmath-forms

We now introduce the supersymmetric FDA on which the minimal @xmath ,
@xmath supergravity theory is based and we then write the
parametrization of its @xmath and @xmath -form in terms of @xmath
-forms, with the aim of finding the hidden superalgebra underlying this
@xmath model Hidden .

The @xmath FDA (in the vacuum) is the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
     @xmath      (5.26)
     @xmath      (5.27)
     @xmath      (5.28)
     @xmath      (5.29)
     @xmath      (5.30)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now @xmath denotes the Lorentz-covariant differential in seven
dimensions ( @xmath , according with the convention adopted in Hidden ;
Malg ; D'AuriaFre ) and @xmath are the usual Pauli matrices. The @xmath
-closure of this FDA relies on the Fierz identities relating @xmath -
and @xmath -gravitinos currents in @xmath (see Appendix B ).

In order to find the hidden superalgebra underlying the theory, let us
introduce the following set of bosonic Lorentz-indexed @xmath -forms:
@xmath , which is associated with @xmath , @xmath , associated with
@xmath , and @xmath , that is associated with @xmath ; we require their
Maurer-Cartan equations to be the following ones:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose integrability conditions are automatically satisfied since @xmath
. The arbitrary choice of the coefficients in the right-hand side fixes
the normalization of the bosonic @xmath -forms @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . We choose @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

The bosonic @xmath - and @xmath -form ( @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively) will be parametrized in terms of the @xmath -forms @xmath
, @xmath (both of them already present in the FDA), @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath (new, hidden, bosonic @xmath -forms). Furthermore, as we are
going to show, the consistency of their parametrizations also requires
the presence of two nilpotent fermionic @xmath -forms , @xmath in the
parametrization of @xmath and @xmath in that of @xmath , whose covariant
derivatives respectively satisfy:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.33)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s will be structure constants of the
hidden superalgebra and they are constrained to satisfy (from the
integrability of @xmath and @xmath and the use of the Fierz identities
in @xmath ) the following equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The consistency of the parametrizations of @xmath and @xmath amounts to
require that their differential, as given in equations ( 5.29 ) and (
5.30 ), respectively, must be reproduced by the differential of their
parametrizations. This is analogous to what happens in @xmath ; in that
case, however, only the parametrization of the @xmath -form was
considered, and its closure required (besides precise values of the
coefficients) the presence of just one spinor @xmath -form.

Let us now explicitly write the general ansatz for the parametrization
of @xmath and @xmath in terms of the set of @xmath -forms @xmath . ¹¹ ¹¹
11 We should, in principle, also consider the parametrization of the
@xmath -form @xmath . However, this deserves further investigation (work
in progress). It reads:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The sets of coefficients @xmath and @xmath are determined by requiring
that the parametrizations ( 5.37 ) and ( 5.38 ) satisfy the equations (
5.29 ) and ( 5.30 ) of the FDA. The reader can find their explicit (and
rather long) expression in the appendices of Ref. Hidden . In Hidden we
have fixed the normalization of the spinor @xmath -forms @xmath and
@xmath in order to obtain a simple expression. In particular, we have
chosen the normalization of @xmath by imposing, in the parametrization
of @xmath , @xmath . In this way, we have obtained @xmath , where, with
the normalization chosen for the bosonic @xmath -forms, we have set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

After that, we have chosen @xmath , which is a valid normalization in
all cases where @xmath , that is to say, for @xmath or @xmath .
Actually, by looking at the general solution for the parameters given in
the appendices of Hidden , one can see that to choose @xmath and @xmath
are not restrictive assumptions, since the cases @xmath and/or @xmath
would correspond to singular limits where the gauge structure of the
supersymmetric FDA breaks down (this is strictly analogous to what we
have discussed for the @xmath case, as far as the gauge structure of the
theory is concerned). With the above normalizations, in Hidden we have
obtained:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s are constrained by equation ( 5.36 ).

Let us observe that the combination @xmath could be used, instead of
@xmath , in the parametrization of @xmath ; this redefinition simplifies
the expression of @xmath and, in particular, the term @xmath vanishes.

#### 5.2.2 The hidden superalgebra in @xmath

We now write, analogously to what was done in D'AuriaFre in the @xmath
case, the @xmath hidden superalgebra in terms of the generators @xmath
dual to the set of @xmath -forms @xmath of the @xmath theory. In the
present case, the set of @xmath -forms is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the set of (dual) generators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mappings between the @xmath -forms and the generators can be found
in Hidden . The (anti)commutators of the superalgebra (besides those of
the Poincaré Lie algebra) can then be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
     @xmath      (5.45)
     @xmath      (5.46)
     @xmath      (5.47)
     @xmath      (5.48)
     @xmath      (5.49)
     @xmath      (5.50)
     @xmath      (5.51)
     @xmath      (5.52)
     @xmath      (5.53)
     @xmath      (5.54)
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

All the other possible (anti)commutators (except, obviously, the
Poincaré part) vanish. This hidden superalgebra includes all the @xmath
-forms associated with the @xmath FDA once the latter is extended to
include all the couples of Hodge dual field-strengths.

We can see that two independent fermionic generators are necessary if we
want to include in the hidden superalgebra description of the FDA
involving both @xmath and @xmath also the @xmath -forms @xmath and
@xmath . We did not consider in the above description the @xmath -form
@xmath (associated with the non-dynamical volume form @xmath ).

##### Lagrangian subalgebras

Let us now consider and discuss two relevant subalgebras of the general
hidden superalgebra presented above, where only one nilpotent fermionic
generator appears. In Hidden we called them “electric hidden
subalgebras” or “Lagrangian subalgebras”, because of their role in the
construction of the Lagrangian, as we will clarify in the following.

The first subalgebra is the one where @xmath . This corresponds to
consider a FDA including both @xmath and @xmath . However, in this case,
the corresponding spinor @xmath -form appears in the parametrizations (
5.37 ) and ( 5.38 ), that is to say @xmath , and the Maurer-Cartan
equations ( 5.33 ) and ( 5.34 ) coincide, implying @xmath . In
particular, we have @xmath , since @xmath . This implies, on the set of
@xmath given in ( 5.41 ), that all the contributions in @xmath and
@xmath in the parametrization of @xmath disappear; then, the
corresponding generators @xmath and @xmath decouple and can be set to
zero. The resulting subalgebra is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
     @xmath      (5.57)
     @xmath      (5.58)
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us observe that the same subalgebra can be obtained by truncating
the hidden superalgebra to the subalgebra where @xmath or, equivalently,
@xmath . However, recalling the discussion about the role of the
nilpotent fermionic generators for the consistency of the gauge
structure of the FDA (referring, in particular, to the singular limit
@xmath ) ¹² ¹² 12 Actually, the discussion we have done concerned the
@xmath theory. Analogous considerations can be worked out for the @xmath
case, as we will show in a while. , from the point of view of the FDA
this corresponds to consider, instead, the “sub-FDA” where only @xmath
and @xmath appear, but not their mutually non-local forms @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. This is the appropriate framework for a
Lagrangian description in terms of @xmath (considered, for example, in
Refs. bershoffo1 and SalamSezgin ).

The other Lagrangian subalgebra is found by setting, instead, @xmath ,
that implies the vanishing of the coefficients @xmath ’s. In this case,
the whole parametrization of @xmath drops out. This subalgebra thus
corresponds to consider the restricted FDA where @xmath is excluded,
together with @xmath . This is the appropriate framework for the
construction of the Lagrangian in terms of @xmath only (see Ref.
Townsend:1983kk ). The @xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath could still be
included in the parametrization of @xmath as kind of trivial
deformations, and they can be consistently decoupled by setting @xmath .

Observe that both Lagrangian subalgebras require the truncation of the
superalgebra to only one (out of the two) nilpotent fermionic generator.

The complete hidden superalgebra is larger than the one just involving
the fields appearing in the Lagrangian in terms of either @xmath or
@xmath only. This is reminiscent of an aspect of @xmath extended
supersymmetric theories, namely of the fact that a central extension of
the supersymmetry algebra is associated with electric and magnetic
charges Witten:1978mh , while the electric subalgebra only involves
electric charges whose gauge potentials appear in the Lagrangian
description.

#### 5.2.3 Including @xmath in the @xmath theory

One could ask whether the inclusion of the extra contributions involving
the @xmath -form @xmath in the parametrization of @xmath and @xmath
could significantly alter the results we have previously obtained, and
if this would require the presence of extra spinorial charges. We
discuss this issue in the following, on the same lines of what we have
done in Hidden . This analysis will also turn out to be useful once we
will relate, in the next section, the @xmath theory to the @xmath one.

Thus, for completing the analysis of the minimal theory in @xmath , let
us include the (non-dynamical) form @xmath associated with the volume
form in @xmath in the FDA, and investigate the superalgebra hidden in
this extension of the FDA. It contributes to the FDA as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

(we will treat the dimensional reduction of the @xmath @xmath -form in
Section 5.3 and we will see that this is evident).

We require the covariant derivatives of the spinor @xmath -forms to be
now:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.61)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, besides the equations in ( 5.2.1 ), we also define (in an analogous
way):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integrability conditions of ( 5.61 ) and ( 5.62 ) give the following
equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new parametrizations for the @xmath - and @xmath -form @xmath and
@xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are given by equations ( 5.37 ) and ( 5.38 ),
respectively. The values of the new set of coefficients can be found in
the appendices of Ref. Hidden . In the following, we directly move to
the result: The parametrization of the extended forms in terms of @xmath
-forms is more complicated in this case, but the closure of the hidden
superalgebra does not require any new spinor @xmath -form besides @xmath
and @xmath .

In order to express the superalgebra in the dual form, it is now
sufficient to introduce the bosonic generator @xmath , dual to @xmath
(that is, satisfying @xmath ). The interested reader can find the
complete form of the hidden superalgebra including @xmath in Hidden .

We now move to the analysis of the hidden gauge structure of the @xmath
theory.

#### 5.2.4 Gauge structure of the minimal @xmath Fda

Analogously to what we have previously done in the case of the @xmath
theory, we now analyze the gauge structure of the @xmath FDA. We limit
ourselves just to a short discussion of it, since the main results
concerning the role of the nilpotent charges (dual to the spinor @xmath
-forms @xmath and @xmath ) is completely analogous to the one discussed
for @xmath in the eleven-dimensional case.

The supersymmetric @xmath FDA is invariant under the following gauge
transformations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us stress that, as for the @xmath case, the gauge transformations (
5.68 ) leaving invariant the @xmath FDA can be obtained, for particular
@xmath -form parameters, through Lie derivatives acting on the hidden
symmetry supergroup @xmath underlying the theory. @xmath has again the
fiber bundle structure @xmath , where @xmath is spanned by the
supervielbein @xmath . The (tangent space description of the) fiber
@xmath is again generated by the Lorentz generators in @xmath and by the
gauge and hidden generators in @xmath and @xmath , where now we have
that the set @xmath spans @xmath , while the set @xmath spans @xmath .

Explicitly, we define the tangent vector in @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, by a straightforward calculation, one gets that the gauge
transformations of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath in ( 5.68 ) can be
obtained by requiring

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.70)
     @xmath      (5.71)
     @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the following choice of the @xmath -form gauge parameters:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.73)
     @xmath      (5.74)
     @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

We expect that also for the forms @xmath and @xmath , whose
parametrizations in terms of @xmath -forms remain still unknown (work in
progress on this topic), the rest of the gauge transformations in ( 5.68
) leaving invariant the supersymmetric FDA should be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.76)
     @xmath      (5.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the following choice of the @xmath -form gauge parameters:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.78)
     @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding gauge transformations of the @xmath -forms in @xmath
read:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the corresponding gauge transformations of the @xmath -forms in
@xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parameters @xmath ’s appearing in ( 5.80 ) are arbitrary Lorentz
(and/or @xmath ) valued @xmath -forms, while @xmath and @xmath in ( 5.81
) are arbitrary spinor parameters.

### 5.3 Relation between @xmath and @xmath supergravities

The hidden Lie superalgebra we have presented and discussed in Section
5.2 is the most general one for the minimal @xmath , @xmath supergravity
theory. As we said in Hidden , we now expect that, for special choices
of the parameters, the whole structure could be retrieved by dimensional
reduction of the @xmath supergravity theory, in the case where four of
the eleven-dimensional space-time directions belong to a
four-dimensional compact manifold preserving one-half of the
supercharges.

In Minimal (the other work in which I dealt with @xmath supergravity),
we have explicitly performed the dimensional reduction of @xmath
supergravity on an orbifold @xmath to the minimal @xmath theory. There,
we pointed out that the minimal @xmath theory can be obtained as a
truncation of the dimensional reduction of @xmath supergravity on a
torus @xmath (that would give the maximal @xmath theory), where the
@xmath holonomy on the internal manifold is truncated to @xmath , so
that only the reduced fields which are @xmath -singlets are retained.

From the point of view of the fermionic fields, the truncation selects
only @xmath out of the @xmath components of the eleven-dimensional
Majorana spinors, which result to be described by pseudo-Majorana
spinors valued in the seven-dimensional @xmath @xmath -symmetry. In
particular, the eleven-dimensional gravitino @xmath -form @xmath
becomes, in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

As far as the bosonic fields are concerned, let us now parametrize the
Lie algebra of @xmath (the holonomy group of the internal manifold) in
terms of the four-dimensional ‘t Hooft matrices @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath (the reader can find their properties in Section B.5 of
Appendix B ).

The above-mentioned truncation corresponds to drop out the contributions
that are proportional to @xmath in the decomposition of the
eleven-dimensional bosonic forms to @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.83)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ’s are the vielbein of the compact manifold and where
@xmath denotes its volume-form.

Then, let us consider the dimensional reduction of the Lorentz-valued
@xmath -forms @xmath (defining the Lie superalgebra hidden in the @xmath
FDA) to the minimal @xmath theory. The comparison of the @xmath to the
@xmath theory would require to consider the version of the
seven-dimensional theory which also includes the @xmath -form @xmath ,
that, in seven dimensions, is associated with the (non-dynamical)
volume-form @xmath . Indeed, by a straightforward dimensional reduction,
we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.85)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

being @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Let us observe that neglecting
@xmath would imply, for consistency, to drop out also all the other
forms in ( 5.86 ).

We are now going to compare the dimensional reduction of
eleven-dimensional fields considering only the fields appearing in the
parametrization of the @xmath -form (due to the fact that the hidden
superalgebra underlying the @xmath theory was obtained in D'AuriaFre by
parametrizing only the @xmath -form @xmath in terms of @xmath -forms,
without considering the one of the @xmath -form @xmath ). Then,
considering the fact that the @xmath field @xmath descends from the
@xmath @xmath -form @xmath (as we can see in equation ( 5.84 )), the
comparison of the two theories could shed some light on the
parametrization of the form @xmath in the @xmath model. In particular,
the analysis done in Section 5.2 shows that the full hidden superalgebra
in @xmath also includes a second nilpotent fermionic generator dual to a
spin- @xmath field appearing in the parametrization of @xmath (see
equation ( 5.37 )); since @xmath is a descendent of @xmath , this could
suggest that considering also the parametrization of @xmath in the
@xmath case would amount to include one extra, nilpotent, fermionic
generator. An explicit verification of this conjecture is left to future
investigations.

The set of relations we found in Hidden between the @xmath and @xmath
structure constants are the following ones:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding relation between the coefficients in the
parametrizations of the @xmath -form are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us observe that, in particular, in the dimensional-reduced theory we
have @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

The dimensional reduction of the @xmath theory to the @xmath one also
entails the relation ( 5.83 ), implying the condition @xmath on the set
of coefficients of the @xmath case; curiously, this selects the
particular solution ( B.17 ) we have recalled in Appendix B , originally
found in D'AuriaFre .

Let us finally report in the following the (anti)commutation relations
of the hidden superalgebra in the @xmath case obtained by dimensional
reduction from the @xmath theory:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.89)
     @xmath      (5.90)
     @xmath      (5.91)
     @xmath      (5.92)
     @xmath      (5.93)
     @xmath      (5.94)
     @xmath      (5.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that here, indeed, two inequivalent solutions exist. In particular,
in the second solution the commutator @xmath vanishes in correspondence
of the solution @xmath . This has a special meaning in the @xmath
theory, since it can be obtained if we further require the following
identification to hold in the seven-dimensional theory:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

This identification is possible in @xmath due to the degeneration of the
Lorentz-index structure for the two @xmath -forms in ( 5.96 ); however,
in the corresponding @xmath theory, the two @xmath -forms that get
identified through ( 5.96 ), namely @xmath and @xmath , are associated
with the mutually non-local exterior forms @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. As we have said in Hidden , we speculate that the absence
of the coupling between the translation generator and the fermionic
generator @xmath in this case could possibly be related to the
intrinsically topological structure in @xmath inherent in the
identification ( 5.96 ).

### 5.4 Further analysis of the symmetries of @xmath supergravity

In this section, that is based on the work Malg in collaboration with L.
Andrianopoli and R. D’Auria, our aim is to clarify the relations
occurring among the following superalgebras: The @xmath algebra, the
@xmath -algebra and the DF-algebra (that is the hidden superalgebra
underlying the FDA of @xmath supergravity introduced in D'AuriaFre ,
further analyzed in Hidden , and recalled before in this thesis).

The DF-algebra found by R. D’Auria and P. Fré in @xmath can be seen as a
(Lorentz-valued) central extension of the @xmath -algebra including the
nilpotent fermionic generator @xmath . On the other hand, @xmath is the
most general simple superalgebra involving a fermionic generator with
@xmath components, @xmath , @xmath . This is also the dimension of the
fermionic generator of eleven-dimensional supergravity. It is then
natural that, already from the first construction of @xmath supergravity
in Cremmer , it was conjectured that @xmath should somehow underlie, at
least in some contracted version, the @xmath theory. They are however
quite different: As we have already said, @xmath supergravity contains,
besides the super-Poincaré fields given by the Lorentz spin connection
@xmath and the supervielbein @xmath ( @xmath ), also a @xmath -form
@xmath , satisfying, in the superspace vacuum, the equation we have
already discussed, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

This theory, as we have largely discussed, is based on a FDA on the
superspace spanned by the supervielbein.

On the other hand, the fields involved in @xmath are @xmath -forms dual
to generators which include, besides the @xmath generators @xmath and
@xmath ( @xmath ), and the supersymmetry charge @xmath , also an extra
generator @xmath carrying five antisymmetrized Lorentz indexes (its dual
is a five-indexed antisymmetric Lorentz @xmath -form @xmath ). Thus, in
the case of @xmath , the set of @xmath -forms is @xmath , and these
@xmath -forms are dual to the @xmath generators @xmath , respectively.

The explicit form of the Maurer-Cartan equations for the @xmath Lie
superalgebra, once decomposed in terms of its subalgebra @xmath , is the
following:

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (5.98)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

being @xmath the Lorentz covariant derivative. Here, @xmath is a
dimensionful constant. Indeed, in ( 5.98 ) we are considering
dimensionful @xmath -form generators: Precisely, the bosonic @xmath
-forms @xmath and @xmath carry length dimension @xmath , the gravitino
@xmath -form @xmath has length dimension @xmath , while the Lorentz spin
connection @xmath is adimensional. As a consequence of this, the
parameter @xmath has dimension @xmath and can be thought of as
proportional to the square root of a cosmological constant.

Let us observe that the presence of the bosonic @xmath -form @xmath in
the simple superalgebra ( 5.98 ) does not allow to interpret a theory
based on such an algebra as a theory on ordinary superspace , whose
cotangent space is spanned by the supervielbein, with Lorentz spin
connection @xmath . To allow an interpretation of this type, the Lorentz
covariant derivative of the @xmath -form fields should be expressed only
in terms of @xmath -forms bilinears of the supervielbein. This is the
case of the Lie supergroup manifold @xmath unless one would enlarge the
ordinary notion of superspace by including the @xmath -form @xmath as an
extra bosonic cotangent vector , playing, in a certain sense, the role
of a “ dual vielbein ”.

In the current section, we investigate the role played by @xmath on the
FDA of @xmath supergravity, and clarify the analogies and differences
between the two algebraic structures. Referring to what we have just
said, the comparison between @xmath supergravity and a theory based on
the Lie superalgebra @xmath could be summarized as follows: On one hand,
we have a theory which is well defined on superspace, but which involves
a @xmath -form, and is therefore based on an algebraic structure which
is associated with a FDA rather than a Lie superalgebra; on the other
hand, we have an algebraic structure corresponding to a Lie
superalgebra, @xmath , which one can however hardly associate to a
theory on ordinary superspace (due to the fact that it defines the
tangent space to a Lie supergroup manifold corresponding to an enlarged
superspace ).

As we have already discussed, the Lie superalgebra of @xmath -forms
leaving invariant @xmath supergravity and reproducing the FDA on
ordinary eleven-dimensional superspace (introduced in D'AuriaFre )
involves the extra bosonic @xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath , dual to the
central generators of a central extension of the supersymmetry algebra
including, besides the Poincaré algebra, the anticommutator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Lie superalgebra ( 5.99 ) was named @xmath -algebra
deAzcarraga:1989mza ; Sezgin:1996cj ; Townsend:1997wg ; Hassaine:2003vq
; Hassaine:2004pp , and it is commonly considered as the Lie
superalgebra underlying @xmath -theory Schwarz:1995jq ; Duff:1996aw ;
Townsend:1996xj in its low-energy limit, corresponding to
eleven-dimensional supergravity in the presence of non trivial @xmath
-brane sources Achucarro:1987nc ; Townsend:1995gp ; Bergshoeff:1987cm ;
Duff:1987bx ; Bergshoeff:1987qx ; Townsend:1995kk (as we have already
mentioned in Chapter 2 ). The algebra ( 5.99 ) generalizes to @xmath
supergravity (and, by dimensional reduction, to all supergravities in
dimensions higher than four) the topological notion of central extension
of the supersymmetry algebra introduced in Witten:1978mh , as it encodes
the on-shell duality symmetries of string and @xmath -theory Hull:1994ys
; Duff:1990hn ; Witten:1995ex ; Duff:1995wd ; Becker:1995kb .

A field theory theory based on the @xmath -algebra ( 5.99 ), however, is
naturally described on an enlarged superspace spanning, besides the
gravitino @xmath -forms, also the set of bosonic fields @xmath . If the
low energy limit of @xmath -theory should be based on the ordinary
superspace spanned by the supervielbein @xmath , as it happens for
@xmath supergravity, then the @xmath -algebra cannot be the final
answer, due to the fact that its generators are not sufficient to
reproduce the FDA on which @xmath supergravity is based.

This issue was raised already in D'AuriaFre , and, as we have recalled,
solved by still enlarging the enlarged superspace with the inclusion of
an extra, nilpotent, fermionic generator @xmath , whose dual spinor
@xmath -form @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this way, the authors of D'AuriaFre disclosed the hidden superalgebra
that, in Malg as well as in this thesis, we have called DF-algebra,
containing the @xmath -algebra ( 5.99 ) as a subalgebra, but including
also a nilpotent fermionic generator @xmath (satisfying @xmath ), dual
to a spinor @xmath -form @xmath , whose contribution to the DF-algebra
Maurer-Cartan equations is given by ( 5.100 ). The DF-algebra underlies
the formulation of the @xmath FDA on superspace (and, therefore, the
@xmath theory on space-time introduced in Cremmer ) once the @xmath
-form is expressed in terms of @xmath -form generators including, as we
have already seen, also the spinor @xmath -form @xmath .

As we have shown in Ref. Hidden and previously reviewed, this in turn
implies that the group manifold generated by the DF-algebra has a fiber
bundle structure whose base space is ordinary superspace, while the
fiber is spanned, besides the Lorentz spin connection @xmath , also by
the bosonic @xmath -form generators @xmath and @xmath . In particular,
the nilpotent generator @xmath , dual to the @xmath -form @xmath ,
allows to consider the extra @xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath as gauge
fields in ordinary superspace and not as additional vielbeins of an
enlarged superspace.

During the years, many attempts have been made to relate @xmath to the
full DF-algebra, or to its @xmath -subalgebra, and, thus, to @xmath
supergravity (see, in particular, Ref. Castellani ). Furthermore, in
Refs. Azca1 ; Azca2 ; Azca3 ; Iza1 , the authors discussed the precise
relation occurring between the @xmath -algebra and @xmath . In
particular, in Azca1 the general theory of expansions of Lie algebras
was introduced and applied, showing that the @xmath -algebra can be
found as an expansion of @xmath (this was further explained in Azca2 and
considered in the context of the so called @xmath -expansion method in
Iza1 ). Then, in Azca3 , the possibility of an “enlarged superspace
variables/fields correspondence principle in @xmath -theory” was
discussed.

Important contributions to the relations among @xmath , the full
DF-algebra, or its @xmath -subalgebra, and @xmath supergravity were also
given in Refs. Bandos:2004xw ; Bandos:2005 ; Hassaine:2003vq ;
Hassaine:2004pp ; Iza1 ; Troncoso:1997va ; Horava:1997dd ;
Troncoso:1998ng ; Zanelli:2005sa ; Izaurieta:2011fr , principally in the
construction of a Chern-Simons @xmath supergravity based on the
supergroup @xmath .

Let us mention here that in Chapter 6 of this thesis we will describe an
analytic method for connecting different (super)algebras and, in
particular, we will give an example of application in which we will show
the way in which @xmath is linked to the @xmath -algebra, reproducing
the result obtained in Iza1 .

In this section, we will show, on the same lines of the work Malg , that
the DF-algebra (which accounts for the non-trivial @xmath -form
cohomology of @xmath supergravity) cannot be (directly) found as a
contraction from @xmath . More precisely, we will focus on the @xmath
-form cohomology in @xmath superspace of the supergravity theory,
strictly related to the presence in the theory of the @xmath -form
@xmath . Indeed, once formulated in terms of its hidden superalgebra of
@xmath -forms, we will find that @xmath can be decomposed into the sum
of two parts, having different group-theoretical meaning: One allows to
reproduce the FDA of @xmath supergravity (due to non-trivial
contributions to the @xmath -form cohomology in superspace) and
explicitly breaks @xmath , while the other does not contribute to the
@xmath -form cohomology (being a closed form in the vacuum); however,
this second part defines a one-parameter family of trilinear forms
invariant under a symmetry algebra related to @xmath by redefining the
spin connection and adding a new Maurer-Cartan equation (it is a @xmath
-cocycle of the FDA enjoying invariance under @xmath ).

Moreover, we will further discuss on the crucial role played by the
@xmath -form spinor @xmath (dual to @xmath ) for the @xmath -form
cohomology of the @xmath theory on superspace.

#### 5.4.1 Torsion-deformed @xmath algebra

Let us start our analysis by reformulating, as we have done in Malg ,
@xmath in such a way to be able to compare it with the DF-algebra and
with its @xmath -subalgebra.

In particular, as we will see in a while, this reformulation allows to
overcome a possible obstruction in relating the two suparalgebras, due
to the presence in the @xmath -algebra of the bosonic @xmath -form
generator @xmath associated with the central charge @xmath , while no
such generator appears in the @xmath Maurer-Cartan equations ( 5.98 ).
This problem can be indeed easily overcome by exploiting the freedom of
redefining the Lorentz spin connection in @xmath by adding an
antisymmetric tensor @xmath -form @xmath (carrying length dimension
@xmath ) as follows:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a dimensionful parameter, with length dimension @xmath ,
which can be identified with the one already present in @xmath as
written in ( 5.98 ). The discussion presented here essentially follows
some of the results obtained in Ref. Castellani and further analyzed and
clarified in Malg .

Such a redefinition is always possible and it implies a change of the
torsion @xmath -form .

After this redefinition of the spin connection, renaming @xmath ,
equations ( 5.98 ) take the following form:

  -- -- -------- -------- ---------
        @xmath            (5.102)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ---------

Now, if one requires, as an extra condition, that the Lorentz @xmath
spin connection @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

corresponding to a Minkowski background @xmath , then, the first
equation in ( 5.102 ) (which corresponds to the Maurer-Cartan equation
for the @xmath connection) splits into two equations: Equation ( 5.103 )
plus the condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which defines the Maurer-Cartan equation for the new tensor field @xmath
.

The algebra obtained from @xmath after having performed the above
procedure is not isomorphic to @xmath , because of the extra constraint
( 5.103 ), which implies ( 5.104 ). A generalization of this
superalgebra was introduced in the literature in 1982, in Ref.
Castellani . ¹³ ¹³ 13 The paper Castellani appeared soon after
D'AuriaFre , as a possible semisimple extension of the DF-algebra.

Actually, the algebra introduced in Castellani generalizes ( 5.102 )
with the constraint ( 5.104 ), since it contains an extra Maurer-Cartan
equation for an extra spinor @xmath -form of length dimension @xmath .
In Malg , we have called it @xmath (to avoid confusion with the extra
spinor @xmath -form @xmath of the DF-algebra). The explicit form of the
Maurer-Cartan equations for the algebra presented in Castellani reads as
follows:

  -- -- -------- -------- ---------
        @xmath            (5.105)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath , as usual, denotes the Lorentz covariant derivative.

Actually, ( 5.105 ) is a (Lorentz-valued) central extension of ( 5.102 )
after having imposed ( 5.103 ) and, consequently, ( 5.104 ), since the
dual of @xmath is a nilpotent generator commuting with all the
generators but the Lorentz ones (the rational reason of its introduction
being that of trying to reproduce the DF-algebra with the Inönü-Wigner
contraction @xmath ). In the following, we will refer to the algebra (
5.105 ) as the SB-algebra, and to its semisimple subalgebra given by (
5.102 ), ( 5.103 ), and ( 5.104 ) as the restricted SB-algebra (for
short, RSB-algebra in the sequel). ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 The acronym SB(-algebra)
stands for “Stony Brook”(-algebra). Indeed, in Malg , having observed
that the authors of Castellani were all affiliated to Stony Brook
University, we decided of adopting the acronym SB.

Let us mention that the algebra ( 5.105 ) is actually closed under
differentiation even if one deletes the last equation containing the
covariant differential @xmath (namely, when considering what corresponds
to its subalgebra, the RSB-algebra); this Maurer-Cartan equation is, in
fact, a double of the gravitino Maurer-Cartan equation, rescaled with
the parameter @xmath . ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Let us mention that, as said in
Castellani , the group associated with the RSB-algebra is @xmath .

Furthermore, the Maurer-Cartan equation for the @xmath -form @xmath does
not depend on any free parameter, meaning that it cannot be identified
with the 1-form @xmath of the DF-algebra (see equation ( 5.100 )).

We can thus conclude that, at the price of introducing the (torsion)
field @xmath satisfying ( 5.104 ), @xmath can be mapped into the
RSB-algebra, whereby the spin connection @xmath is identified with the
Lorentz connection of a @xmath Minkowski space-time with vanishing
Lorentz curvature (albeit with a modification of the (super)torsion,
which is non vanishing in both cases). We refer to the RSB-algebra also
as “torsion-deformed @xmath algebra”.

The RSB-algebra can be easily compared to the @xmath -algebra. Indeed,
the Maurer-Cartan equations of the RSB-algebra exactly reproduce the
@xmath -algebra (but not the full DF-algebra) by the Inönü-Wigner
contraction @xmath .

For the RSB-algebra given by ( 5.102 ), ( 5.103 ), and ( 5.104 ),
analogously to what happens for @xmath in the standard formulation (
5.98 ), an interpretation in terms of ordinary superspace spanned by the
supervielbein is not possible, because of the presence of two kinds of
extra “vielbeins”, @xmath and @xmath , whose dual generators are not
(Lorentz-valued) central charges, in this case: Indeed, the bosonic
@xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath are elements of a semisimple bosonic
subalgebra and, for this reason, independently of their super-extension,
they cannot be related to central charges. The same observation also
holds for the SB-algebra, since it shares the same bosonic subalgebra
with the RSB-algebra.

On the other hand, the DF-algebra is non-semisimple and it enjoys a
fiber bundle structure over ordinary superspace, where the fiber
includes, besides the Lorentz connection, also the @xmath -forms @xmath
and @xmath ; in this theory, they are dual to Lorentz-valued central
charges and can therefore be interpreted as abelian gauge fields on
superspace (as we have shown in Hidden and reviewed in Section 5.1 of
this chapter).

At the dynamical level, the space-time components @xmath and @xmath of
the @xmath -form gauge fields @xmath and @xmath (we are using rigid
Lorentz indexes), present extra degrees of freedom with respect to the
component fields @xmath and @xmath , respectively, appearing in the FDA
on which @xmath supergravity is based. ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The possible
interpretation of the field @xmath of @xmath supergravity in terms of
the totally antisymmetric part of the contorsion tensor in @xmath was
already considered in Ref. Troncoso:1997va . @xmath are the components
of the @xmath -form @xmath , related to @xmath by Hodge duality of their
field-strengths. As we will clarify in the following, the extra degrees
of freedom are dynamically decoupled from the physical spectrum in the
DF-algebra (contrary to what happens in the case of the @xmath -algebra)
because of the presence of the spinor @xmath -form @xmath , dual to the
nilpotent fermionic generator @xmath , which thus behaves as a BRST
ghost, guaranteeing the equivalence of the hidden algebra with the
supersymmetric FDA. This mechanism does not work for the semisimple
RSB-algebra, since, in that case, the extra components in @xmath and
@xmath besides the fully antisymmetrized ones are not decoupled from the
physical spectrum.

The detailed relation between the full SB-algebra and the DF-algebra
(including the relations and differences between the extra spinors
@xmath and @xmath of the two algebras) is more subtle, and will be
analyzed in the following, on the same lines of what we have done in the
paper Malg .

Before moving to that topic, let us analyze some properties of the
RSB-algebra related to its feature of being a semisimple superalgebra.

##### Properties of the RSB-algebra

For any semisimple Lie algebra, as it is well known from the Lie
algebras CE-cohomology (see Chapter 2 ), and as already pointed out in
Castellani , it is always possible to define a non-trivial @xmath
-cocycle @xmath (satisfying @xmath ) given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the structure constants of the algebra, with an index
lowered with the Killing metric @xmath .

The closure of @xmath can be easily proven by using the Maurer-Cartan
equations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath ’s @xmath -forms are in the coadjoint representation of
the Lie (super)algebra. Indeed, we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the vanishing of this expression is due to (super-)Jacobi
identities.

For the semisimple RSB-algebra, the set of @xmath -forms is @xmath .
However, the Lorentz quotient of the RSB-group admits the
Lorentz-covariant Maurer-Cartan equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for the restricted set of @xmath -forms @xmath , allowing to rewrite

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

satisfying @xmath (see the CE-theorem 1 in Chapter 2 ). From a direct
calculation, one can find, up to an overall normalization, that the
cocycle @xmath can be written as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.112)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Let us observe that @xmath is actually a bosonic @xmath -form (see
equation ( 5.112 ), the same expression holding for the @xmath -cocycle
of its bosonic subalgebra). An analogous result can be obtained for
@xmath by setting @xmath in ( 5.112 ) and ( 5.112 ).

Let us remark that the @xmath limit of @xmath is a singular limit:
Indeed, in this limit we have that @xmath , but @xmath is finite if one
considers the second expression ( 5.112 ), while @xmath in the limit,
corresponding to the fact that the Killing metric of the contracted
superalgebra at @xmath is degenerate.

For @xmath , instead, @xmath is a @xmath -cocycle of the superalgebra
and (following the general Sullivan construction of FDAs Sullivan ) it
could be trivialized in terms of a @xmath -form @xmath , writing

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this way, a new FDA in the semisimple case is realized.

It could be interesting to investigate about a hidden superalgebra of (
5.113 ), which would allow to parametrize @xmath in terms of an
appropriate set of @xmath -forms; however, to ascertain if one can
associate a hidden Lie superalgebra to the FDA ( 5.113 ), one has to
introduce extra fields besides the set of generators @xmath of the
SB-algebra. This is left to future investigations.

#### 5.4.2 Relating @xmath to the DF-algebra

In the following, we clarify the relation between the DF-algebra and the
SB-algebra.

The complete Maurer-Cartan equations for the DF-algebra can be found in
Section 2.5 of Chapter 2 .

For our purpose, it is convenient to rewrite the real parameters @xmath
appearing in the parametrization of the @xmath -form @xmath in terms of
@xmath -forms (see the result reported in ( 2.189 ) of Chapter 2 ),
namely in @xmath , as follows: ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 Here we have defined, using the
notations of Hidden , @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -- -------- -------- ---------
        @xmath            (5.114)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ---------

Given the above expressions, it is then useful to decompose the spinor
@xmath -form @xmath of the DF-algebra as follows:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we introduced the spinor @xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.116)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.117)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

From equation ( 5.117 ), we can now see that @xmath can be chosen as
proportional to the spinor @xmath -form @xmath introduced in ( 5.105 )
as a Lorentz-valued central extension of the RSB-superalgebra:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then, equations ( 5.114 ) and ( 5.115 ) allow to decompose also @xmath
into two pieces, namely

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now recognize, in the first term of ( 5.121 ), the @xmath -invariant
@xmath -form @xmath introduced in ( 5.112 ), which is finite in the
@xmath limit, but looses its character of being a @xmath -cocycle
(namely, a closed form), becoming just a @xmath -cochain of the @xmath
-algebra. Explicitly, we have:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.122)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and, by a straightforward differentiation using the Maurer-Cartan
equations of DF-algebra (see Section 2.5 of Chapter 2 ), we can easily
verify that @xmath , while

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.123)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.124)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Now, let us observe that @xmath only depends on the restricted set of
@xmath -forms @xmath , which does not include the @xmath -form @xmath ,
through an expression, that is ( 5.120 ), which does not contain any
free parameter. The term @xmath is, however, the only one contributing
to the (vacuum) @xmath -form cohomology in superspace (see equation (
5.123 )), @xmath being instead a closed @xmath -form in the vacuum. ¹⁸
¹⁸ 18 Surprisingly, it corresponds to one of the solutions found in the
original paper of R. D’Auria and P. Fré D'AuriaFre .

On the other hand, we can see that the one-parameter family of solutions
to the DF-algebra, whose presence was clarified in Bandos:2004xw ,
actually only depends on the contribution @xmath , which appears as a
trivial deformation of @xmath in @xmath , since it does not contribute
to the vacuum @xmath -form cohomology ( 5.97 ). However, @xmath is
invariant not only under the DF-algebra, but also under the SB-algebra,
even at finite @xmath . Instead, the other term, @xmath , explicitly
breaks the invariance under the SB-algebra.

In Figure 5.2 the reader can find a map which schematically collects and
summarizes the relations among the superalgebras we have analyzed.

#### 5.4.3 More on the role of the extra spinor @xmath-forms

Let us conclude our analysis by spending some words to discuss the role
of the spinor @xmath -forms @xmath and @xmath introduced in the
decomposition ( 5.115 ) of @xmath and appearing in @xmath through
equation ( 5.119 ), following the lines of what we have done in Hidden
and previously recalled in this chapter.

The spinor @xmath appears in @xmath and its role is that of allowing for
@xmath to be a closed @xmath -form on ordinary superspace ; it behaves
as a cohomological ghost, since its supersymmetry and gauge
transformations exactly cancel the non-physical contributions coming
from the tensor field @xmath . In other words, the group manifold
generated by the set of @xmath -forms @xmath including @xmath presents a
fiber bundle structure with ordinary superspace as base space.

The role of the second spinor, @xmath , appearing, instead, in the
@xmath -invariant term @xmath , at first sight appear less clear, since
@xmath in the FDA where the vacuum relation ( 5.97 ) holds. It plays,
however, a role that is analogous to the one of @xmath : Indeed, in its
absence, @xmath would reduce to the bosonic @xmath -form @xmath , which
is a closed @xmath -form for @xmath , while this property is lost in the
limit @xmath . In the same limit, @xmath is, instead, a @xmath -form
polynomial of all the @xmath ’s, that is a cochain of the superspace
enlarged to include @xmath and @xmath . The role of @xmath is then
crucial in order to restore, also for @xmath , the correct @xmath -form
cohomology ( 5.97 ) on the vacuum superspace for @xmath , by allowing
@xmath . On the other hand, in the semisimple case @xmath , @xmath is a
closed @xmath -form, and @xmath looses its cohomological role.

Let us remark that when considering the interacting theory out of the
vacuum, one should introduce a @xmath -form super field-strength @xmath
in superspace, namely

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this case, one would expect that the superspace @xmath -form
cohomology could also get non-trivial contributions from @xmath .

We can finally summarize our results as follows: We have found that,
despite of the fact that the @xmath -algebra is a Inönü-Wigner
contraction of the torsion deformation of @xmath that we have called
RSB-algebra, still the DF-algebra cannot be directly obtained as an
Inönü-Wigner contraction from the SB-algebra, the latter being a
Lorentz-valued, central extension of the RSB-algebra. Correspondingly,
the @xmath supergravity theory is not left invariant by @xmath , while
being invariant under the DF-algebra. This is due to the fact that the
spinor @xmath -form @xmath of the DF-algebra (spinor central extension
of the @xmath -algebra) contributes to the DF-algebra with structure
constants different from the ones of the SB-algebra. In particular,
referring to equation ( 5.115 ), we can see that @xmath differs from
@xmath by the extra @xmath -form generator @xmath . This has a
counterpart in the expression of @xmath , which trivializes the vacuum
@xmath -form cohomology in superspace in terms of DF-algebra @xmath
-forms @xmath ’s. As we can see by looking at the decomposition ( 5.119
), @xmath is not invariant under @xmath (neither under its torsion
deformation), and this is due to the contribution @xmath , which
explicitly breaks this symmetry. However, this latter term is the only
one contributing to the vacuum @xmath -form cohomology in superspace,
because of the presence in the DF-algebra of the two spinors @xmath and
@xmath into which the cohomological spinor @xmath can be decomposed.

### 5.5 Comments on the FDAs of @xmath theories

Let us mention, now, that in Ref. SM4 , in collaboration with D. M.
Peñafiel, we have considered a new minimal super-Maxwell like algebra in
@xmath dimensions, containing, besides the Poincaré and the
supersymmetry generators, also Maxwell-like bosonic generators and an
extra fermionic generator, and we have written the Maurer-Cartan
equations dual to the superalgebra. Then, we have added a @xmath -form
field-strength to the theory and performed a study on the FDA in @xmath
thus obtained, on the same lines of Hidden ; Malg .

The minimal Maxwell superalgebras are minimal super-extension of the
Maxwell algebra, which, in turn, is a non-central extension of Poincaré
algebra involving an abelian generator (along the lines of
non-commutative geometry), and, as we have already mentioned in Chapter
4 , it arises when one considers symmetries of systems evolving in flat
Minkowski space filled in by a constant electromagnetic background bacry
; schrader . ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 Indeed, if one constructs an action for a massive
particle, invariant under the Maxwell symmetries, one obtains that “it
satisfies the equations of motion of a charged particle interacting with
a constant electromagnetic field via the Lorentz force” gibbons .

In particular, the @xmath , @xmath supersymmetrization of the Maxwell
algebra introduced in gomis2 seems to be specially appealing, since it
describes the supersymmetries of generalized @xmath , @xmath superspace
in the presence of a constant, abelian supersymmetric field-strength
background. Subsequently, this superalgebra and its generalizations have
been obtained as @xmath -expansions of the @xmath superalgebra Concha2 .
This family of superalgebras containing the Maxwell algebras type as
bosonic subalgebras may be viewed as a generalization of the D’Auria-Fré
superalgebra (DF-algebra), introduced in D'AuriaFre and recalled before
in this thesis, and of the so called Green algebras green .

The main reason for having chosen a Maxwell-like superalgebra in four
dimensions (whose basis is given by a set of generators @xmath ) as a
starting point of our analysis has been the fact that the Maxwell-like
generators @xmath and @xmath can be related to dual bosonic @xmath
-forms associated with an antisymmetric @xmath -form @xmath on
superspace, appropriately introduced in the context of FDAs, whose
field-strength is given by @xmath (modulo gravitino @xmath -form
bilinears, when it has support on superspace). In @xmath , @xmath can be
viewed as a trivial boundary term of an hypothetical Lagrangian (in SM4
we did not discuss the dynamics of the theory, while we concentrated,
instead, on the pure FDA structure of the model).

Now, it is well known that @xmath supergravity admits spontaneous
compactification to @xmath and that through the Freund-Rubin ansatz one
ends up with a @xmath ground state (see Duff:1986hr for exhaustive
details). The two manifolds then correspond to (either) @xmath (or
@xmath ). In this set up, one can see that, even if the @xmath -form
@xmath does not give any dynamical contribution to the theory in four
dimensions, however, its field-strength (which is proportional to the
volume element in four dimensions) can be related to the presence of
fluxes (see, for example, Trigiante2 ), that are background quantities
which can be switched on in a toroidal compactification. In particular,
the Freund-Rubin solution @xmath is characterized by the vacuum
expectation value along the four non-compact space-time directions,
@xmath , of the @xmath -form field-strength @xmath of the
eleven-dimensional theory, and it describes the full back-reaction of
this flux on the space-time geometry. Then, @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the volume element in four dimensions; @xmath can thus
be associated with a flux with charge @xmath , being @xmath a constant
parameter.

With this motivations, we considered of some interest to study a
semisimple Maxwell-like superalgebra in @xmath in the context of FDAs
(involving a @xmath -form @xmath ), by writing the deformation to the
@xmath -form @xmath induced by the presence a scaling parameter @xmath .
Since @xmath is a boundary contribution in four dimensions, we expected
a topological form of @xmath to lie in the parametrization of @xmath .
Indeed, on the same lines of what we have seen in the previous section,
given the Maurer-Cartan equations @xmath for a semisimple Lie algebra,
one can write (see the CE-theorem 1 in Chapter 2 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

satisfying @xmath and providing @xmath with a topological hidden
structure. One can then request the parametrization @xmath in terms of
@xmath -forms to satisfy @xmath , which is allowed, as well as expected,
in @xmath when @xmath . However, since, as we have already mentioned,
one can endow @xmath with a support on superspace, we can alternatively
request the parametrization @xmath to satisfy @xmath in the superspace
vacuum of the four-dimensional theory. ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Indeed, in superspace
the super field-strength in the vacuum is given by @xmath .

In SM4 , we first requested @xmath to have a topological structure, by
selecting a particular ansatz for the @xmath -form parametrization,
involving the scaling parameter @xmath . Then, we checked that @xmath in
the limit @xmath . We have obtained that this happens for a particular
non-semisimple contraction of the @xmath Maxwell-like superalgebra we
considered, which is also an extension (involving the parameter @xmath )
of the super-Poincaré algebra underlying supergravity in four
dimensions. The superalgebra we got in this way could be considered in
future works for the construction of a Lagrangian and for the study of
the dynamics of the theory, also in the presence of a non-trivial
space-time boundary.

Let us mention that the extra fermionic generator @xmath of the @xmath
Maxwell-like superalgebra is still nilpotent, but it does not appear as
a “central spinor” extension of some other algebra.

It would be interesting to study the hidden parametrization of the
@xmath -form @xmath and, consequently, the hidden structure associated
to the complete extended @xmath supergravity theory (in both the @xmath
and the @xmath cases) which also includes gauge fields and scalars, some
of which can be dualized to antisymmetric tensors and can introduce
non-trivial conditions in the vacuum of the @xmath theory Trigiante2 .
One could also add to this set up a @xmath -form (on the lines of galalg
), which, contrary to the case of the @xmath -form, in four-dimensional
theories exhibits a dynamical role. The same could be done, for example,
in the case of the @xmath -Lorentz superalgebra in @xmath studied and
analyzed in Chapter 4 ; we conjecture that, in that case, the @xmath
field appearing in the theory could also be viewed as an extra
superspace direction, leading to a superspace which is enlarged with
respect to the ordinary one.

Another future analysis would be try to better understand the possible
relations among the extra bosonic fields appearing in the
above-mentioned theories in @xmath and the extra bosonic @xmath -forms
appearing in the hidden structure underlying @xmath (and @xmath )
supergravities. In this context, the study of the dimensional reduction
from eleven (or directly seven) to four dimensions would certainly be
clarifying (work in progress on this topic).

## Chapter 6 New results on @xmath-expansion

In Physics, there is a great interest in studying the relations among
different Lie (super)algebras related to the symmetries of different
theories, since this can disclose connections among the aforementioned
theories.

There are many different methods to obtain new Lie (super)algebras from
given ones, for example deformations, extensions, expansions, and
contractions.

In @xmath , a particular expansion approach, which goes under the name
of @xmath -expansion , was developed Iza1 . In performing the @xmath
-expansion method, one combines the structure constants of an initial
Lie (super)algebra @xmath with the inner multiplication law of a
discrete set @xmath , endowed with the structure of a semigroup, in such
a way to define the Lie bracket of a new, larger, @xmath -expanded
(super)algebra, commonly written as @xmath .

Several (super)gravity theories have been extensively analyzed in the
context of expansions and contractions, enabling numerous results (among
which, for example, those presented in Refs. Azca1 ; Azca2 ; Azca3 ;
Iza4 ; Fierro2 ; Salgado ; Fierro1 ; Concha:2013uhq ; Concha1 ; Concha2
; CR2 ; Concha:2014zsa ; Concha:2016hbt ; Concha:2016tms ).

This is the reason why, on the pure algebraic and group theoretical side
of my PhD research, in collaborations with some colleagues and friends
from Chile (M.C. Ipinza and D. M. Peñafiel) and from the Polytechnic of
Turin (F. Lingua), I have moved towards the @xmath -expansion (and the
Inönü-Wigner contraction) of Lie (super)algebras (for a review of @xmath
-expansion and Inönü-Wigner contraction, see Chapter 3 ).

A fundamental task to accomplish when performing the @xmath -expansion
method is to find the appropriate semigroup connecting two different Lie
(super)algebras. This involved, until more or less one year ago, a kind
of “trial and error” process.

With this in mind, in the work Analytic we have developed an analytic
method to find the semigroup(s) @xmath (there can also be more than one)
linking two different (super)algebras, once certain particular
conditions on the subspace decomposition of the starting and target
(super)algebras and on the partition of the set(s) involved in the
procedure are met. The details will be given in this chapter, where we
will describe this analytic method and also give an interesting example
of application, concerning the superalgebra @xmath and the @xmath
-algebra.

The @xmath -expansion is valid regardless of the structure of the
original Lie (super)algebra; however, when something about the structure
of the starting (super)algebra is known and when certain particular
conditions are met, the @xmath -expansion is able not only to lead to
diverse expanded (super)algebras, but also to reproduce the effects of
the so called standard as well as the generalized Inönü-Wigner
contraction (see Chapter 3 for definitions).

In GenIW , we have developed a new prescription for @xmath -expansion
which involves an infinite abelian semigroup and the subsequent removal
of an infinite subalgebra . We have shown that the ideal subtraction
corresponds to a reduction (in the sense intended in Chapter 3 ) and, in
particular, it can be viewed as a (generalization of the) @xmath
-reduction of @xmath -expanded algebras .

The “infinite @xmath -expansion” is an extension and generalization of
the finite case and, with the subtraction of an infinite ideal
subalgebra from an infinite resonant subalgebra of the infinitely @xmath
-expanded (super)algebra, it also offers an alternative view of the
generalized Inönü-Wigner contraction. Indeed, in GenIW we have
explicitly shown how to reproduce a generalized Inönü-Wigner contraction
within our scheme. The Inönü-Wigner contraction does not change the
dimension of the original (super)algebra. Thus, the subtraction of the
infinite ideal subalgebra here is crucial, since it allows to end up
with Lie (super)algebras with a finite number of generators.

We have also given a theorem for writing the invariant tensors for the
(super)algebras obtained by applying our method of infinite @xmath
-expansion with ideal subtraction. Indeed, since the ideal subtraction
can be viewed as a @xmath -reduction, one can then apply Theorem VII.2
of Ref. Iza1 , ending up with the invariant tensors for the @xmath
-reduced (super)algebras. This is very useful, since it allows to
develop the dynamics and construct the Lagrangian of several physical
theories, starting from their algebraic structure (in particular, in
this context the construction of Chern-Simons forms becomes more
accessible). In the current chapter we will also recall this new
prescription for @xmath -expansion, following what we have done in GenIW
.

### 6.1 An analytic method for @xmath-expansion

In this section, we describe the analytic method we have developed in
Analytic for linking different (super)algebras in the context of @xmath
-expansion.

To this aim, let us first of all consider a finite Lie (super)algebra
@xmath , with basis @xmath , which can be decomposed into @xmath
subspaces @xmath , with @xmath , namely @xmath .

Then, let us consider another Lie (super)algebra @xmath (our target).
Here and in the following, the quantities having a “tilde” symbol above
will be quantities pertaining to the target (super)algebra.

By definition, the (graded) Jacobi identities are clearly satisfied for
both @xmath and @xmath .

Let us also define a discrete, finite, and abelian magma ¹ ¹ 1 A magma
(or also groupoid ) is a basic algebraic structure, consisting of a set
equipped with a single, binary operation that is closed by definition,
without any other requirement. @xmath with @xmath elements as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, let us decompose @xmath into @xmath subsets @xmath , @xmath , such
that we can write the following partition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where with the symbol @xmath we denote the disjoint union of (sub)sets.
The composed index @xmath labeling the subsets @xmath , @xmath , takes
into account the cardinality (number of elements) of each subsets
through the capital Greek letter @xmath .

We now give the conditions under which our analytic method can be
applied, that is we require:

1.  The (target) Lie (super)algebra to be decomposed into @xmath
    subspaces @xmath , @xmath , that is @xmath . This means that we
    request that the number of subspaces in the decomposition of @xmath
    is equal to the number of subspaces in the decomposition of the
    initial (super)algebra @xmath .

2.  The dimensions of the subspaces of the Lie (super)algebra @xmath to
    be multiples of the dimensions of the subspaces of @xmath .

3.  @xmath and @xmath to be the vector spaces of the subalgebras @xmath
    and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

4.  The subspace decomposition of @xmath to satisfy the following
    Weimar-Woods conditions WW1 ; WW2 (see equation ( 3.2 ) in Chapter 3
    ):

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    @xmath . Analogously, we require the subspace decomposition of
    @xmath to satisfy

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.4)
      -- -------- -- -------

    @xmath .

5.  The partition ( 6.2 ) to be in resonance (see Definition 4 in
    Chapter 3 ) with the decomposition of @xmath into subspaces @xmath ,
    namely we require:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where the product @xmath is defined as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Under resonance condition, the association between the subsets
    @xmath ’s of @xmath and the subspaces @xmath ’s of @xmath is
    uniquely determined ( @xmath ).

Thus, our method will be limited to these choices on the subspace
decomposition of @xmath and @xmath and on the subsets partition of
@xmath ; before applying our analytic method, one should always fulfill
these requirements. On the other hand, the above assumptions can also be
seen as a convenient (even if restrictive) criterion for choosing the
decomposition of Lie (super)algebras and a proper resonant partition for
the semigroup involved in the procedure in the context of @xmath
-expansion.

Now, let us suppose that @xmath also fulfills associativity (that will
be checked at the final step of the method). Thus, @xmath is now
supposed to be a semigroup, and we will denote it with @xmath ,
according with the notation of Iza1 , where the @xmath -expansion (that
is semigroup expansion) procedure was developed for the first time.

Now, let us define @xmath . In this way, @xmath results to be an @xmath
-expanded (super)algebra obtained by @xmath -expanding @xmath (see
Chapter 3 ). Then, according to Theorem 2 recalled in Chapter 3 , we
have that @xmath , where @xmath , is a resonant subalgebra of the @xmath
-expanded (super)algebra @xmath . Furthermore, by construction, we have
that the subspace structure of @xmath is, in turn, in resonance with the
partition ( 6.5 ) of @xmath , and we can write:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, the following system of equations naturally arises:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath (let us recall that @xmath is the total number of
(non-zero) elements of @xmath ).

Let us mention that, by taking into account the possible presence of a
(unique) zero element @xmath (which can always be factorized out of the
commutation relations) such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

the system ( 6.8 ) acquires the following form: ² ² 2 And the whole
procedure goes under the name of @xmath -resonant-reduction , since,
imposing @xmath (being @xmath the set of generators of @xmath ), we end
up with a @xmath -reduced algebra of the resonant subalgebra @xmath (see
Chapter 3 for details).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, again, @xmath , and where the @xmath contribution now appearing
in @xmath is due to the presence of the zero element @xmath .

Now, solving the system ( 6.8 ) (or, equivalently, ( 6.10 ), when @xmath
is endowed with a zero element) we will immediately know the cardinality
of each of the subsets @xmath . Indeed, both the systems ( 6.8 ) and (
6.10 ) can be solved with respect to the variables @xmath and @xmath ,
and the unique (by construction) solution admits only values in @xmath
(the value zero is obviously excluded).

In this way, we are left with the knowledge of the cardinality of each
subset of @xmath . Furthermore, by construction, we already know the
partition structure of @xmath (which is in resonance with the subspace
decomposition of @xmath (and @xmath )).

Let us now complete this first part with the following theorem, which we
have written and proven in Analytic :

###### Theorem 4.

In the @xmath -expansion procedure, when the commutator of two
generators in the original Lie (super)algebra falls into a linear
combination involving more than one generator, all the terms appearing
in this resultant linear combination of generators must share the same
element of @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof of Theorem 4 can be treated as a reductio ad absurdum .
Indeed, if the linear combination of generators were coupled with
different elements of @xmath , this would mean having different
two-selectors associated with the same resulting element, and, according
to the definition of two-selector given in ( 3.5 ) of Chapter 3 , this
would break the uniqueness of the internal composition law of @xmath .
But this cannot be true, since the composition law associates each
couple of elements @xmath and @xmath with a unique element @xmath (see
again ( 3.5 ) in Chapter 3 ). We can thus conclude that when the
commutator of two generators in the original Lie (super)algebra falls
into a linear combination involving more than one generator, the terms
appearing in this resultant linear combination of generators must be
multiplied by the same element. ∎

Theorem 4 also reflects on the subspace structure of the original Lie
(super)algebra and on the subsets partition of @xmath .

We have thus exhausted the information coming from the starting
(super)algebra @xmath . We can now exploit the information coming from
the target (super)algebra @xmath to fix some detail on the
multiplication rules and to build up the whole multiplication table of
@xmath . ³ ³ 3 Let us recall that, at the end of the whole procedure,
one should check the associativity of @xmath , since, till now, we have
just hypothesized that @xmath is a semigroup. This step is based on the
following identification criterion .

#### 6.1.1 Identification criterion between generators

We can now write (according with what we have recalled in Chapter 3 )
the following identification between generators:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath a basis of @xmath , while @xmath is a basis of @xmath ;
@xmath denotes a general element of @xmath . We have to perform the
identification ( 6.11 ) for each element of @xmath , that is we have to
associate each element of each subset with the generators in the
subspace related to the considered subset. This means

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Now, observe that for @xmath we can write the commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have denoted by @xmath the structure constants of @xmath ; due
to the identification ( 6.11 ), they read @xmath , where @xmath are the
structure constants of @xmath .

Then, since for @xmath we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

we are now able to write the structure constants of @xmath in terms of
the two-selector and of the structure constants of @xmath (see Chapter 3
), namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Subsequently, we can exploit the identification ( 6.11 ) in order to
write the commutation relations of @xmath , namely ( 6.13 ), in terms of
the commutation relations between the expanded generators of @xmath
(factorizing the elements of @xmath out of the commutators). Thus, we
end up with the following relations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we now compare the commutation relations ( 6.16 ) with the ones in (
6.14 ), we can deduce further information on the multiplication rules
between the elements of @xmath , that is to say:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us stress that we should repeat this procedure for all the
commutation rules of @xmath , in order to get all the multiplication
rules between the elements of @xmath .

During this process, the possible existence of the (unique) zero element
@xmath can play a crucial role. Indeed, in the case in which the
commutation relations of the target (super)algebra @xmath read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, at the same time, from the initial (super)algebra @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

considering the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with ( 6.19 ), we conclude that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we then impose @xmath , we end up with the @xmath -reduced algebra of
the resonant subalgebra @xmath of the @xmath -expanded (super)algebra
@xmath .

At the end of the whole procedure, in any case, we are left with the
complete multiplication table(s) describing the abelian semigroup(s)
@xmath for moving from the initial Lie (super)algebra @xmath to the
target one @xmath . One can end up with more than one abelian semigroup
linking the two (super)algebras; this results in a degeneracy of the
multiplication table. When performing our analytic method, however, one
just supposes the abelian magma @xmath to fulfill associativity and,
thus, to be a semigroup @xmath . The final check for associativity can
remove (completely or in part) the degeneracy appearing in the
multiplication table.

Let us mention here that, in the cases in which the (graded) Jacobi
identities of the initial (super)algebra @xmath are trivially satisfied
(that is, each term of the Jacobi identities is equal to zero), the
abelian magma @xmath does not necessarily need to be a semigroup
(namely, to fulfill associativity) in order end up with a consistent
result after having applied our analytic method. Indeed, in those cases,
after having performed the identification ( 6.11 ), we can write the
(graded) Jacobi identities of the @xmath -expanded (super)algebra @xmath
in terms of the generators of @xmath , factorizing (thanks to the fact
that the magma @xmath is abelian) the elements of @xmath , and this will
not give any constraints on the multiplication rules among the elements
of @xmath ; in particular, @xmath does not have to fulfill
associativity. This means that, when the (graded) Jacobi identities of
the initial (super)algebra @xmath are trivially satisfied, @xmath , with
@xmath , is a resonant subalgebra of @xmath , where @xmath is just an
abelian magma. We can then perform all the above procedure and end up
with the multiplication table(s) associated with @xmath (also in this
case, we can end up with more than one abelian magma).

#### 6.1.2 A simple algorithm to check associativity

The final step of our method consist in checking that @xmath is indeed
an abelian semigroup, @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4 Which, as we have already said, is
not required only in the cases in which the (graded) Jacobi identities
of the initial (super)algebra @xmath are trivially satisfied.

The check for associativity can be rather tedious if performed by hand,
but, fortunately, it can be implemented by means of a simple
computational algorithm. Indeed, mapping all the elements @xmath ’s of
@xmath to the set of the integer numbers @xmath , the multiplication
table of @xmath can then be stored as a matrix @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the index associated with the element @xmath .
Associativity can now be easily tested by checking that, for any @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath , the following relation holds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 6.1.3 Example of application: From @xmath to the @xmath-algebra

In our paper Analytic , the reader can find many examples of application
of our analytic method. In the following, we will present an example
involving the Lie superalgebra @xmath and the @xmath -algebra (which are
related to @xmath supergravity and have already been presented and
discussed in Chapter 5 ), reproducing the result presented in Iza1 .

The authors of Iza1 also considered a “D’Auria-Fré-like” superalgebra
and another @xmath superalgebra different from but resembling in some
aspects to both the @xmath -algebra and the DF-algebra, always in the
context of @xmath -expansion. The D’Auria-Fré-like superalgebra of Iza1
presents the same structure (the same number and type of generators,
with commutators valued on the same subspaces) as the one introduced by
R. D’Auria and P. Fré in D'AuriaFre (DF-algebra), but some details are
different, so that it cannot really correspond the DF-algebra. Indeed,
according to the results presented in Chapter 5 of this thesis, the
DF-algebra cannot be directly related through @xmath -expansion to
@xmath , while this is allowed when dealing with the D’Auria-Fré-like
superalgebra considered in Iza1 .

Let us also observe that, instead, the @xmath -algebra can be obtained
from the DF-algebra with a suitable truncation of the nilpotent
fermionic generator @xmath . Indeed, due to the presence of the spinor
@xmath -form @xmath (dual to the generator @xmath ) in the DF-algebra,
the latter can be viewed as a spinor central extension of the @xmath
-algebra. One can thus move from @xmath to the DF-algebra by performing
two subsequent steps: First, one has to go from @xmath to the @xmath
-algebra (we will see in a while the procedure one can adopt to perform
this step); then, one has to centrally extend the @xmath -algebra with
an extra (nilpotent) fermionic generator.

We now want to find the semigroup leading from @xmath to the @xmath
-algebra through our analytic method.

Let us first collect the useful information coming from the starting
algebra @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 The detailed (anti)commutation relations for
@xmath and for the @xmath -algebra can be found in Ref. Iza1 .

The generators of @xmath are given, with respect to the Lorentz subgroup
@xmath , by the following set:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath can be respectively interpreted as the
Lorentz, translations and supersymmetry generators; @xmath is a @xmath
-indexes skew-symmetric generator. Let us perform the following subspace
decomposition on the @xmath algebra:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have set @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Thus, the dimensions of
the internal decomposition of @xmath read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now, we do an analogous analysis for the @xmath -algebra (our target).
Its generators (which we denote with an upper “tilde” symbol) are given
by the set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can thus proceed by performing the following subspace decomposition
on the @xmath -algebra:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have set @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath (as usual, each subspace
also contains the empty set @xmath ). We can see that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Both the superalgebra @xmath and the @xmath -algebra satisfy the
Weimar-Woods conditions ( 6.3 ) and ( 6.4 ), and they also fulfill the
other requirements allowing to apply our method.

We can now proceed with the study of the system ( 6.10 ), which, in this
case, reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath denote the cardinality of the subsets
related to the subspaces @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , respectively,
and we have taken into account the possible existence of the zero
element of the set @xmath involved in the procedure. This system admits
the unique solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, we can now write the following (resonant) subset partition of
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.49)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, taking into account the resonance condition, we can write the
multiplication rules

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.51)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.52)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.55)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have already taken into account the fact that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.57)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

by definition of zero element.

We can now fix the degeneracy appearing in the above multiplication
rules by analyzing the information coming from the target superalgebra,
that is, in this case, the @xmath -algebra. To this aim, we first
perform the identification

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, we have to write the commutation relations between the generators
of the @xmath -algebra in terms of the commutation relations between the
generators of the @xmath -expanded @xmath . The details of this
calculation can be found in Section C.1 of Appendix C , while here we
just report and discuss the results we end up with.

The whole procedure fixes the degeneracy of the multiplication rules
(and, in particular, @xmath ) between the elements of the subsets of
@xmath , and we are finally able to write the complete multiplication
table of @xmath , which reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, after having performed the identification

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can reorganize the multiplication table above as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is exactly the multiplication table of the semigroup commonly
denoted by @xmath , which satisfies the following multiplication rules:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.63)
  -- -- -- --------

We can thus come to the same conclusions given in Ref. Iza1 , namely
that @xmath is the semigroup leading, through an @xmath -expansion
procedure (actually, a @xmath -resonant-reduction, due to the presence
of the zero element @xmath ), from @xmath to the @xmath -algebra. Our
prescription immediately allows to recover this result, without resort
to any “trial and error” process.

We have thus shown that our method is reliable and it can also be
applied to rather complicated superalgebras in higher dimensions. This
becomes particularly interesting when the superalgebras are associated
with higher-dimensional supergravity theories (as in the case discussed
in this example). One of the possible future developments could consist
in developing extensions and generalizations of our analytic method.

### 6.2 Infinite @xmath-expansion with ideal subtraction

In this section, we describe our prescription for infinite @xmath
-expansion (involving an infinite abelian semigroup @xmath ) with
subsequent subtraction of an infinite ideal subalgebra, and we show how
to reproduce a generalized Inönü-Wigner contraction in this context.
This method is both a new prescription for @xmath -expansion and an
alternative way of seeing the (generalized) Inönü-Wigner contraction. We
also give a theorem for writing the invariant tensors of (super)algebras
obtained through infinite @xmath -expansion with ideal subtraction. The
discussion we present here is based on the work GenIW , in collaboration
with D. M. Peñafiel.

As we will discuss in the following, the prescription for infinite
@xmath -expansion with subtraction of an infinite ideal subalgebra
developed in GenIW leads to reduced algebras (in the sense intended in
Chapter 3 ). In particular, the subtraction of the infinite ideal can be
viewed as a @xmath -reduction involving an infinite number of elements
which play the role of “generating zeros".

The subtraction of the ideal allows to obtain Lie (super)algebras with a
finite number of generators, after having infinitely expanded the
original Lie (super)algebras.

#### 6.2.1 General formulation of our prescription

In the @xmath -expansion procedure, if the finite semigroup is
generalized to the case of an infinite semigroup , then the @xmath
-expanded algebra will be an infinite-dimensional algebra Caroca . We
can thus generate an infinitely @xmath -expanded algebra as a
“loop-like” Lie algebra Caroca , where the semigroup elements can be
represented by the set @xmath , ⁶ ⁶ 6 The loop algebra of Caroca was
constructed by considering the semigroup @xmath (which is an abelian
group with the sum operation). Here we restrict to the case of @xmath ,
following GenIW ; this is the reason why we have written “loop-like”.
that presents the same multiplication rules (extended to an infinite
set) of the general semigroup @xmath , that is to say: @xmath if @xmath
, and @xmath if @xmath .

We now write the following definition from Ref. GenIW :

###### Definition 5.

Let @xmath be an infinite discrete set of elements. Then, the infinite
set @xmath satisfying commutation rules like the ones of the set @xmath
(that is to say, of @xmath ), namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

is an infinite abelian semigoup symbolized by @xmath .

Notice that, since the multiplication rules in ( 6.65 ) hold, the
element @xmath can be regarded as an “ideal element” of @xmath .

Now, let @xmath be a subspace decomposition of @xmath . We now perform
an infinite @xmath -expansion on @xmath using the semigroup @xmath .

The infinite @xmath -expanded algebra can be rewritten as:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Observe that the Jacobi identity is fulfilled for the infinite @xmath
-expanded algebra @xmath . This is due to the fact that the starting
algebra satisfies the Jacobi identity and the semigroup @xmath is
abelian (and associative by definition of semigroup): These are the
requirements that the starting algebra and the semigroup involved in the
procedure must satisfy so that the @xmath -expanded algebra satisfies
the Jacobi identity when performing an @xmath -expansion process Iza1 .

We can now split the infinite semigroup in subsets in such a way to be
able to properly extract a resonant subalgebra from the infinitely
@xmath -expanded one, and define partitions on these subsets such that
one can isolate an ideal structure from the resonant subalgebra. In this
way, we will reproduce a reduction, ending up with a finitely generated
algebra (see Chapter 3 for details).

Now, in order proceed with the extraction of the infinite resonant
subalgebra, we have to define a resonant subset decomposition of the
infinite semigroup @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

under the product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is to say, a decomposition such that equation ( 3.28 ) of Chapter 3
is fulfilled. In this case, the @xmath ’s are infinite subsets.

Once such a resonant subset decomposition has been found, the direct sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a resonant subalgebra of @xmath (we have used Theorem 2 recalled in
Chapter 3 ).

In particular, we observe that @xmath is the direct sum of a finite
number of infinite subspaces @xmath , due to the fact that the subsets
@xmath ’s contains an infinite amount of semigroup elements.

In GenIW , we have then presented the following theorem:

###### Theorem 5.

Let @xmath be a Lie (super)algebra and let @xmath be the infinite @xmath
-expanded (super)algebra obtained using the infinite abelian semigroup
@xmath . Let @xmath be an infinite resonant subalgebra of @xmath and let
@xmath be an infinite ideal subalgebra of @xmath . Then, the
(super)algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a reduced (super)algebra.

###### Proof.

After having performed the infinite @xmath -expansion on @xmath ,
obtaining @xmath , and after having extracted a resonant subalgebra
@xmath from @xmath , we can write an @xmath partition @xmath (where the
@xmath ’s are finite subsets, while the @xmath ’s are infinite ones)
satisfying the conditions ( 3.32 ) and ( 3.33 ) of Chapter 3 , which we
also report here for completeness:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once such a partition has been found, it induces, according with Theorem
3 recalled in Chapter 3 , the following decomposition on the resonant
subalgebra @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, therefore, @xmath correspond to a reduced (super)algebra of @xmath
. Moreover, in the case in which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is, in particular, an infinite ideal subalgebra , due to the fact
that it also satisfies ( 6.77 ).

We can thus write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have denoted by @xmath the infinite ideal subalgebra, @xmath ,
and where @xmath corresponds to the reduced algebra we obtain at the end
of the procedure. ∎

Notice that @xmath is finite , since it is the direct sum of products
between finite subsets and finite subspaces, while @xmath is infinite ,
due to the fact that the @xmath ’s are infinite subsets.

Thus, we have explicitly shown that the subtraction of an infinite ideal
subalgebra from an infinite resonant subalgebra of an infinite @xmath
-expanded (super)algebra corresponds to a reduction and leads to a
finite, reduced algebra (in the sense intended in Chapter 3 ).

A reduced algebra, in general, does not correspond to a subalgebra; this
means that the (super)algebra we end up with after having performed the
ideal subtraction does not correspond, in general, to a subalgebra.

Let us finally observe that the ideal subtraction can be viewed as a
(generalization of the) @xmath -reduction , in the sense that all the
elements of the infinite ideal are mapped to zero after the ideal
subtraction; this has the same effect which is usually produced by the
zero element @xmath of a semigroup, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are now conferring the role of “generating zeros” to a particular
infinite set of generators: The ones belonging to the infinite ideal.
The reduced algebra @xmath can be viewed, in this sense, as a @xmath
-reduced algebra.

One of the fundamental step in performing our procedure consists, after
having found a resonant subset decomposition of @xmath , in choosing
properly the @xmath partition @xmath , in order to be able to extract an
infinite ideal subalgebra @xmath from the infinite resonant subalgebra
@xmath .

#### 6.2.2 How to reproduce a generalized Inönü-Wigner contraction

In order to see how to reproduce a generalized Inönü-Wigner contraction
by following the above prescription, let us now apply our method to the
case in which the original Lie algebra @xmath can be decomposed into
@xmath subspaces

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfying the following Weimar-Woods conditions WW1 ; WW2 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we can properly choose the subset partition of @xmath and apply our
method of infinite @xmath -expansion with ideal subtraction in order to
show that the generalized Inönü-Wigner contraction fits within our
scheme.

First, we perform the infinite @xmath -expansion on @xmath , obtaining
the @xmath -expanded algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, in order to be able to perform the extraction of the infinite
resonant subalgebra, we have to split the semigroup @xmath into @xmath
infinite subsets @xmath such that, when @xmath satisfies the
Weimar-Woods conditions (that is our case), the following condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

is fulfilled. Here, @xmath denotes the set of all products of all
elements of @xmath and all elements of @xmath . Thus, we must define
such a decomposition for the infinite semigroup @xmath .

Now, let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

be a subset decomposition of @xmath , where the subsets @xmath are
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

The subset decomposition ( 6.85 ) is a resonant one under the semigroup
product ( 6.68 ), since it satisfies ( 6.84 ). Then, according to
Theorem 2 recalled in Chapter 3 , the direct sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a resonant subalgebra of @xmath .

Let us now consider @xmath and write the following @xmath partition:
@xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath partition just defined satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is exactly the condition ( 6.72 ). The second condition that must
be fulfilled in order to have the chance of extracting a reduced algebra
from the resonant subalgebra @xmath , when the original algebra @xmath
satisfies the Weimar-Woods conditions, reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the present case, @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. Thus, the condition ( 6.92 ) is fulfilled, since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used ( 6.64 ).

We can then conclude that the @xmath partition we have chosen satisfies
the reduction condition, and we can now extract a reduced algebra from
the resonant subalgebra @xmath . Indeed, what we have done induces,
according to Theorem 3 recalled in Chapter 3 , the following
decomposition on the resonant subalgebra:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . One can now easily prove that, by construction, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This means that @xmath is an infinite subalgebra of @xmath and,
consequently, an infinite subalgebra of @xmath . In particular, it is an
ideal subalgebra, since it also satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, we can finally write:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, applying Theorem 5 , we can prove that the algebra @xmath
corresponds to a reduced algebra . Now, since the generalized
Inönü-Wigner contraction corresponds to the reduction of a resonant
subalgebra of the @xmath -expanded one Iza1 , we can conclude that the
generalized Inönü-Wigner fits within our scheme.

#### 6.2.3 Invariant tensors and infinite @xmath-expansion

The authors of Iza1 developed a theorem for writing the components of
the invariant tensor of a target algebra obtained through a finite
@xmath -expansion in terms of those of the initial algebra (see Theorem
VII.1 of Ref. Iza1 ). Furthermore, in Theorem VII.2 of the same paper,
they gave an expression for the invariant tensor of a @xmath -reduced
algebra.

Starting from their results, in GenIW we presented the following
theorem:

###### Theorem 6.

Let @xmath be a Lie (super)algebra of basis @xmath and let @xmath be an
invariant tensor for @xmath . Let @xmath be the infinite @xmath
-expanded (super)algebra obtained using the infinite abelian semigroup
@xmath . Let @xmath be an infinite resonant subalgebra of @xmath and let
@xmath be an infinite ideal subalgebra of @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath ’s are arbitrary constants, corresponds to an invariant
tensor for the finite (super)algebra

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

having denoted the generators of @xmath by @xmath , @xmath , and where
the set @xmath is finite.

###### Proof.

The proof of Theorem 6 can be developed by applying Theorem 5 . Indeed,
as stated in Theorem 5 , we have that the subtraction of an infinite
ideal subalgebra from an infinite resonant subalgebra of an infinitely
@xmath -expanded (super)algebra (using the semigroup @xmath on the
original (super)algebra) corresponds to a reduction. In particular, we
have seen that it reproduces the same result of a @xmath -reduction.

In this way, one can write the invariant tensor of the (super)algebra
obtained with our method of infinite @xmath -expansion with ideal
subtraction by applying Theorem VII.2 of Ref. Iza1 , which, indeed,
gives an expression for the invariant tensor for a @xmath -reduced
algebra.

Thus, it is straightforward to show that the invariant tensor for the
(super)algebra @xmath can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

being @xmath arbitrary constants, where we have denoted the generators
of @xmath by @xmath , with @xmath , and where the set @xmath is finite.
∎

Let us conclude by saying that, in Ref. GenIW , the interested reader
can also find examples of application of our prescription for infinite
@xmath -expansion with ideal subtraction, in which we reproduced some
results already known from the literature and also gave some new
features.

## Chapter 7 Conclusions and future developments

In this concluding chapter, we summarize the original results obtained
during my PhD research activity (and collected, reorganized, and
clarified in this thesis), and discuss some possible future
developments.

### 7.1 Original results concerning supergravity theories

In Gauss (see Chapter 4 ), we have presented the explicit construction
of the @xmath , @xmath @xmath -Lorentz supergravity bulk Lagragian in
the rheonomic framework, showing an alternative way to introduce a
generalized supersymmetric cosmological term to supergravity.
Subsequently, we have studied the supersymmetry invariance of the
Lagrangian in the presence of a non-trivial space-time boundary; we have
found that the supersymmetric extension of a Gauss-Bonnet like term is
required in order to restore the supersymmetry invariance of the full
Lagrangian (bulk plus boundary). The Lagrangian we have finally obtained
can be recast in a suggestive MacDowell-Mansouri like form MM .

The results we have presented in Gauss and reviewed in this thesis could
be useful to study higher-dimensional supergravity theories in the
presence of a non-trivial boundary using the rheonomic (geometric)
approach. Furthermore, it would be interesting to analyze the possible
role played by the bosonic field @xmath appearing in our model in the
context of the @xmath /CFT correspondence, in particular in the
holographic renormalization language.

The core of my PhD research activity is concentrated in Hidden and Malg
(see Chapter 5 ), both in collaboration with L. Andrianopoli and R.
D’Auria. In these papers, in particular, we have deeply analyzed and
discussed diverse superalgebras in eleven dimensions, which are somehow
“hot topics” of the supergravity research field since the action of
@xmath supergravity was first constructed in Cremmer .

In particular, in Hidden we have reconsidered the hidden superalgebra
structure underlying supergravity theories in space-time dimensions
@xmath (and, in general, supersymmetric theories necessarily involving
@xmath -form gauge fields with @xmath ), first introduced in D'AuriaFre
in the context of the @xmath supergravity theory (we have called the
hidden superalgebra underlying @xmath supergravity the DF-algebra). It
generalizes the supersymmetry algebra to include the set of
almost-central charges (carrying Lorentz indexes) which are currently
associated with @xmath -brane charges.

We have focused on the role played by the nilpotent spinor charges
naturally appearing in the hidden superalgebra, showing that such extra
charges, besides they are required for the equivalence of the hidden
superalgebra to the FDA, are also necessary to project out of the
physical superspace the non-physical degrees of freedom, decoupling them
from the physical spectrum of the theory. In this sense, the extra
spinors behave like cohomological BRST ghosts.

Thus, analyzing in detail the @xmath case, we have clarified the
physical interpretation of the spinor @xmath -form field dual to the
nilpotent spinor charge: It is not a physical field in superspace, its
differential being parametrized in an enlarged superspace which also
includes the almost-central charges as bosonic tangent space generators,
besides the supervielbein @xmath . Because of this feature, it
guarantees that, instead, the @xmath -forms dual to the almost-central
charges are abelian gauge fields whose generators, together with the
nilpotent fermionic generators, close an abelian ideal of the
supergroup.

As the generators of the hidden Lie superalgebra span the tangent space
of a supergroup manifold, then, in our geometrical approach, the fields
are naturally defined in an enlarged manifold corresponding to the
supergroup manifold, where all the invariances of the FDA are
diffeomorphisms, generated by Lie derivatives. The extra spinor @xmath
-form @xmath (dual to the nilpotent fermionic generator @xmath )
appearing in the hidden superalgebra underlying @xmath supergravity
allows, in a dynamical way, the diffeomorphisms in the directions
spanned by the almost-central charges to be in particular gauge
transformations, so that one obtains the ordinary superspace as the
quotient of the supergroup over the fiber subgroup of gauge
transformations.

We have further considered a lower-dimensional case, with the aim of
investigating a possible enlargement of the hidden supergroup structure
found in @xmath , focusing, in particular, on the minimal @xmath FDA. In
that case, we have been able to parametrize in terms of @xmath -forms
the couple of mutually non-local forms @xmath and @xmath . An analogous
investigation in @xmath would have required the knowledge of the
explicit parametrization of @xmath , that is mutually non-local with
@xmath , but which at the moment has not been worked out yet.

In the @xmath case, we have found that two nilpotent spinor charges are
required in order to find the most general hidden Lie superalgebra
equivalent to the FDA in superspace. In this case, two subalgebras
exist, where only one spinor, parametrizing only one of the two mutually
non-local @xmath -forms, is present. We have called them Lagrangian
subalgebras , since they should correspond to the expected symmetries of
a Lagrangian description of the theory in terms of @xmath -forms, or,
for the corresponding FDA, to the presence of either @xmath or @xmath in
the Lagrangian.

Actually, as we will further discuss later on, also the @xmath case
admits the presence of (at least) two nilpotent fermionic generators, in
the sense that the extra spinor @xmath -form @xmath appearing in the
DF-algebra can be parted into two contributions, whose integrability
conditions close separately (see the work Malg , recalled in the second
part of Chapter 5 of this thesis).

In particular, in Malg we have shown that, despite the @xmath -algebra
is a Inönü-Wigner contraction of the @xmath algebra (more precisely, of
its torsion deformation, namely of the superalgebra we have called the
RSB-algebra), still the DF-algebra cannot be directly obtained as an
Inönü-Wigner contraction from the SB-algebra, the latter being a
(Lorentz-valued) central extension of the RSB-algebra. Correspondingly,
@xmath supergravity is not left invariant by the @xmath algebra (not
even in its torsion deformed formulation RSB), while being invariant
under the DF-algebra. This is due to the fact that the spinor @xmath
-form @xmath of the DF-algebra (that is a spinor central extension of
the @xmath -algebra) contributes to the DF-algebra with structure
constants different from the ones of the SB-algebra (which is related to
the @xmath algebra).

More precisely, we have seen that @xmath differs from @xmath by the
extra @xmath -form generator @xmath . This has a counterpart in the
expression of @xmath , which trivializes the vacuum @xmath -form
cohomology in superspace in terms of DF-algebra @xmath -form generators
@xmath . @xmath is not invariant under the @xmath algebra (neither under
its torsion deformation RSB) because of the contribution @xmath
explicitly breaking this symmetry; however, such term is the only one
contributing to the vacuum @xmath -form cohomology in superspace, due to
the presence in the DF-algebra of the two spinors @xmath and @xmath into
which the cohomological spinor @xmath can be decomposed.

The decomposition of @xmath in superspace, where we have disclosed
different contributions to the @xmath -form cohomology on superspace
from the two terms @xmath and @xmath , suggests that such contributions
could be possibly related to the general analysis done in Witten:1996md
; Diaconescu:2000wy ; Diaconescu:2000altro ; Diaconescu:2003bm , where
the @xmath -form cohomology of the @xmath -theory on a spin manifold
@xmath is shown to be shifted, with respect to the integral cohomology
class, by the canonical integral class of the spin bundle of @xmath .
Referring to our discussion, it appears reasonable to conjecture that
one could rephrase the above statement into the following one, in terms
of the super field-strength @xmath in superspace: @xmath has integral
periods in superspace, while the periods of @xmath are shifted by the
contribution (possibly fractional) of the spin bundle. Since our
analysis refers to the FDA describing the vacuum in superspace , we
should consider as spin manifold @xmath flat superspace, where the
integral cohomology class is trivial. This corresponds, in our
formulation, to the trivial contribution from the RSB-invariant term
@xmath , the only non-trivial contribution to the @xmath -form
cohomology on flat superspace coming from @xmath , which accounts for
the contribution from the spin bundle.

A deeper analysis of the correspondence between the two approaches, for
the vacuum theory and for the dynamical theory out of the vacuum, is
currently under investigation and left to future works. In particular,
it is still to be explicitly shown that the contribution to the @xmath
-form cohomology in superspace from @xmath could assume both integer and
half-integer values. In this direction, the techniques developed in
Castellani:2016ibp , where a formulation of supergravity in superspace
with integral forms was introduced, could be particular useful.

Some future works could consist on extending the study of the hidden
gauge structure of eleven-dimensional supergravity to the complete FDA
(including the @xmath -form), considering the full dynamical content of
the theory out of the vacuum and performing an analysis for the @xmath
-form @xmath of @xmath supergravity similar to the one we have done in
Malg for the @xmath -form @xmath . We expect that, in the study of the
@xmath -form, a cohomological @xmath -form spinor different from @xmath
should play a crucial role. The decomposition of the spinor @xmath into
a linear combination of @xmath -form spinors, @xmath and @xmath ,
suggests that possibly the relevant spinor in the case of @xmath could
correspond to a different linear combination of @xmath and @xmath . Such
analysis should preliminarily require the knowledge of the
parametrization of @xmath in terms of @xmath -forms, which, as we have
already mentioned, is not available yet.

On the other side, it appears that the extra spinor @xmath -form @xmath
could be an important addition towards the construction of a possible
off-shell theory underlying @xmath supergravity. In Hassaine:2003vq , a
supersymmetric @xmath Lagrangian invariant under the @xmath -algebra and
closing off-shell without requiring auxiliary fields was constructed as
a Chern-Simons form. It would be very intriguing to investigate the
possible connections between our formulation and the approach adopted in
Hassaine:2003vq .

It might also be worth analyzing the connection between our approach and
the theories of generalized geometry . In particular, the approach
presented in Hidden , where all the invariances of the FDA are expressed
as Lie derivatives of the @xmath -forms in the hidden supergroup
manifold, could be an appropriate framework to discuss theories defined
in enlarged versions of superspace recently considered in the
literature, such as Double Field Theory (DFT) and Exceptional Field
Theory (EFT) (see, for example, Hohm:2013pua ; Hohm:2013uia ;
Hohm:2014qga and references therein). This conjecture is based on the
fact that we have recognized that the presence of extra bosonic @xmath
-forms in the Lie superalgebras appears to be quite analogous to the
presence of extra coordinate directions in the formulation of DFT and
EFT. We expect that our approach, where the gauge and supersymmetry
constraints are dynamically implemented by the presence of the nilpotent
fermionic generators, could be appropriate to formulate the constraints
on which the consistency of DFT and EFT are based. In particular, the
@xmath -form fields @xmath of the DF-algebra should give an alternative
description of EFT, where the section constraints , required in that
theory to project the field equations on ordinary superspace, should be
dynamically implemented through the presence of the cohomological spinor
@xmath . Some work is in progress on this topic.

In this context, referring to the concluding comments in Chapter ( 5 )
done when discussing a @xmath case considered in SM4 and to the fact
that the description of supergravity in eleven dimensions in terms of
its hidden DF-algebra could be useful in the analysis of its
compactification to lower dimensions, it might be attractive to better
understand the possible relations between the extra bosonic fields
appearing in different @xmath theories (such as those related to the
@xmath -Lorentz and Maxwell-like superalgebras considered in Gauss and
SM4 , respectively) and the extra bosonic @xmath -forms appearing in the
hidden structures underlying @xmath (and @xmath ) supergravities; the
study of the dimensional reduction from eleven (or directly seven) to
four dimensions would certainly be clarifying.

### 7.2 New results in the context of @xmath-expansion

On the pure group theoretical and algebraic side of my research, driven
by the fact that connecting different Lie (super)algebras can give birth
to new links among physical theories (and, sometimes, also to new
physical theories), in the work Analytic (see Chapter 6 ) we have
developed an analytic method (in the context of @xmath -expansion) to
find the semigroup(s) @xmath (we could also find more than one
semigroup) linking two different (super)algebras, once certain
particular conditions on the subspace decomposition of the starting and
target (super)algebras and on the partition of the set(s) involved in
the procedure are met.

In the cases in which the (graded) Jacobi identities of the initial
(super)algebra @xmath are trivially satisfied (each term of the Jacobi
identities is equal to zero, separately), the abelian magma(s) @xmath
involved in the procedure does not necessarily be a semigroup @xmath ,
since associativity, in those particular cases, is not a necessary
condition for the consistency of the method.

We have then given an interesting example of application involving the
Lie superalgebra @xmath and the @xmath -algebra, reproducing the result
presented in Iza1 , namely obtaining that @xmath is the semigroup
leading from @xmath to the @xmath -algebra. Our analytic method
immediately allowed to recover this result, without resorting to any
“trial and error” process; it is reliable and can also be adopted in
more complicated cases.

Let us mention here that one can move from @xmath to the DF-algebra by
performing two subsequent steps: First, one has to go from @xmath to the
@xmath -algebra (through, for example, @xmath -expansion and @xmath
-resonant-reduction, with the abelian semigroup @xmath ); then, one has
to “centrally” extend the @xmath -algebra with an extra (nilpotent)
fermionic generator.

A possible future development of the results presented in this context
consists in extensions and generalizations of our method (for example,
trying to release some of the initial assumptions).

Subsequently, in GenIW (see the second part of Chapter 6 ), we have
given a new prescription for @xmath -expansion, using an infinite
abelian semigroup @xmath and performing the subtraction of an infinite
ideal subalgebra from an infinite resonant subalgebra of the infinitely
@xmath -expanded one. We have explicitly shown that the subtraction of
the infinite ideal subalgebra corresponds to a reduction, leading to a
reduced (super)algebra. In particular, it can be viewed as a
(generalization of the) @xmath -reduction. This method also offers an
alternative view of the generalized Inönü-Wigner contraction. Indeed, an
infinite @xmath -expansion with ideal subtraction allows to reproduce
the standard as well as the generalized Inönü-Wigner contraction. The
removal of the infinite ideal is crucial, since it allows to end up with
finite-dimensional Lie (super)algebras.

We have then given a theorem for writing the invariant tensors for the
(super)algebras obtained by applying our method of infinite @xmath
-expansion with ideal subtraction. Indeed, since the ideal subtraction
can be viewed as a @xmath -reduction, one can then write the invariant
tensors for the @xmath -reduced (super)algebras in terms of those of the
starting ones. This procedure allows to develop the dynamics and
construct the Lagrangians of physical theories. In particular, in this
context the construction of Chern-Simons forms becomes more accessible.

By performing our method, one can get diverse (super)algebras from the
original one (depending on different choices for the resonant subspace
partitions and subset decomposition of the starting algebra and of the
semigroup, respectively, and, consequently, on the subtraction of
different infinite ideal subalgebras), obtaining, in this way, an
exhaustive overview on the possible reduced (super)algebras associated
with the starting one.

In GenIW , we have restricted our study to the case of an infinite
semigroup @xmath related to the set @xmath . We leave a possible upgrade
to the set @xmath to future works.

Another possible development concerning @xmath -expansion would consists
in extending the procedures recalled in this thesis to include algebraic
structures which link different (super)algebras by also involving
Grassmann-like variables. Some work is in progress on this topic.

“ Learn from yesterday, live for today, hope for tomorrow.

The important thing is not to stop questioning .”

Albert Einstein

## Appendix A The vielbein basis

The geometry of linear spaces as well as that of a general Riemannian
manifold can be studied using the (orthonormal) moving frame ¹ ¹ 1
Namely, a frame of reference which moves together with the observer
along a trajectory. @xmath and the so called dual vielbein (co)frame
@xmath . Let us discuss what we mean, following the same lines of Ref.
Libro1 .

From now on, we use Greek indexes to denote the coordinate indexes (also
called holonomic indexes, world-indexes, or curved indexes), while the
Latin indexes (called anholonomic, tangent space indexes, flat indexes,
or intrinsic indexes) label the moving frame @xmath and the new basis of
@xmath -forms @xmath .

### a.1 Geometry of linear spaces in the vielbein basis

Consider curvilinear coordinates @xmath on @xmath ( @xmath -dimensional
linear space); the tangent vectors at @xmath to the lines @xmath span
the so called natural basis . The vectors of the natural frame are given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used the symbol @xmath to denote the position vector of
@xmath referred to some origin in @xmath . Each vector at @xmath can be
expressed in terms of its local components. In particular, the
displacement vector @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Besides the natural basis ( A.1 ), any other frame could be a suitable
one. In particular, we can introduce a set of vectors @xmath which are
orthonormal with respect to the @xmath -dimensional Minkowski metric
@xmath : ² ² 2 The choice of the signature @xmath , which actually
corresponds to pseudo -Riemannian, rather than Riemannian, geometries,
is motivated by the fact that our aim is that of describing a theory of
gravitation . In the sequel, we will omit all the time the term “pseudo”
and we will use Riemannian for pseudo-Riemannian, according with the
convention of Libro1 .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The frame @xmath is called the moving frame and it is related to the
natural basis ( A.1 ) by a non-singular matrix @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, introducing the differential @xmath -forms (antisymmetric tensors)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

equation ( A.2 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The set of @xmath -forms @xmath is the so called vielbein frame , which
is dual to the moving frame @xmath . Indeed:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The relation occurring between two infinitesimally close frames @xmath
and @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and, since @xmath is a vectorial @xmath -form, we find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an infinitesimal matrix of @xmath -forms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Differentiating the orthonormality relation ( A.3 ) and using ( A.10 ),
one can show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, @xmath is an infinitesimal “rotation” matrix of the
Lorentzian group @xmath and it is called the spin connection .

#### a.1.1 Torsion and curvature in linear spaces

We now apply the @xmath -operator to both sides of ( A.7 ) and ( A.10 );
the integrability condition @xmath gives the following equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

being “ @xmath ” the wedge product between differential forms. The
left-hand sides of these equations are called the torsion and the
curvature @xmath -forms, respectively. In the @xmath case, they are
identically zero (the spin connection is a pure gauge ).

#### a.1.2 Covariant derivatives

Let us now consider a vector field @xmath defined over a region of
@xmath . Referring to the moving frame, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( A.10 ), we can evaluate the @xmath due to an infinitesimal
displacement:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

is called the covariant derivative of @xmath .

The whole procedure can then extended to the case of @xmath -dimensional
smooth Riemannian manifolds @xmath . Let us see how.

### a.2 Riemannian manifolds geometry in the vielbein basis

Consider a @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath on which a metric @xmath
has been defined. Then, @xmath is, by definition, a (smooth) Riemannian
manifold (namely, a smooth manifold with a Riemannian metric, see, for
example, Ref. Libro1 for details). ³ ³ 3 In our case, the signature of
the metric is actually that of pseudo-Riemannian geometry, as we have
already mentioned in the previous section.

Now, at each point @xmath of @xmath we can set up an orthonormal local
reference frame @xmath spanning a basis of the tangent space @xmath at
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Minkowskian metric on the tangent space.

Let us mention that we insist to consider orthonormal frames since one
would also introduce spinor fields on @xmath , which are @xmath
representations. We are therefore forced to restrict the set of affine
frames at @xmath , related to each other by elements of @xmath , to the
subset of orthonormal frames related to each other by elements of @xmath
. In particular, spinors cannot be described in the natural frame @xmath
. Indeed, under a coordinate transformation the vectors @xmath transform
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Jacobian matrix @xmath is, in general, an element of @xmath .

The relation between the moving (orthonormal) frame and the natural one
is (as in the Euclidean case):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a non-singular matrix satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

( @xmath is the inverse matrix of @xmath ).

The reader can find the relation with the usual tensor formulation,
which utilizes the natural frame, in Ref. Libro1 .

We then express an infinitesimal displacement @xmath in terms of the
moving frame at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the vielbein fields dual to the moving frame defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

They are a basis for the @xmath -forms on the cotangent plane at @xmath
. In other words, being @xmath the orthonormal moving frame, the
corresponding orthonormal dual frame of covectors in @xmath is the
vielbein frame. Let us mention that, in this frame, a canonical oriented
volume element is given by the @xmath -form (or volume form )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have denoted by “ @xmath ” the wedge product between
differential forms.

Actually, one can observe that the notation @xmath for the infinitesimal
displacement is a little misleading, due to the fact that, in Riemannian
geometry, ( A.23 ) is not, in general, an exact differential, since
@xmath is not a function of the coordinates (contrary to what happens in
the case of Euclidean geometry). With an abuse of notation, however, we
continue to use the symbol “ @xmath ”. The same remark applies to the
evaluation of the change of the moving frame under an infinitesimal
translation @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

is called the connection . Then, applying the @xmath -operator to both
sides of ( A.18 ), one can (heuristically) prove ⁴ ⁴ 4 Following Libro1
, we have added the term “heuristically” because, at this point, in the
differentiation we are actually using a differential operator that is
not an exact one, and thus cannot be identified with what is commonly
referred to as the @xmath -operator. that the infinitesimal matrix
@xmath is antisymmetric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore it is a “rotation” matrix that belongs to the Lie algebra
of @xmath (as one would obtain in Euclidean geometry). In the sequel, we
assume the validity of ( A.29 ). In this case, @xmath is called the spin
connection . ⁵ ⁵ 5 Equation ( A.29 ) can be referred to as the “metric
postulate”, since it strictly depends on the signature of the metric
(see Ref. Libro1 for details).

#### a.2.1 Torsion and curvature in Riemannian manifolds geometry

On any manifold @xmath one can introduce the torsion and the curvature
@xmath -forms by means of the following definitions, respectively:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.30)
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We will also refer to both @xmath and @xmath together as
the curvatures.

In general, @xmath and @xmath have non-vanishing values (in Riemannian
geometry). Equations ( A.23 ), ( A.27 ), ( A.30 ), and ( A.31 ) are
called the structure equations . Let us mention that the structure
equations ( A.30 ) and ( A.31 ) could also be (again heuristically)
retrieved by taking the exterior derivative of both sides of equations (
A.23 ) and ( A.27 ).

The metric tensor on @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, differentiating both sides of equations ( A.30 ) and ( A.31 ), and
using @xmath , we get the following integrability conditions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.33)
     @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( A.33 ) and ( A.34 ) are referred to as the Bianchi
identities obeyed by @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

Now, let us explicitly observe that all the equations introduced so far
are exterior equations and, as such, they are scalars under
diffeomorphisms ⁶ ⁶ 6 Strictly speaking, diffeomorphisms are
isomorphisms of smooth manifolds. on @xmath . Latin indexes are inert
under diffeomorphisms, being indexes of the local gauge group @xmath .
The same is true if we expand @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath in a local
cotangent basis @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.35)
     @xmath      (A.36)
     @xmath      (A.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, the component fields @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath carry indexes
of the Latin type and are hence inter under diffeomorphisms. @xmath is
called the intrinsic curvature tensor .

Summarizing: Our starting point was a Riemann manifold @xmath endowed
with a local (orthonormal) moving frame and its dual local vielbein
frame @xmath in the cotangent plane. The frame @xmath is acted on by the
local gauge group @xmath . We have also introduced a local connection
@xmath -form @xmath and, postulating @xmath , we have identified it with
an infinitesimal “rotation” matrix of @xmath , called the spin
connection. Then, we have defined the torsion and the curvature @xmath
-forms, and we have subsequently derived the Bianchi identities.

If one further assumes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath is said to be a (Riemannian) manifold with a Riemannian
connection . In this case, one can express the spin connection in terms
of (the space-time derivatives of) the vielbein field (see Libro1 for
details).

#### a.2.2 Lorentz covariant derivatives

Let us now explore the gauge invariance under @xmath and define the
covariant derivatives in the case of Riemannian manifolds geometry.

Suppose we perform an @xmath gauge transformation on the local frames:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

From

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

(remember that, actually, “ @xmath ” is not an exact differential
operator) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

(where we have adopted a matrix notation), using ( A.27 ) and ( A.39 ),
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The result is that the spin connection @xmath undergoes an @xmath gauge
transformation.

Then, one can find that the torsion and the curvature @xmath -forms
transform in the vector and in the adjoint representations of @xmath ,
respectively:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.45)
     @xmath      (A.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

After that, computing the change of a vector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

under an infinitesimal displacement, differentiating both sides of (
A.47 ) and using ( A.27 ), one finds:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, we define the @xmath covariant exterior derivative of @xmath by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is referred to as the Lorentz covariant derivative .

One can also introduce @xmath -form fields which are in the spinor
representations of the gauge group @xmath . Let @xmath be one such field
in the lowest spinor representation, and let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

be the Lorentz generators in the spinor representation, where @xmath are
Dirac gamma matrices for @xmath . Then, one can show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the covariant derivative of the spinor @xmath -form @xmath .

Then, using the Lorentz covariant derivative, the torsion @xmath -form
can be rewritten as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Bianchi identities ( A.33 ) and ( A.34 ) become, respectively:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.53)
     @xmath      (A.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

### a.3 Curvature tensor, Ricci tensor, and curvature scalar

Let us finally make the symmetries of the intrinsic curvature tensor
@xmath explicit. Indeed, from equation ( A.37 ) one immediately gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

and from the metric postulate ( A.29 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, when @xmath is a Riemannian connection, that is when
equation ( A.38 ) holds, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding ( A.57 ) along the vielbein basis, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives the cyclic identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, one can show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

From @xmath one may construct the Ricci tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

which turns out to be symmetric in the indexes @xmath , and the
curvature scalar

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of the aforementioned symmetry properties, any other contraction
possibility gives, at most, a change of sign with respect to the
definitions ( A.61 ) and ( A.62 ).

## Appendix B Technical details on the hidden structure of FDAs

In this appendix, we collect the notation and conventions adopted in
Chapters 2 and 5 , together with some technical details.

### b.1 Fierz identities and irreducible representations

In this section, we give the @xmath -gravitinos irreducible
representations and the Fierz identities in @xmath and @xmath space-time
dimensions.

#### b.1.1 @xmath-gravitinos irreducible representations in @xmath

The gravitino @xmath @xmath of @xmath supergravity is a spinor @xmath
-form belonging to the spinor representation of @xmath . The symmetric
product @xmath , of dimension @xmath , belongs to the three-times
symmetric reducible representation of @xmath : The Fierz identities
amount to decompose the representation @xmath into irreducible
representations of @xmath . In this way, we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We denote the corresponding irreducible spinor representations of the
Lorentz group @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the indexes @xmath are antisymmetrized, and each of them satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, one can easily compute the coefficients of the explicit
decomposition into the irreducible basis, obtaining (see Refs. Libro2 ;
D'AuriaFre for details):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

#### b.1.2 Irreducible representations in @xmath

In @xmath , an analogous decomposition leads to:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.12)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

### b.2 Some useful formulas in @xmath

  -- -- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath            (B.14)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --------

### b.3 Explicit solution for the @xmath-form in @xmath

In @xmath supergravity, for the consistency of the parametrization of
the @xmath -form @xmath , given by equation ( 2.188 ) of Chapter 2 , the
following set of equations must be satisfied:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the integrability condition @xmath further implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

(here we have corrected some misprints, which were in part already
recognized in Bandos:2004xw , appearing in D'AuriaFre ). This system is
solved by the relations ( 2.189 ) written in Chapter 2 .

In D'AuriaFre , the coefficient @xmath was arbitrarily fixed to @xmath ,
leading to two distinct solutions; then, if we now fix the normalization
@xmath in our system, we see that we get two distinct solutions,
depending on the parameter @xmath (which just fixes the normalization of
@xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

### b.4 Dimensional reduction of the gamma matrices

Here we write the dimensional reduction of the gamma matrices from
eleven to seven dimensions. We first decompose the gamma matrices in
@xmath (hatted ones) as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Then, we can write the following
decomposition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the internal indexes running from @xmath to @xmath .
Let us mention that we are using a mostly minus Minkowski metric. Thus,
we can finally write

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.22)
  -- -- -- --------

### b.5 Properties of the ‘t Hooft matrices

In the following, we write the properties of the ‘t Hooft matrices. The
self-dual and antiself-dual ‘t Hooft matrices satisfy the quaternionic
algebra:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
     @xmath      (B.24)
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the above relations, it follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix C Detailed calculations concerning @xmath-expansion

This appendix contains the detailed calculations referring to an example
of application of the analytic method presented in Analytic and recalled
in Chapter 6 of this thesis.

### c.1 From @xmath to the @xmath-algebra

The (anti)commutation relations for @xmath and for the @xmath -algebra
can be found in Ref. Iza1 . For simplicity, in the following we will
just consider the structure of the (anti)commutation relations, since
the explicit values of the coefficients are not relevant to our
analysis. We also neglect the Lorentz indexes of the generators,
labeling, in particular, by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath the generators
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , respectively (the former refer to the
@xmath -algebra, the latter to @xmath ).

We can write the (anti)commutation relations between the generators of
the target @xmath -algebra in terms of the (anti)commutation relations
between the generators of @xmath (obtaining, in this way, the
multiplication rules between the elements of @xmath ), schematically, as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.1)
     @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath      (C.3)
     @xmath      (C.4)
     @xmath      (C.5)
     @xmath      (C.6)
     @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath      (C.8)
     @xmath      (C.9)
     @xmath      (C.10)
     @xmath      (C.11)
     @xmath      (C.12)
     @xmath      (C.13)
     @xmath      (C.14)
     @xmath      (C.15)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, in equation ( C.15 ), we must set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order to get consistent relations without breaking the uniqueness of
the internal composition law of @xmath . For performing this
identification with consistency, we have exploited Theorem 4 and the
resulting statements.

This procedure fixes the degeneracy of the multiplication rules between
the elements of the subsets of @xmath ; indeed, we are left with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.17)
     @xmath      (C.18)
     @xmath      (C.19)
     @xmath      (C.20)
     @xmath      (C.21)
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are then able to write the complete multiplication table of @xmath .
