This thesis describes the development of the density matrix embedding
theory (DMET) and its applications to lattice strongly correlated
electron problems. We introduced a broken spin and particle-number
symmetry DMET formulation to study the high-temperature
superconductivity and other low-energy competing states in models of the
cuprate superconductors. These applications also relied on (i) the
development and adaptation of approximate impurity solvers beyond exact
diagonalization, including the density matrix renormalization group,
auxiliary-field quantum Monte Carlo and active-space based quantum
chemistry techniques, which expanded the sizes of fragments treated in
DMET; and (ii) the theoretical development and numerical investigations
for the finite size scaling behavior of DMET.

Using these numerical tools, we computed a comprehensive ground state
phase diagram of the standard and frustrated Hubbard models on the
square lattice with well-controlled numerical uncertainties, which
confirms the existence of the @xmath -wave superconductivity and various
inhomogeneous orders in the Hubbard model. We also investigated the
long-sought strong coupling, underdoped regime of the Hubbard model in
great detail, using various numerical techniques including DMET, and
determined the ground state being a highly-compressible, filled vertical
stripe at @xmath doping in the coupling range commonly considered
relevant to cuprates. The findings show both the relevance and
limitations of the one-band Hubbard model in studying the cuprate
superconductivity.

Therefore, we further explored the three-band Hubbard model and
downfolded cuprate Hamiltonians from first principles, in an attempt to
understand the physics beyond the one-band model. We also extended the
DMET formulation to finite temperature using the superoperator
representation of the density operators, which is potentially a powerful
tool to investigate finite-temperature properties of cuprates and other
strongly correlated electronic systems.
