## 1 Introduction

In physics, there have been many attempts to study the gravitational
field as a quantized field in order to unify the gravitational force,
which is described by General Relativity ( GR ), with the other forces
in nature, which are described by the Standard Model ( SM ) using the
Quantum Field Theory ( QFT ) framework [ 1 , 2 ] . These attempts have
met various obstacles, either the lack of experimental abilities to
explore sufficiently high energy or the lack of needed mathematical
tools that allow the study of gravity as a quantized theory, quantum
gravity. The reason behind the latter problem is that the
Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian of quantum gravity diverges at loop level so
we consider it as a non-renormalizable theory [ 3 , 4 ] . Thus, such a
quantum theory for gravity has not been solved yet, and a full unified
theory has not been found yet.

Even so, it is still possible to construct and solve a renormalizable
effective theory for gravity order by order by using the Effective Field
Theory ( EFT ) framework [ 3 , 5 ] . In this framework, we can study
gravity at a particular loop level by expanding the Lagrangian in the
energy expansion up to the relevant terms for this loop level. To
determine which terms are relevant, we use Weinberg’s power counting
theorem [ 3 ] . These new terms in the expansion contain new parameters
which can absorb the divergences from the loop diagrams, and at the same
time can be measured experimentally. Therefore, gravity can be
renormalized at loop level when we make the proper expansion of the
Lagrangian.

At the same time, the Einstein–Hilbert Lagrangian is very complicated
and leads to equally complicated Feynman rules as given in [ 6 ] , which
we will call the standard Feynman rules. These rules give lengthy
complicated calculations, but they also lead to scattering amplitudes
that are simple in general [ 7 , 8 ] . Therefore, there is a strong
indication that manipulating this Lagrangian can lead to a simpler form
which still gives the same scattering amplitudes. In addition, when the
Lagrangian contains fewer terms, it is possible to understand the math
in the theory better. Consequently, there has been some efforts to
simplify these rules as in [ 9 ] , where a parameterized metric field
was used.

As starting point for the simplification approach in this thesis, we
derive the Lagrangian for gravity, the Einstein–Hilbert Lagrangian, by
using an analogy with the Yang-Mills ( YM ) gauge theory. Then we
construct the most general effective Lagrangian by using Effective Field
Theory ( EFT ). After that, we set out to simplify the Feynman rules as
much as possible by manipulating the Lagrangian for gravity using the
three freedoms [ 1 , 3 , 10 ] : choosing a gauge, adding total
derivative terms to the Lagrangian and re-parameterization of the fields
(gravitational, scalar, ghost fields). In other words, we choose the
most general parameterized gauge condition, and we add a
parameterization of all possible total derivative terms. Then, we
redefine the gravitational, ghosts and scalar fields using a general
parameterization. As a result of parameterizing the previous freedoms,
we efficiently reduce the problem of simplifying Feynman rules as much
as possible to solve a system of linear equations for eight sets of
parameters.

In addition, for comparison and verification purposes, we perform the
calculations in two approaches. In the standard calculations, we use the
de Donder gauge to obtain the standard Feynman rules as shown in App. B
, which agree with those in [ 6 ] . In the simplified calculations, we
use the three freedoms that we mentioned before, and then choose the
parameters in order to obtain Feynman rules as simple as possible,
especially the triple and quadruple graviton vertices.

To check our simplified rules, we compare the resulting amplitudes of
scalar-graviton and graviton-graviton scattering at tree level using the
standard rules and using the simplified ones [ 7 , 8 , 11 ] .
Furthermore, to show the utility of these simplified rules, we compare
the standard and simplified calculations of some one-loop diagrams for
scalar-graviton scattering, where we use the dimensional regularization
scheme with the Passarino-Veltman method to calculate the loop integrals
[ 12 , 13 ] . Finally, since we are interested in the calculations up to
one-loop level for scalar-graviton scattering, we only simplified the
lowest order vertices.

In this thesis, we start in Sec. 2 by discussing the theoretical
background for deriving the Lagrangian for gravity and show the tools
needed for manipulating the Lagrangian and calculating scattering
processes. Then in Sec. 3 we calculate the Feynman rules in the standard
and simplified way. After that, in Sec. 4 we use the Feynman rules to
calculate the amplitudes of scalar-graviton and graviton-graviton
scattering at tree level in both ways. Moreover, in Sec. 5 we show the
usefulness of our Feynman rules by comparing calculations of some
one-loop diagrams for scalar-graviton scattering using both approaches.
Finally, the conclusions of our work is in Sec. 6 .

Before we start, it is important to mention that we follow the
conventions in [ 3 ] throughout this thesis, such as the metric
signature @xmath and the natural units @xmath . In addition, since the
calculations of Feynman rules and the amplitudes are extremely lengthy
to do by hand, we use the FORM program [ 14 , 15 ] to perform them.

## 2 Theoretical Background

In this section, we start by discussing our motivation behind choosing
spin-2 for the graviton [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] . Then, we give the derivation
of the Einstein–Hilbert Lagrangian using an analogy with YM theory [ 2 ,
3 ] . After that, using the EFT framework, we build the most general
effective Lagrangian for gravity which is needed to study gravity at
one-loop level [ 3 , 5 ] . In addition, we discuss the three freedoms
that we use to simplify Feynman rules: choosing the gauge [ 1 , 3 ] ,
adding total derivative terms [ 1 ] , and field redefinitions [ 10 ] .

### 2.1 Spin of Graviton

As in this thesis we want to quantize the gravitational field, let us
start by discussing the possible spins for its quanta, which are called
gravitons [ 3 ] . Since the graviton is a boson, its spin has to be an
integer number. In this case, there are three possibilities: spin-0,
spin-1 and spin-2 while higher spins are not consistent with QFT for
fundamental particles with interactions [ 4 ] . Firstly, if we start
with a spin-0 particle as the Higgs boson, the scalar-scalar scattering
via a spin-0 graviton, as shown in Fig. 1 , leads to a Newtonian
gravitational potential with the bare mass as the source [ 1 , 3 ] .
However, we know from GR that the bare mass of an object is not the only
source of the gravitational field [ 2 ] .

Secondly, with a spin-1 particle as the photon, the scalar-scalar
scattering leads to an attractive or repulsive potential, so spin–1
particles are not appropriate to describe the gravitational force [ 3 ]
. Finally, in the case of a spin-2 particle, the scalar-scalar
scattering leads to a gravitational potential with the energy-momentum
tensor @xmath as the source for gravity, which is consistent with GR [ 2
, 3 ] .

From the above discussion, it is clear that the graviton should be a
spin-2 boson in order to be consistent with GR and QFT , and later on we
will see more indications that the graviton should be a spin-2 particle.

### 2.2 Analogy with Yang-Mills Theory

The main idea of a Yang-Mills ( YM ) theory is to search for an
appropriate global symmetry which is relevant to the force that we
study. Then, we convert this symmetry to a local or gauge symmetry,
where this conversion is called gauging the symmetry. After that, to
preserve the local gauge invariance, we need to insert a new field which
will be the field of the gauge boson for this force.

For example, consider the following, matter Lagrangian for a massive
real scalar field @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Minkowski metric, and @xmath is the mass. This
Lagrangian is invariant under the global translational symmetry

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, we convert this global translational symmetry to a local
translational symmetry, where the latter is called the General
Coordinate Transformations ( GCT ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where Lorentz indices @xmath in flat space-time have been replaced by
world indices @xmath in curved space-time. In addition, we need to
replace the Minkowski metric in flat space @xmath by the metric field in
curved space @xmath in order to make the Lagrangian Eq. ( 2.1 )
invariant under GCT Eq. ( 2.3 ). Thus, the Lagrangian becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which contains a new field, the metric field @xmath , that represents
the spin-2 gauge boson for gravity (i.e., the graviton).

As with other gauge theories, we need to introduce a kinetic term for
the gravitational field @xmath . We search for a quantity similar to the
YM field strengh tensor @xmath , which we recall is related to the
commutator of covariant derivatives @xmath . For gravity, with a vector
field @xmath , this commutator can be written as [ 3 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the covariant derivative, @xmath is the Riemann tensor
given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the Christoffel symbol given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In addition, from the Riemann tensor we can also get the Ricci tensor
@xmath and the scalar curvature @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We also use the standard expansion of the weak gravitational field
around the Minkowski metric @xmath , that is used to raise or lower
indices, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the canonical quantized gravitational field, and @xmath
is the Newtonian strength of gravitational interactions.

In this situation, we have three quantities: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
that are related to the commutator of covariant derivatives. One of them
can be chosen as a field strengh tensor for the gravitational field to
build the kinetic term in analogy with @xmath . To do this, we use that
the YM field strengh tensor is antisymmetric, @xmath , and has one
partial derivative @xmath , while the Riemann tensor @xmath and the
Ricci tensor @xmath do not have the same symmetry property and have two
partial derivatives @xmath . In addition, the kinetic term should be
Lorentz invariant and GCT invariant. So, the simplest combinations for
the kinetic term are @xmath as well as @xmath . It follows that @xmath
is the most relevant one of them for weak-field since it has only two
partial derivatives while the other have four. Thus, we can write the
kinetic term for the gravitational field in terms of the scalar
curvature as the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian for gravity [ 3 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In addition, when we move from flat to curved space, there is a
correction of the measure @xmath in the action @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the square root of the determinant of the metric tensor
which is given by

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         
                    (2.13)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

and we have used that the metric tensor can be written as @xmath . In
this thesis, we take the expansion in @xmath and @xmath up to four which
is relevant to the lowest order vertices as we will see later.

Summarizing, the actions of matter and gravity become

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From the matter action, the variation with respect to @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Energy-Momentum Tensor ( EMT ). Thus, the EMT is the
conserved current that follows from GCT which is consistent with GR ,
where EMT is the source for gravity. This is an indication that we are
dealing with the correct symmetry for gravity. Moreover, the total
action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this action, the equation of motion for @xmath will be

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
              @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This equation can be recognized from GR as Einstein’s field equation
with @xmath , where @xmath is the gravitational constant [ 2 ] .
Reaching Einstein’s equation is another indication that we are gauging
the correct global symmetry for the gravitational force.

However, when we calculate scattering at loop level with this Lagrangian
Eq. ( 2.11 ), we get UV divergences. Therefore, we need to construct
gravity as an effective field theory in order to study this theory at
loop level.

### 2.3 Effective Field Theory

Effective Field Theory (EFT) is a way to study physics in a particular
range of energy while neglecting the physics at higher energy. This can
be done if the contributions from high energy are small when the theory
is studied in the low energy range. For example, we can study the
hydrogen atom using the Schrödinger equation, neglecting the quark and
gluon interactions inside the nucleus. Mathematically, it means that we
need to expand and organize the Lagrangian according to the dimension of
the energy operators, where in the case of gravity, the energy operators
are just partial derivatives. This expansion is called the energy
expansion of the Lagrangian, and it separates the terms which are
relevant at high energy, from the terms which are relevant at low
energy. In other words, the effective Lagrangian can be written in the
energy expansion as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the term @xmath does not contain any energy operator @xmath , and
it is just a constant. The term @xmath contains energy operators of
dimension one @xmath and so on.

In the case of gravity, the quantities that can be used to construct the
effective Lagrangian are: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which as already
mentioned are related to the commutator of the covariant derivative
Eq. ( 2.5 ). However, each of these quantities ( @xmath ) contain two
partial derivatives, which as already mentioned are energy operators of
the gravitational field. Therefore, only even energy dimensions are
possible in the energy expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the same time, since in this thesis we are only interested in
studying gravity up to one-loop order, it is useful to use Weinberg’s
power counting theorem [ 3 ] . This theorem can tell us how many terms
in the energy expansion should be taken into account in order that the
theory can be renormalized at one-loop. According to this theorem, the
energy dimension @xmath of a diagram with @xmath loops and @xmath
vertices arising from the effective Lagrangian terms that contain @xmath
derivatives is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In our case, we want to calculate the energy dimension @xmath for
gravity with @xmath up to one-loop order @xmath . This gives @xmath ,
which means that gravity can be renormalized at one-loop, if we take
into account terms up to energy dimension four @xmath in the energy
expansion of the Lagrangian.

Let us discuss the possible terms that can be inserted into the
effective Lagrangian for gravity in more detail. First, the terms should
be GCT invariant and Lorentz invariant. Then we need to organize the
terms according to the energy dimension as follows:

-   @xmath : This is only a constant such as the Cosmological constant
    @xmath .

-   @xmath : The only possible term is @xmath .

-   @xmath : There are three possible combinations: @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath .

-   @xmath : There are four possible combinations: @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath .

Thus, the most general effective Lagrangian in the energy expansion up
to energy dimension four is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are numerical coefficients of the higher order corrections,
which are called counter terms. In addition, @xmath is experimentally
very small so we will neglect it as the following.

When we use the @xmath term ( @xmath ) for one-loop calculations, we get
UV divergences which are absorbed by @xmath . The finite parts of @xmath
have to be determined experimentally. Thus, the theory can be
renormalized at one-loop. In addition, when we calculate scalar-graviton
scattering up to one-loop order from the above Lagrangian, the @xmath
term contributes to one-loop diagrams while the @xmath and @xmath terms
contribute to tree level diagrams.

Finally, let us discuss locality of the theory [ 3 ] . EFT is local if
the higher order operators in the energy expansion are taken into
account. However, if we neglect these higher order operators, the theory
becomes non-local at high energy whereas locality will be restored at
low energy. For example, in the full theory, the one-loop diagram as
shown in Fig. 1(a) is local at large energy. On the other hand, in its
corresponding EFT and after neglecting the higher order operators, this
diagram becomes non-local. However, locality will be restored at low
energy where this loop will be reduced to a vertex as shown in Fig. 1(b)
. In addition, using EFT the diagram becomes easier to calculate by
reducing this loop to a vertex.

### 2.4 Lagrangians for Fixing Gauge and Ghosts

Since the Lagrangian for gravity has more degrees of freedom than its
gauge boson, we need to fix the gauge and introduce ghosts in order to
get rid of the extra degrees of freedom. The gauge boson in our case is
a spin-2 massless graviton, which has a transverse, traceless, symmetric
polarization tensor, with two degrees of freedom.

Another way to see why we need to fix the gauge and introduce ghosts is
by considering the following GCT , where @xmath is an infinitesimal
translation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, the metric @xmath transforms as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.25)
  -- -- -- --------

We also consider the weak gravitational field expansion, Eq. ( 2.10 ),
so the transformation of the gravitational field @xmath , the gauge
transformation, is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

However, since the Lagrangian for gravity is invariant under this
transformation, we get a redundancy in the description of the physical
system. This redundancy can also be seen from the path integral
formulation of the generating functional

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the measure @xmath is performed over all configurations of @xmath
, including those configurations that are equivalent under the gauge
transformation, Eq. ( 2.26 ).

Because of this, we need to choose a gauge condition to build two
Lagrangians which together can remove this redundancy. The first
Lagrangian is to fix the gauge, and the second Lagrangian is to correct
the first one depending on the choice of the gauge condition. In other
words, we need to insert a Lagrangian for fixing the gauge @xmath and a
Lagrangian for ghosts @xmath into the Lagrangian for gravity in order to
remove this redundancy. In the path integral formalism, this means that
using @xmath and @xmath will correct the measure @xmath to be performed
over the correct configurations of @xmath . Next, we will follow the
Faddeev-Popov method to derive the Lagrangian for fixing the gauge
@xmath and the Lagrangian for ghosts @xmath .

The Faddeev-Popov method depends on multiplying the generating
functional by two identities and then performing the integral in order
to get a new generating functional with two new terms, where one of them
is related to @xmath and the other is related to @xmath .

To do that, we use the following identity, always taking into account
the gauge transformation Eq. ( 2.26 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge condition, and @xmath is Faddeev-Popov
determinant.
Since the generating functional Eq. ( 2.27 ) does not depend on @xmath ,
it is possible to insert the above identity into it as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also use the following identity

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normalization constant, and @xmath is a parameter.
Again, since the generating functional Eq. ( 2.29 ) does not depend on
@xmath , it is also possible to insert the above identity into it as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, performing the integral over @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a new normalization constant. However, the Faddeev-Popov
determinant @xmath can be written in terms of an artificial vector
fermion field @xmath , the ghost field, and an anti-fermion field @xmath
, the anti-ghost field, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the generating functional becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have two new terms:

-   Lagrangian for ghost fields:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.34)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   Lagrangian for fixing gauge:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is a parameter that can be chosen differently for
    different gauges. However, Feynman–’t Hooft gauge, @xmath will be
    used throughout the thesis.

Finally, we calculate @xmath and @xmath in two approaches. In the
standard approach, we use the de Donder (harmonic) gauge condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the simplified approach, we use a general parameterized gauge
condition which contains all possible combinations for ( @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath ) as given below

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the parameters that will be chosen later to simplify
the Feynman rules as much as possible. In addition, note that we
consider only up to three powers of @xmath which are relevant to the
lowest order vertices, that we need to calculate scalar-graviton
scattering to one-loop as will be shown later.

### 2.5 Total Derivative Lagrangians

In general, a transformation of the fields is a symmetry transformation
if the Lagrangian changes by a total derivative [ 1 ] . This means that
adding total derivative terms to the Lagrangian does not change the
physics that it contains. We can see this from the principle of least
action. Adding a total derivative term to the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

the variation of the action remains zero. Explicitly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and the infinitesimal variation of the total derivative
part vanishes by the assumption that @xmath vanishes at the boundary of
integration.

In other words, adding total derivative terms to the Lagrangian is
equivalent to doing integration by parts. For example,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In addition, the freedom of adding total derivative terms can also be
seen from applying momentum conservation in a vertex in momentum space.
For example, if we consider the term @xmath and then add the total
derivative @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

These partial derivatives give momenta in momentum space. So, assuming
that all the momenta in this vertex are ingoing, equation ( 2.41 ) can
be represented in momentum space as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This result also agrees with momentum conservation in this vertex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this thesis, we use this freedom by adding a parameterization of all
possible total derivative terms which are relevant to the lowest order
vertices. This means that we use the expansion up to four @xmath for the
gravitational field,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

up to three @xmath for the scalar field

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and up to two @xmath for the ghost and antighost fields

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are parameters that we choose later to
simplify the Feynman rules. Mainly, we use them to get rid of terms that
have second order derivatives of the fields (e.g., @xmath ) as we show
later in more detail.

### 2.6 Field Redefinition

The field redefinition freedom follows from the equivalence theorem [ 10
] which states that the S-matrix in quantum field theory remains
unchanged under reparameterization of the field operators. We can
illustrate this theorem by taking a scalar field @xmath as an example,
where the generating functional is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, redefining the scalar field @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

This redefinition is allowed as long as the Jacobian of the integral is
essentially one [ 10 ] . Similarly, we can also redefine the other
fields: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

Now let us explain how the field redefinition can simplify the
Lagrangian. Consider the following field redefinition for the
gravitational field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting this into @xmath , which is part of the triple graviton
vertex, as an illustration gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, the field redefinition generates an expansion of the triple
graviton vertex as shown in Fig. 3 , giving two new contributions for
the quadruple graviton vertex with the two parameters ( @xmath ). So, by
choosing a proper value for these parameters, we can cancel some of the
contributions to the quadruple graviton vertex in the standard
Lagrangian.

For our fields, we use the most general parameterized expansions which
are relevant to the lowest order vertices. This means that we write all
possible parameterized combinations up to four @xmath for the
gravitational field @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

up to three powers of @xmath for the scalar field @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

up to two powers of @xmath for the ghost field @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and up to two powers of @xmath for the anti-ghost field @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are parameters that will be
chosen later to simplify the Feynman rules.

## 3 Feynman Rules

In this section, we calculate the standard Feynman rules [ 6 ] . After
that, we explain our strategies to simplify the Feynman rules for
gravity, and then we show the resulting simplified Feynman rules.

To perform these calculations, we use the FORM program which is a
symbolic manipulation system that can manipulate symbolic expressions
and do mathematical operations, then return symbolic results [ 14 , 15 ]
. In addition, some short pieces of code that are relevant to our
calculations are shown in App. F .

### 3.1 The Standard Calculations

First, we calculate the Lagrangian for matter up to three powers of
@xmath and the Lagrangian for gravity up to four powers of @xmath from
Eqs. ( 2.14 , 2.15 ) respectively using the expansion Eq. ( 2.13 ) and
the definitions ( 2.6 @xmath 2.10 ). Second, we calculate the Lagrangian
for fixing the gauge up to four @xmath and the Lagrangian for ghosts up
to two @xmath from Eqs. ( 2.35 , 2.34 ) using the de Donder (harmonic)
gauge condition Eq. ( 2.36 ) and the gauge transformation Eq. ( 2.26 ).
Thus, we get the total Lagrangian as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From this total Lagrangian, we get the standard Feynman rules which are
listed in App. B . We have also verified that they agree with the
Feynman rules in [ 6 ] .

### 3.2 The Simplified Calculations

Again, we calculate the Lagrangian for matter up to three powers of
@xmath and the Lagrangian for gravity up to four powers of @xmath from
Eqs. ( 2.14 , 2.15 ) respectively using the expansion Eq. ( 2.13 ) and
the definitions ( 2.6 @xmath 2.10 ). Second, we calculate the Lagrangian
for fixing gauge up to four @xmath and the Lagrangian for ghost up to
two @xmath from Eqs. ( 2.34 , 2.35 ) using the general parameterized
gauge condition Eq. ( 2.37 ) and the gauge transformation Eq. ( 2.26 ).
Third, we add the total derivative Lagrangians Eqs. ( 2.43 @xmath 2.45
). Fourth, we put the previous Lagrangians together to obtain the total
Lagrangian as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

After that, we redefine all the fields in the general parameterized way
as given in Eqs. ( 2.50 @xmath 2.53 ). Thus, we get the total Lagrangian
Eq. ( 3.2 ) with eight sets of parameters:

Finding the proper values of these parameters by inspection is what took
the most time in this thesis. In order to find suitable values for the
parameters we used the following strategies:

1.  Ensuring the same propagators as in the standard calculations.

2.  Minimizing the number of terms as much as possible, especially for
    the triple and quadruple graviton vertices.

3.  Cancelling all terms that have second order derivative of our fields
    as @xmath . Because when we integrate by parts, the second order
    derivative of our fields as @xmath gives two terms that have first
    order derivative of our fields as @xmath . Some of these terms can
    cancel terms in the standard Lagrangian.

4.  Trying to keep terms that have the same indices for the partial
    derivatives, such as @xmath and not @xmath , in order to get simpler
    expressions in momentum space.

Thus, we choose the parameters as given in App. A , where we list each
set of the parameters separately and we also show the parameters that
contribute to each Feynman rule. These parameters are the main results
of our work.

To illustrate the simplified calculations, let us take an example of the
triple graviton vertex from our work. The FORM code for the total
Lagrangian of this vertex is shown below, where only parameters from the
following sets ( @xmath ), ( @xmath ), ( @xmath ) can appear: {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=Result,labelposition=all,numbers=left]
LagT3 = + H(mu,mu)*H(nu,nu)*H(al,al,be,be)*Fact(1 + 4*a9,4) +
H(mu,mu)*H(nu,nu)*H(al,be,al,be)*Fact( - 1 + 4*a13,4) +
H(mu,mu)*H(nu,nu,al)*H(al,be,be)*Fact( - 1 - b5 + 2*b3 + a19 + 2*a13,1)
+ H(mu,mu)*H(nu,nu,al)*H(be,al,be)*Fact(1 + 2*b5 + a17,1) +
H(mu,mu)*H(nu,nu,al,be)*H(al,be)*Fact( - 1 + a11,1) +
H(mu,mu)*H(nu,al)*H(nu,al,be,be)*Fact( - 1 + a19,1) +
H(mu,mu)*H(nu,al)*H(nu,be,al,be)*Fact(2 + a17 + a15,2) +
H(mu,mu)*H(nu,al)*H(al,be,nu,be)*Fact(2 + a17 + a15,2) +
H(mu,mu)*H(nu,al,al)*H(nu,be,be)*Fact(1 - 4*c2 - 4*b3 + 8*a9,4) +
H(mu,mu)*H(nu,al,be)^2*Fact( - 3 + 4*c2 + 4*a11,4) +
H(mu,mu)*H(nu,al,be)*H(al,nu,be)*Fact(1 + 2*a15,2) +
H(mu,mu,nu)*H(nu,al)*H(al,be,be)*Fact(2 + 2*b8 - b7 + a21 + a17,2) +
H(mu,mu,nu)*H(nu,al,be)*H(al,be)*Fact(2 + 2*b4 + a20 + 2*a14,2) +
H(mu,mu,nu)*H(al,nu,be)*H(al,be)*Fact( - 4 + 2*b6 + a22 + a18,2) +
H(mu,mu,nu,nu)*H(al,be)^2*Fact( - 1 + 2*a10,2) +
H(mu,mu,nu,al)*H(nu,be)*H(al,be)*Fact(2 + a12,1) +
H(mu,nu)^2*H(al,be,al,be)*Fact(1 + 2*a14,2) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,nu,al)*H(al,be,be)*Fact(2 - b6 + a21 + a15,2) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,nu,al)*H(be,al,be)*Fact( - 4 + 2*b6 + a22 + a18,4) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,nu,al,be)*H(al,be)*Fact(2 + a20,1) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al)*H(nu,al,be,be)*Fact(2 + a21,4) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al)*H(nu,be,al,be)*Fact( - 4 + a18 + a16,1) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al,nu,be)*H(al,be)*Fact( - 2 + a22,2) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al,al)*H(nu,be,be)*Fact( - 1 - 2*b8 + 2*a19,2) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al,al)*H(be,nu,be)*Fact(2 + 2*b8 - b7 + a21 + a17,4) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al,be)*H(nu,al,be)*Fact(3 + 2*a20,2) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al,be)*H(al,nu,be)*Fact( - 2 + a22 + a16,1) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al,be,be)*H(nu,al)*Fact(6 + 3*a21,4) +
H(mu,nu)*H(nu,mu,al)*H(al,be,be)*Fact(2 - b6 + a21 + a15,2) +
H(mu,nu)*H(nu,mu,al)*H(be,al,be)*Fact( - 4 + 2*b6 + a22 + a18,4) +
H(mu,nu)*H(nu,al,mu,be)*H(al,be)*Fact( - 2 + a22,2) +
H(mu,nu)*H(nu,al,al)*H(be,mu,be)*Fact(2 + 2*b8 - b7 + a21 + a17,4) +
H(mu,nu)*H(al,mu,nu)*H(al,be,be)*Fact( - 1 + c2 - c1 - b4 + a11 +
2*a10,1) + H(mu,nu)*H(al,mu,nu)*H(be,al,be)*Fact(2 + 2*b4 + a20 +
2*a14,2) + H(mu,nu)*H(al,mu,al)*H(be,nu,be)*Fact( - 2 + 2*b7 + a18,1) +
H(mu,nu)*H(al,mu,be)*H(al,nu,be)*Fact(3 + 2*c1 + 2*a12,1) +
H(mu,nu)*H(al,mu,be)*H(be,nu,al)*Fact( - 1 + a16,1) ; Here Fact(x,y)
@xmath , H(mu,nu) @xmath , H(al,mu,nu) @xmath , H(al,be,mu,nu) @xmath ,
and all the indices are contracted in the proper way.

Now, if we plug our choice of the parameters as shown in App. A , we get
the following simplified expression for this vertex: {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=Result,labelposition=all,numbers=left]
Time = 5.66 sec Generated terms = 4 LagT3 Terms in output = 4 Bytes used
= 444

LagT3 = + H(mu,mu)*H(nu,al,al)*H(nu,be,be)*Fact(1,8) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al,be)*H(nu,al,be)*Fact(-1,2) +
H(mu,nu)*H(mu,al,be)*H(al,nu,be)*Fact(1,1) +
H(mu,nu)*H(al,mu,nu)*H(al,be,be)*Fact(-1,4) ;

As a result, we efficiently reduce the triple graviton vertex from 40 to
4 terms. In the next subsection we will show all the simplified Feynman
rules that we obtain.

### 3.3 The Simplified Feynman Rules

Here we present the simplified Feynman rules that we obtain from our
choice of parameters, in App. A , together with some comparisons with
the standard Feynman rules that are given in App. B . As already
mentioned, our choice of parameters ensures the same propagators as in
the standard Feynman rules. For completeness, we give below the
Lagrangian and the corresponding propagator in momentum space for the
scalar field @xmath
{axopicture} (90,50) \SetWidth 0.8 \Text (10,35) @xmath \Text (80,35)
@xmath \Line [arrow](35,30)(55,30) \SetWidth 1.5 \Line (10,20)(80,20)

@xmath (3.3) @xmath

for the ghost field @xmath
{axopicture} (90,50) \SetWidth 0.8 \Text (10,35) @xmath \Text (80,35)
@xmath \Line [arrow](35,30)(55,30) \SetWidth 1.5 \Line
[arrow](10,20)(80,20)

@xmath (3.4) @xmath

and for the gravitational field @xmath
{axopicture} (90,50) \SetWidth 0.8 \Text (10,35) @xmath \Text (80,35)
@xmath \SetWidth 1. \DoublePhoton (10,20)(80,20)2102 \Line
[arrow](35,30)(55,30)

@xmath (3.5) @xmath

where @xmath .

Turning now to the vertices, our choice of parameters successfully
simplifies most of them, comparing with the standard ones as listed in
App. B . Here we discuss each vertex separately. First, our main effort
is to get the simplest form of the triple graviton vertex @xmath since
it can appear in many one-loop diagrams, as shown in Sec. 5 , and its
standard expression has 40 terms, as shown in Eq. ( B.6 ). This can lead
to messy calculations when this vertex appears twice or more in a
diagram. For example, a diagram with three triple graviton vertices such
as Fig. 12 i can give about 64 000 terms. However, using our choice of
parameters, we successfully reduce it to just four terms as follows
{axopicture} (100,100) \Text (0,0)[l] @xmath \Text (90,0) @xmath \Text
(55,90)[l] @xmath \SetWidth 1. \DoublePhoton (50,50)(50,100)2102
\DoublePhoton (50,50)(10,10)2102 \DoublePhoton (50,50)(90,10)2102
\SetWidth 0.8 \Line [arrow](40,80)(40,60) \Line [arrow](35,45)(20,30)
\Line [arrow](65,45)(80,30) \Vertex (50,50)3 @xmath

@xmath (3.6) @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Second, in addition to the triple graviton vertex, our main goal is to
get the simplest form of the quadruple graviton vertex @xmath . This
vertex has a very complicated standard form, 113 terms, as shown in
Eq. ( B.7 ). In our method, the parameters in App. A successfully
reduces the number of terms to just 12 as follows

{axopicture}

(100,100) \Text (0,0)[l] @xmath \Text (100,0)[r] @xmath \Text
(100,100)[r] @xmath \Text (0,100)[l] @xmath \SetWidth 1. \DoublePhoton
(50,50)(10,90)2102 \DoublePhoton (50,50)(10,10)2102 \DoublePhoton
(50,50)(90,90)2102 \DoublePhoton (50,50)(90,10)2102 \SetWidth 0.8
\Vertex (50,50)3

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath (3.7)

Third, the scalar-scalar-graviton vertex @xmath , which is the only
vertex that has the same expression as in the standard rules Eq. ( B.2
), is given by
{axopicture} (100,100) \Text (0,0)[l] @xmath \Text (90,0) @xmath \Text
(55,90)[l] @xmath \SetWidth 1. \DoublePhoton (50,50)(50,100)2102
\SetWidth 1.5 \Line (50,50)(10,10) \Line (50,50)(90,10) \SetWidth 0.8
\Line [arrow](40,80)(40,60) \Line [arrow](20,30)(35,45) \Line
[arrow](65,45)(80,30) \Vertex (50,50)3

@xmath (3.8) @xmath @xmath

Fourth, as mentioned before, the parameters are chosen in order to get
the triple graviton and quadruple graviton vertices as simple as
possible, but at the same time the scalar-scalar-graviton-graviton
vertex @xmath is surprisingly reduced from six terms, as in Eq. ( B.3 ),
to just two terms. Moreover, this vertex is now independent of the
scalar mass @xmath as follows
{axopicture} (100,100) \Text (0,0)[l] @xmath \Text (98,0)[r] @xmath
\Text (98,100)[r] @xmath \Text (0,100)[l] @xmath \SetWidth 1. \Line
(50,50)(10,90) \DoublePhoton (50,50)(10,10)2102 \Line (50,50)(90,90)
\DoublePhoton (50,50)(90,10)2102 \SetWidth 0.8 \Line
[arrow](20,30)(35,45) \Line [arrow](65,45)(80,30) \Line
[arrow](20,70)(35,55) \Line [arrow](65,55)(80,70) \Vertex (50,50)3

@xmath (3.9) @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

Fifth, the scalar-scalar-graviton-graviton-graviton vertex @xmath is
reduced from 10 terms, as in Eq. ( B.4 ), to seven terms in the
simplified method, where this reduction is due to the choice of the
redefinition parameters for scalar field @xmath , @xmath as shown in
Tab. 8 , as follows
{axopicture} (100,100) \Text (0,0)[l] @xmath \Text (90,0) @xmath \Text
(45,100)[r] @xmath \Text (5,55)[b] @xmath \Text (95,55)[b] @xmath
\SetWidth 1. \DoublePhoton (50,50)(50,100)2102 \DoublePhoton
(50,50)(0,50)2102 \DoublePhoton (50,50)(100,50)2102 \SetWidth 1.5 \Line
(50,50)(10,10) \Line (50,50)(90,10) \SetWidth 0.8 \Vertex (50,50)3

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath (3.10)

Sixth, the ghost-ghost-graviton vertex @xmath also appears in our
one-loop diagrams as shown in Sec. 5 . It has 11 terms, compared to 8 in
the standard vertex, and it takes the form
{axopicture} (100,100) \Text (0,0)[l] @xmath \Text (90,0) @xmath \Text
(55,90)[l] @xmath \SetWidth 1. \DoublePhoton (50,50)(50,100)2102
\SetWidth 1.5 \Line [arrow](10,10)(50,50) \Line [arrow](50,50)(90,10)
\SetWidth 0.8 \Vertex (50,50)3

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath (3.11)

Seventh, the ghost-ghost-graviton-graviton vertex @xmath is the last
vertex that is needed in the calculations of our one-loop diagrams,
where it appears in Fig. 12 e. It has 29 terms while it vanishes in the
standard rules. It can be written as
{axopicture} (100,100) \Text (0,0)[l] @xmath \Text (100,0)[r] @xmath
\Text (100,100)[r] @xmath \Text (0,100)[l] @xmath \SetWidth 1. \Line
[arrow](10,90)(50,50) \DoublePhoton (50,50)(10,10)2102 \Line
[arrow](50,50)(90,90) \DoublePhoton (50,50)(90,10)2102 \SetWidth 0.8
\Vertex (50,50)3

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath (3.12)

Our ghost vertices above are more complicated than the standard ghost
vertices because our general parameterized gauge Eq. ( 2.37 ) is more
complicated than the de Donder gauge Eq. ( 2.36 ). However, the ghost
vertices just appear in few diagrams in scalar-graviton scattering as
shown in Sec. 5 , so they do not affect our calculations so much if they
have slightly more complicated form.

Finally, after deriving the simplified Feynman rules, it is time to
apply these rules on scattering processes as shown in the next section.

## 4 Tree Level Scattering

Now all the ingredients are in place to start the calculations, but
before diving into one-loop diagrams, we calculate the amplitudes of
scalar-graviton scattering and graviton-graviton scattering at tree
level. So, we first show how we use the helicity formalism [ 11 ] to
express the resulting amplitudes at tree level. After that, we calculate
these amplitudes by using the simplified Feynman rules, as shown in the
previous section, then repeat the calculations for the same amplitudes
but using the standard Feynman rules, as shown in App. B . Finally, we
compare the results obtained in the two ways and check against published
results where available.

### 4.1 Helicity Amplitudes

A helicity amplitude is an amplitude @xmath that is evaluated for fixed
helicity of the external particles, where the helicity of a particle is
the projection of its spin on its momentum. Namely, if we consider the
process: @xmath , then the total amplitude @xmath will be decomposed
into helicity amplitudes @xmath each one representing the amplitude of
transition from a particular helicity state @xmath of the incoming
particles @xmath to a particular helicity state @xmath of the outgoing
particles @xmath .

In our case, the graviton has a polarization tensor @xmath for helicity
@xmath which can be written in terms of the polarization vector @xmath
for helicity @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In addition, the graviton is a spin-2 massless particle of a symmetric
gravitational field @xmath . This implies that its polarization tensor
@xmath is transverse, traceless and symmetric [ 11 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where our choice of polarization vectors and four momenta in the
Center-of-Mass frame ( CM ) are given in App. C together with other
useful kinematic relations.

Finally, helicity amplitudes have some useful properties. For example,
in general the results are given by simple expressions and the total
amplitude can be squared directly without having to use the completeness
relations. Above all, only some of the helicity amplitudes are actually
independent. The others can be calculated by using various symmetries [
7 ] , such as parity

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

time-reversal

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

charge conjugation

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and exchanging bosons

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the spin of the particles.

### 4.2 Scalar-Graviton Scattering

For this process, there are four possible diagrams at tree level as
shown in Fig. 4 . We use the helicity amplitudes formalism, as discussed
before, to write down the amplitudes. For this process we have two
independent helicity amplitudes @xmath , @xmath and the others can be
obtained by applying the symmetries that are given in the previous
subsection.

The amplitudes of the respective diagrams in Fig. 4 can then be written
as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath                        (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Adding these amplitudes together, we get the total amplitude as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the helicity formalism, this total amplitude can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the simplified Feynman rules that we derived in the previous
section and applying kinematics in the CM frame according to the choice
of momenta and polarization vectors as shown in App. C , the two
independent helicity amplitudes are given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the scattering angle and @xmath is the momentum of the
incoming particles in the CM frame.

However, in the CM frame, we have:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then, the two independent helicity amplitudes can be written as:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

After obtaining the results with our simplified Feynman rules, we can
start the process of comparison and checking the results. First, we have
verified that the standard Feynman rules in App. B give the same results
for the independent helicity amplitudes Eq. ( 4.11 ). In addition, our
results for the scalar-graviton scattering helicity amplitudes also
agree with the results of M. T. Grisaru and P. Van Nieuwenhuizen and C.
C. Wu in [ 7 ] .

### 4.3 Graviton-Graviton Scattering

For this process, there are also four possible diagrams at tree level as
shown in Fig. 5 , and the helicity amplitude formalism is again used to
express the final results. This process has four independent helicity
amplitudes @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The amplitudes of the respective diagrams in Fig. 5 can then be written
as:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Adding these amplitudes together, we get the total amplitude as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the helicity formalism, this total amplitude can be written as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Again, using our simplified Feynman rules and applying kinematics in the
CM frame gives the four independent helicity amplitudes:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Applying the symmetry relations Eqs. ( 4.4 @xmath 4.7 ) gives all
helicity amplitudes for graviton-graviton scattering:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath               
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Once more, comparing with the standard Feynman rules, the same results
are reached. Our results for these helicity amplitudes also agree with
the results of J. F. Donoghue and T. Torma in their paper [ 8 ] and M.
T. Grisaru, P. Van Nieuwenhuizen and C. C. Wu in [ 7 ] .

## 5 One-Loop Correction

While the goal in the previous section was to verify the simplified
Feynman rules, the goal in this section is to show the usefulness of
these rules at loop level. So, we first show how to treat the loop
integrals in the loop calculations by using dimensional regularization
and the Passarino-Veltman method [ 1 , 12 , 13 ] . After that, we
calculate some one-loop diagrams for scalar-graviton scattering using
the simplified rules, then repeat the calculations using the standard
rules, and finally compare the results obtained in the two ways.

### 5.1 Loop Integral

To calculate our loop integrals, we use dimensional regularization with
Passarino-Veltman reduction since it preserves gauge and Lorentz
invariance [ 1 , 13 ] .

#### 5.1.1 Dimensional Regularization

Dimensional regularization is widely used to regularize loop integrals
and separate out the UV divergences [ 1 ] . The main idea is to change
the dimensionality of the loop integral from the dimension where it
diverges to a lower dimension @xmath where the integral converges.

In our case, the loop integrals are in four-dimensional Minkowski space.
So, we move them to dimension @xmath , where @xmath is a parameter and
the limit @xmath will be taken at the end of the calculation. Then, we
perform the integrals and go back to the original dimension by doing
analytic continuation. Moreover, there are some considerations when
using @xmath dimensions that have to be taken into account: the metric
tensor becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the measures become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a regulator parameter with dimension @xmath .

Briefly, the standard procedure of this regularization is [ 1 ] :
transfer to Euclidean space, do the Wick rotation, apply Feynman
parameters, shift the integration variable, perform the integral, go
back to Minkowski space. These steps will be explained in more detail
and applied in the next section.

#### 5.1.2 Scalar Integrals

The general form of a scalar one-loop integral for a N-point function
with external momenta @xmath (with @xmath from momentum conservation) as
shown in Fig. 6 is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the undefined momentum in the loop that will be
integrated over, and @xmath are the internal momenta that are related to
the external momenta by @xmath as shown in Fig. 6 , and @xmath are the
masses of the propagators involved in the loop.

In our case of scalar-graviton scattering to one-loop, only the scalar
field propagator has a mass @xmath , so the masses @xmath are either
zero or @xmath . In the following, we will only need one-loop diagrams
up to the box diagrams with four propagators so we limit ourselves to
the following scalar integrals:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.2)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where the loop integrals are denoted with respect to the number of
propagators involved in the loop: ( @xmath ) for one propagator, (
@xmath ) for two propagators, ( @xmath ) for three propagators and (
@xmath ) for four propagators.

Before continuing we note that as a result of the standard procedure of
dimensional regularization, all massless tad-pole diagrams, as
illustrated in Fig. 7 , vanish.

More specifically these diagrams correspond to the massless scalar
integral @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

As can be seen in App. D , this integral vanishes for all @xmath since
it is proportional to @xmath where in this case @xmath . Thus, the whole
integral is zero. The general form of this result can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is known as Veltman’s formula [ 12 ] .

#### 5.1.3 Tensor Integrals

The general form of a tensor one-loop integral of rank- @xmath for a
N-point function with external momenta @xmath (with @xmath from momentum
conservation) as shown in Fig. 6 is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are indices that represent the rank of the integral, and
the rest is the same as in Eq. ( 5.1 ).

In our case of scalar-graviton scattering to one-loop, the maximum
number of indices that can appear in the numerator for @xmath and @xmath
integrals is four, for @xmath is five, and @xmath is six. To calculate
these tensor integrals, we will follow the Passarino-Veltman method,
which will be discussed in the next section.

#### 5.1.4 Passarino-Veltman Reduction

The idea of the Passarino-Veltman method [ 13 ] is to write the tensor
integrals in terms of scalar integrals, Eq. ( 5.2 ), with the help of
Passarino-Veltman reduction formula which takes the general form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

To illustrate this idea, let us take an example of a rank-one tensor
integral, a vector integral, for a two-point function which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Since @xmath is the only four vector in this integral
which can carry the index @xmath in the result, it follows that this
integral can be written as @xmath multiplied by a scalar function @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Multiplying by @xmath from both sides gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we can use the Passarino-Veltman reduction formula Eq. ( 5.6 ) which
takes the following form in this example,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Inserting Eq. ( 5.10 ) into Eq. ( 5.9 ) gives

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

From this it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As a result, the tensor integral @xmath can be written in terms of the
scalar integrals @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This procedure can be
generalized for any tensor integral, and for completeness we give all
relevant tensor integrals in App. E .

### 5.2 Scalar-Graviton Scattering to One-Loop Order

In order to study scalar-graviton scattering to one-loop order, we first
need to draw all the diagrams that can contribute to this process up to
one-loop. We start with the tree level diagrams as shown in Fig. 8 .
Then, we insert all possible one-loop corrections, as shown in the next
sections, into the tree level diagrams to get all possible one-loop
diagrams for scalar-graviton scattering. More specifically, in this case
we need to insert the propagator corrections, the triple graviton vertex
corrections, the scalar-scalar-graviton vertex corrections and the
scalar-scalar-graviton-graviton vertex corrections.

Moreover, we need to take into account that there are permutations of
external graviton legs whenever it is possible. For example, the loop
corrections to the scalar-scalar-graviton-graviton vertex has a
permutation in external graviton legs as shown in Fig. 9 . In addition,
when dealing with loops, it is important to remember the minus sign that
arises from fermion loops.

The last point to describe before starting the calculations is how the
graviton propagator behaves in dimensional regularization at loop level.
As starting point, we recall the Lagrangian for the graviton propagator,
Eq. ( 3.5 ), which can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the identity tensor.

Then, we solve the Green’s function equation in @xmath dimensions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

to find the propagator. To solve this equation, we perform a Fourier
transform which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

To solve this equation, we use the following ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Thus, the graviton propagator in momentum space in @xmath dimensions is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

#### 5.2.1 Self-Energy Corrections

There are two types of propagators, scalar and graviton, in the tree
level diagrams shown in Fig. 8 , and each one has different loop
corrections. So, let us start with the graviton propagator which has six
one-loop diagrams as shown in Fig. 10 .

In terms of the Feynman rules, the diagrams with one propagator in Fig.
10 a-c can be written as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath                        (5.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the symmetry factor. @xmath and @xmath vanish according
to the relation Eq. ( 5.4 ), which means that all massless tad-pole
diagrams vanish. Using the simplified rules, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which can be written in terms of scalar integrals as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, if we use the standard Feynman rules to calculate the
amplitude @xmath , then the calculation is slightly more complicated
because the scalar-scalar-graviton-graviton vertex @xmath has six terms
in the standard rules Eq. ( B.2 ), compared to two terms in the
simplified rules Eq. ( 3.9 ).

Next we consider the diagrams with two propagators in the loop as in
Fig. 10 d-f, which can be written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the symmetry factor and @xmath .

Plugging in the Feynman rules will give lengthy expressions. Therefore,
we only show @xmath , which has two triple graviton vertices, while the
other amplitudes @xmath are approximately the same in the standard and
simplified rules. Using the simplified rules and doing the
Passarino-Veltman reduction, the amplitude @xmath can be written in
terms of the scalar integral @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now, if we instead use the standard Feynman rules to calculate the
amplitude @xmath , then the calculation is more complicated because the
triple graviton vertex @xmath has 40 terms in the standard rules Eq. (
B.6 ), compared to only four terms in the simplified rules Eq. ( 3.6 ).
In addition, this amplitude has two triple graviton vertices, so the
number of Lagrangian terms involved from the vertices in the standard
rules is 1600, compared to 16 terms in the simplified rules. Since these
calculations are very lengthy, we only show the comparison between the
running time in the FORM program, after doing Passarino-Veltman
reduction and writing the amplitude @xmath in terms of scalar integrals:
{Verbatim} [gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=simplified
way,labelposition=all,numbers=left] WTime = 0.58 sec Generated terms =
10 HH2a Terms in output = 10 Bytes used = 4024 {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=standard
way,labelposition=all,numbers=left] WTime = 26.38 sec Generated terms =
10 HH2b Terms in output = 10 Bytes used = 3960 As shown above, there is
a large difference in the running time. In addition, the running time
will increase considerably for more complicated diagrams as we will show
in the next sections.

Finally, we consider the scalar propagator which has just two diagrams
that can contribute as shown in Fig. 11 . Again, the massless tad-pole
in Fig. 11 a vanishes. So, the diagrams can be written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath               (5.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the symmetry factor and @xmath .
Plugging the Feynman rules in @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.23)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which can be written in terms of scalar integrals as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both the simplified and the standard rules give the same results, since
the scalar-scalar-graviton vertex @xmath and the propagators are the
same in both.

#### 5.2.2 Triple Graviton Vertex Corrections

At tree level, the triple graviton vertex appears in the t-channel
diagram as shown in Fig. 8 b, and it has nine one-loop contributions:
three of them are tad-pole diagrams as in Fig. 12 a-c, three are bubble
diagrams as in Fig. 12 d-f and three are triangle diagrams as in Fig. 12
g-i. However, in this section we only discuss the bubble diagram with
two graviton propagators, as shown in Fig. 13 f in detail, while we only
give overall comparisons for the other diagrams.

Using the momentum assignments in Fig. 13 , the amplitude of this
diagram can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the symmetry factor and @xmath .

In this case, we note that the standard triple graviton vertex @xmath
Eq. ( B.6 ) has 40 terms and the standard quadruple graviton vertex
@xmath Eq. ( B.7 ) has 113 terms whereas the simplified ones Eqs. ( 3.6
, 3.7 ) have only 4 and 12 terms respectively. Thus, for this diagram,
the number of Lagrangian terms involved from the vertices in the
standard way is 4520, compared to 48 terms in the simplified way. To
compare the two, we again consider the running time in FORM, after doing
Passarino-Veltman reduction and writing the amplitude in terms of scalar
integrals: {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=simplified
way,labelposition=all,numbers=left] WTime = 20.15 sec Generated terms =
99 V3HH2a Terms in output = 99 Bytes used = 32776 {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=standard
way,labelposition=all,numbers=left] WTime = 803.35 sec Generated terms =
99 V3HH2b Terms in output = 99 Bytes used = 34184 which shows that the
running time in the standard way is about 40 times the running time in
the simplified way. Similarly, for the diagram in Fig 12 i the running
time is about seven minutes in the simplified way while in the standard
way it is more than two hours.

Finally, we list, in Tab. 1 , the number of Lagrangian terms for all
one-loop corrections to the triple graviton vertex in the standard and
simplified ways.

#### 5.2.3 Scalar-Scalar-Graviton Vertex Corrections

At tree level, the scalar-scalar-graviton vertex appears twice in the s
and u-channel diagrams and once in the t-channel as shown in Fig. 8 ,
and it has six one-loop diagrams as shown in Fig. 14 : the tad-pole
diagram in Fig. 14 a, the three bubble diagrams in Fig. 14 b-d and the
two triangle diagrams in Fig. 14 e-f.

Again, we list in Tab. 2 the comparison of the number of Lagrangian
terms using the standard and simplified rules to show the usefulness of
the simplified rules and how the number of Lagrangian terms can be
reduced by a factor 30 for some of the diagrams in Fig. 14 .

#### 5.2.4 Scalar-Scalar-Graviton-Graviton Vertex Corrections

The scalar-scalar-graviton-graviton vertex also appears once at tree
level in the last diagram in Fig. 8 . However, it has 16 one-loop
diagrams as shown in Fig. 15 : the tad-pole diagram in Fig. 15 a, the
five bubble diagrams in Fig. 15 b-f, the seven triangle diagrams in Fig.
15 g-m and the three box diagrams in Fig. 15 n-p.

Again, since the aim of this section is to show the usefulness of the
simplified rules, we only discuss the statistics of the results for the
diagram in Fig. 15 h. For this diagram, the number of Lagrangian terms
involved from the vertices in the standard way is 9 600, compared to 32
terms in the simplified way. To compare the two, we again consider the
running time in FORM, after doing Passarino-Veltman reduction and
writing the amplitude in terms of scalar integrals: {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=simplified
way,labelposition=all,numbers=left] WTime = 91.16 sec Generated terms =
21830 V2phi2H3a Terms in output = 116 Bytes used = 1786232 {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=standard
way,labelposition=all,numbers=left] WTime = 3940.32 sec Generated terms
= 34572 V2phi2H3b Terms in output = 116 Bytes used = 1823344 which shows
that the running time in the simplified way is less than two minutes
while in the standard way it is more than one hour.

Finally, we list, in Tab. 3 , the number of Lagrangian terms for all
one-loop corrections to the triple graviton vertex in the standard and
simplified ways.

## 6 Conclusions

In this work we have shown how it is possible to simplify the Feynman
rules for gravity by using the freedom of choosing the gauge, adding
total derivative terms and redefining the fields, which can change the
form of Lagrangian without changing the information that it contains. In
particular, the triple graviton and quadruple graviton vertices were
reduced from 40 to 4 terms and from 113 to 12 terms respectively.

In order to check our simplified Feynman rules, we have compared the
resulting amplitudes from the simplified rules with the resulting
amplitudes from the standard rules for scalar-graviton and
graviton-graviton scattering at tree level, and we indeed found that the
resulting amplitudes are in agreement. In addition, our results at tree
level also agree with the results of M. T. Grisaru, P. Van Nieuwenhuizen
and C. C. Wu [ 7 ] as well as J. F. Donoghue and T. Torma [ 8 ] .

Besides tree level amplitudes, we have also calculated some one-loop
diagrams for scalar-graviton scattering, and we have shown how the
calculations become simpler by using the simplified Feynman rules. In
particular, for those diagrams that have triple or quadruple graviton
vertices. Moreover, we have shown how the running time in the FORM
program can be considerably reduced, up to @xmath times faster for some
diagrams, by using the simplified Feynman rules to calculate the
amplitudes.

These simplified rules can also be used to simplify the calculations of
more complicated diagrams such as the quadruple graviton vertex at
one-loop level in graviton-graviton scattering with four propagators. In
the latter example, the number of Lagrangian terms involved from the
vertices in the standard way is 2 560 000 terms, compared to 256 terms
in the simplified way. In addition, our aim was to simplify the lowest
order vertices. However, this technique can also be used to simplify
higher order vertices. Finally, this thesis may open the door to finding
more freedoms and tools to further manipulate the Lagrangian in order to
reach even simpler Feynman rules for gravity.

## Appendix A Parameters

Table 4 - 10 in this appendix shows the values of the parameters that
were chosen to obtain the simplified Feynman rules as shown in Sec. 3 .

## Appendix B Standard Feynman Rules

For completeness we give here the standard Feynman rules that we derived
using the weak gravitational field expansion Eq. ( 2.10 ) and de Donder
gauge Eq. ( 2.36 ):

-   The scalar propagator:

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (B.1)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

-   The scalar-scalar-graviton vertex:

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

-   The scalar-scalar-graviton-graviton vertex:

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      (B.3)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

-   The scalar-scalar-graviton-graviton-graviton vertex:

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      (B.4)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

-   The graviton propagator:

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (B.5)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

-   The triple graviton vertex:

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

      -- -- -------- -- -------
            @xmath      
            @xmath      
            @xmath      
            @xmath      
            @xmath      
            @xmath      
            @xmath      (B.6)
      -- -- -------- -- -------

-   The quadruple graviton vertex:

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

      -- -- -------- --
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
            @xmath   
      -- -- -------- --

      -- -- -------- -- -------
            @xmath      
            @xmath      
            @xmath      
            @xmath      (B.7)
      -- -- -------- -- -------

-   The ghost propagator:

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (B.8)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

-   The ghost-ghost-graviton vertex:

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      (B.9)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

-   The ghost-ghost-graviton-graviton vertex vanishes.

## Appendix C Kinematics

### c.1 Scalar-Graviton Scattering (@xmath):

There are four diagrams for this process as shown in Fig. 4 , three of
them (a, b, c) representing s, t and u-channels respectively. According
to the conventions that we use in this thesis, the Mandelstam variables
are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mass of scalar field @xmath .

In the CM frame, with the incoming particles along the z-axis, the
momenta and the polarization vector can be chosen as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Choosing the outgoing particles to be in the yz-plane, the momenta and
the complex conjugate polarization vector are:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the scattering angle and @xmath where @xmath is a
rotation. It is also possible to write the graviton polarization
directly as a tensor:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath where again @xmath are rotation matrices. Finally, the
following useful relations are valid in the CM frame:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

### c.2 Graviton-Graviton Scattering (@xmath):

There are also four diagrams for this process as shown in Fig. 5 , but
the relation between Mandelstam variables for this process is now

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the CM frame, with the incoming particles, along the z-axis, the
momenta and the polarization vectors can be chosen as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               (C.9)
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Choosing the outgoing particles to be in the yz-plane, the momenta and
the complex conjugate polarization vectors are:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scattering angle.

Finally, the following useful relations are valid in the CM frame:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix D Dimensional Regularization of Scalar Integrals

To illustrate how the scalar integrals are calculated in dimensional
regularization, let us take as an example the scalar integral @xmath
Eq. ( 5.2 ) and then follow the standard procedure of dimensional
regularization [ 1 ] . First, we move the loop integral from Minkowski
space to Euclidean space by replacing the zeroth component of momentum
in Minkowski space @xmath by the imaginary fourth component in Euclidean
space @xmath . As a result of this replacement @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Then, the scalar integral @xmath for @xmath and @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Second, since the integration over the fourth component of the momentum
goes along the imaginary axis @xmath , we need to perform a Wick
rotation to move to the integration along the real axis, making sure
that the contour does not cross the poles of @xmath . Third, in order to
transform the product of several brackets in the denominator into a
single bracket, we use the Feynman parameterization

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.4)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the gamma function.

In our case, @xmath , and the integral becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , and from the second line to the third we used the delta
function to do the integration over @xmath and finally renamed @xmath to
@xmath .

Fourth, to complete the square of @xmath in the denominator, we need to
shift the integration variable @xmath to absorb the term @xmath and
obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

Fifth, we perform the momentum integral in Euclidean space, using
spherical coordinates as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath follows from the angular integration, and from the second
line to the third @xmath is used, and then @xmath . However, we note
that the gamma function @xmath still diverges in the last result if we
are in 4-dimensions.

Sixth, we transform back into Minkowski space by replacing again @xmath
and doing an expansion in @xmath using the following relation [ 1 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The integral still blows up for @xmath but now the
divergent part is separated from the finite terms. Similarly, we can
calculate the other scalar integrals.

## Appendix E Passarino-Veltman Reduction of Tensor Integrals

In the Passarino-Veltman method, the tensorial integrals can be written
in terms of scalar functions as listed below. However, we only include
the cases that are relevant to the scalar-graviton scattering to
one-loop order (i.e., @xmath and @xmath integrals up to four indices,
@xmath integrals up to five indices and @xmath integrals up to six
indices in the numerator). In addition, all scalar functions @xmath are
symmetric under @xmath indices in our notation below (e.g., @xmath ),
and @xmath was dropped for simplicity:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.8)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.9)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.11)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.12)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.13)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.14)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.15)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.16)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.17)
              @xmath      
     @xmath               (E.18)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.19)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.20)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.21)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Also, we use the following reduction formulas

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the relations between the momenta are:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Finally, we follow the Passarino-Veltman method as explained in Sec.
5.1.4 using the reduction formulas Eqs. ( E.22 @xmath E.28 ) and other
integral tools such as change of variables. As a result, we write all
above scalar functions @xmath in terms of the scalar functions @xmath
and @xmath .

## Appendix F The FORM Program

In this appendix, we show short pieces of our code to illustrate as much
as possible how we perform the calculations in the FORM program. At the
same time, we ensure that all the indices are contracted in a proper way
in the code. However, let us start by introducing some notations in Tab.
11 .

As an example, the square root of the determinant of metric @xmath
SQRTMG can be calculated from the relation Eq. ( 2.13 ) as: {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=Code,labelposition=all,numbers=left]
Local SQRTMG = 1+sum_(n,1,‘MAXH’,invfac_(n)/2^n*trlng^n); #do i=1,‘MAXH’
id,once trlng = -sum_(n,1,‘MAXH’
,sign_(n)/n*epsh^n*kappa^n*HH(n,i‘i’x1,i‘i’x1)); id epsh^‘MAXH’+1 = 0;
#enddo #do i=1,‘MAXH’ #do j=2,‘MAXH’ id,once HH(n?,mu?,nu?) =
H(mu,i‘i’x‘j’)*HH(n-1,i‘i’x‘j’,nu); id HH(0,mu?,nu?) = d_(mu,nu); #enddo
#enddo

In addition, the field redefinition can be done by replacing each field
and its derivatives with the proper expansion. The code below shows the
gravitational field redefinition Eq. ( 2.50 ), where the other fields
were treated in the same way: {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=Code,labelposition=all,numbers=left]
#do i=1,‘MAXH’ multiply aa; id,once aa*H(?a,mu?,nu?) =
a1*Der(?a,H(mu,nu)) +kappa*epsh*(a3*Der(?a,H(mu,i‘i’+1x1),
H(i‘i’+1x1,nu))+a2*Der(?a,H(mu,nu),H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x1)))
+kappa^2*epsh^2*(a4*Der(?a,H(mu,nu),H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x1),
H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x2))+a5*Der(?a,H(mu,nu),H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x2),
H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x2))+a6*Der(?a,H(mu,i‘i’+1x1),H(nu,i‘i’+1x1),
H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x2))+a7*Der(?a,H(mu,i‘i’+1x1),H(nu,i‘i’+1x2),
H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x2)))
+kappa^3*epsh^3*(a8*Der(?a,H(mu,nu),H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x1),
H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x2),H(i‘i’+1x3,i‘i’+1x3))+a9*Der(?a,H(mu,nu),
H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x1),H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x3),
H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x3))+a10*Der(?a,H(mu,nu),H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x2),
H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x3),H(i‘i’+1x3,i‘i’+1x1))+a11*Der(?a,
H(mu,i‘i’+1x1),H(nu,i‘i’+1x1),H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x2),
H(i‘i’+1x3,i‘i’+1x3))+a12*Der(?a,H(mu,i‘i’+1x1),H(nu,i‘i’+1x1),
H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x3),H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x3))+a13*Der(?a,
H(mu,i‘i’+1x1),H(nu,i‘i’+1x2),H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x2),
H(i‘i’+1x3,i‘i’+1x3))+a14*Der(?a,H(mu,i‘i’+1x1),H(nu,i‘i’+1x2),
H(i‘i’+1x1,i‘i’+1x3),H(i‘i’+1x2,i‘i’+1x3))); id aa = 1; id epsh^‘MAXH’ =
0; .sort #enddo Taking a derivative in our notation can also be achieved
in FORM with the following procedure: {Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=Code,labelposition=all,numbers=left]
repeat; id Deriv(H?fields(?a),?b) = H(?a)*Deriv(?b); id
Deriv(mu?,H?fields(?a),?b) = H(mu,?a)*Deriv(?b) +H(?a)*Deriv(mu,?b); id
Deriv(mu?,nu?,H?fields(?a),?b) = H(mu,nu,?a)*Deriv(?b)
+H(mu,?a)*Deriv(nu,?b) +H(nu,?a)*Deriv(mu,?b) +H(?a)*Deriv(mu,nu,?b); id
Deriv(mu?) = 0; id Deriv(mu?,nu?) = 0; id Deriv = 1; endrepeat; Finally,
the amplitude of a Feynman diagram can be calculated in FORM as shown
below for the s-channel diagram in scalar-graviton scattering:
{Verbatim}
[gobble=2,frame=single,framesep=2mm,label=Code,labelposition=all,numbers=left]
* S-channel in scalar-graviton scattering: * * p2-¿ x x p4-¿ * mu,nu x x
al,be * x x * aaaaaaaXaaaaaaaYaaaaaaaa * p1-¿ P1-¿ p3-¿ * * X=p1x,i1x
Y=p2x,i2x

#include vertexprocedures.hf #include symbols.hf #include setexternal.hf
.sort L Vleft = #call vertex2phi1H‘VERTEXTYPE’ ; #call setmom(p1x,3)
#call takederiv print +s; .sort skip; L Vright = #call
vertex2phi1H‘VERTEXTYPE’ ; #call relabelindexij(1,2) #call setmom(p2x,3)
#call takederiv print +s; .sort #call
pickoutphiin(p1,p1x,p1xp1x,2,Vleft) #call
pickoutphiout(p3,p2x,p2xp2x,2,Vright) #call
pickoutHin(mu,nu,p2,p1x,p1xp1x,2,Vleft) #call
pickoutHout(al,be,p4,p2x,p2xp2x,1,Vright) .sort drop Vleft,Vright; G
PPHH1‘VERTEXTYPE’ = i_^3*Vleft*Vright; #call
connectphi(P1,p1x,p1xp1x,1,p2x,p2xp2x,1,PPHH1‘VERTEXTYPE’) print +s;
.store save save/PPHH1‘VERTEXTYPE’.sav PPHH1‘VERTEXTYPE’; .end Where we
start the code by defining the vertices and importing their
corresponding expressions. In the example above, the left vertex defined
in lines 15 and 16 is a scalar-scalar-graviton vertex, with its
corresponding expression given by Eq. ( 3.8 ). Then in lines 18, 19, 31
and 33, we convert this vertex to momentum space. After that in line 37,
we put all together and multiply by ( @xmath ) for each vertex and
propagator. Finally in line 38, we connect the two vertices by calling
the propagator procedure, which also contains the pickoutphiin and
pickoutphiout procedures.

[type=acronym]
