## Chapter 1 Introduction

This thesis is devoted to various questions connected with duality. It
is composed of two parts. The first part explores some aspects of
timelike T-duality in the context of comapctifications of the maximal
supergravity in eleven-dimensions and its timelike T-duals. The second
part studies the consistent deformations (“gaugings”) of extended
supergravities and sheds new light on the role played by the
electric-magnetic duality in that context.

The question of why spacetime has Lorentzian signature @xmath with one
and only one time has been repeatedly raised by many authors in the
literature (see [ 5 ] and references therein). Duality provides a tool
to address this question since the timelike T-dualities considered by
Hull [ 6 , 7 ] change the spacetime signature. In the case of @xmath
-theory, one can generate through timelike dualities various “exotic”
duals ( @xmath -theory and @xmath -theory as well as the reversed
signature theories), which possess a different number of “times”. Part 1
of the thesis studies a special class of solutions of the corresponding
exotic supergravities. More preciesly, we investigate compactifications
of these theories to four dimensions on internal seven-manifolds that
are parallelizable.

The condition that allows a Riemannian geometry to admit an absolute
parallelism is a classic question which was answered by Cartan and
Schouten [ 8 , 9 ] in the case of Euclidean signature, concluding that
the only possibilities for sphere topologies are @xmath and @xmath .
They also described curvature-free connections on Lie groups and as a
result exhibited parallelisms on group manifolds. They then generalized
it to give a local description of parallelism (in terms of
curvature-free metric-compatible connections in the presence of torsion)
on Riemannian manifolds which are products of flat manifolds, compact
simple group manifolds, and 7-spheres. Moreover, the parallelism of the
@xmath -sphere, which was before understood as an isolated phenomenon,
was provided as an example.

There is a close relation between parallelizability of spheres and
division algebras. It is particularly interesting since it explains the
reason behind the specific form [ 8 , 9 ] of the solutions that was
found by Cartan and Schouten. It also allows one to go one step forward
and to extend the result of Cartan and Schouten to pseudo-Riemannian
manifolds [ 10 , 11 ] . This will lead to the result that there exist a
parallelism on the pseudo-Riemannian manifolds which are of the form of
the product of a flat manifold, irreducible symmetric spaces and the
symmetric coset spaces @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Here “irreducible”
means that the symmetric spaces are not locally product spaces.
Equivalently, it means that the infinitesimal holonomy group acts
irreducibly on the tangent space and therefore the holonomy group is
given by the Berger classification of irreducible holonomy groups [ 12 ,
13 ] .

We are interested in the case of seven dimensions, which stands out also
as a result of Adams theorem [ 14 ] that relates @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath to normed division algebras. We will briefly discuss
the three-dimensional case to set the stage for a more difficult case of
seven dimensions. The generalization of Cartan-Schouten theorem to
pseudo-Riemannian manifold will teach us that in three and seven
dimensions (beside @xmath and @xmath already noted by Cartan and
Schouten), respectively AdS @xmath manifold and @xmath (or @xmath ) are
also parallelizable.

Seven dimensions have been shown to play an important role in
supergravity or @xmath -theory, where one finds an effective theory of
supergravity in four dimensions from compactification of the
eleven-dimensional supergravity on a seven-manifold. If this
seven-manifold is toroidal then the compactification will result in an
ungauged theory in four-dimensional flat background [ 15 , 16 ] . The
Freund-Rubin compactification [ 17 ] on @xmath will lead to a
four-dimensional @xmath gauged supergravity in AdS @xmath spacetime [ 18
] . The Freund-Rubin compactification is the only flux compactification
of supergravity which has the maximum number of Killing spinors or, in
other words, it preserves all supercharges. There is another type of
flux compactification where one turns on other fluxes and therefore
changes the internal geometry, which breaks part of the supersymmetry of
the resulting theory. For example, @xmath compactification of
eleven-dimensional supergravity [ 19 , 20 ] preserves one Killing
spinor, which leads to at most @xmath supergravity in four dimensions.
The Englert solution [ 21 ] is a specific solution of @xmath
compactification where supersymmetry is completely broken. This solution
is obtained by compactifying on parallelizable @xmath .

Since @xmath plays an important role in this scenario, it might seem
interesting to see if any role is played by @xmath for example in the
compactification. At first sight, this looks impossible since we cannot
compactify a theory in @xmath dimensions on a manifold with more than
one time direction. However, as we recalled above it turns out that
there is a signature-changing duality in string theory [ 6 , 7 ] . This
duality is called timelike T-duality as a result of which one finds an
orbit of equivalent theories under this duality. The orbit involves
three theories formulated in the same dimension but with different
signatures. The theories in reversed signatures also belong to this
orbit.

We will show that the compactification on parallelizable @xmath is
possible if one works in the picture described by one of these dual
theories, known as @xmath -theory [ 1 ] . This solution, similarly to
the Englert solution, will result in a non-supersymmetric theory in AdS
@xmath background. This can be understood as a spontaneous
compactification on @xmath with @xmath invariant fluxes. The
compactification on parallelizable seven-manifolds for the other
supergravity theories in eleven dimensions (the low energy limit of
@xmath - and @xmath -theories) is not possible.

In Part 4.4.1 we focus on electric-magnetic duality of supergravity in
four dimensions [ 22 ] . Electric-magnetic duality is particularly
interesting since the gauge group of a gauged supergravity in its
second-order formulation is a subgroup of electric-magnetic duality
symmetry group and moreover the available gaugings depend on the duality
frame in which the theory is formulated [ 23 ] . However, the
electric-magnetic duality symmetry of a supergravity (or in general a
scalar-vector coupled model) in the second-order formulation is not
manifest off-shell since part of this symmetry acts non-locally (in
space) on fields [ 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ] . As a result, the gauge group is
normally a subgroup of an electric subgroup of electric-magnetic duality
which acts locally on fields. On the other hand, the first-order
formulation is manifestly duality invariant. The main purpose of Part
4.4.1 is to have a systematic discussion of the gaugings of a
supergravity theory, or in other words to find the consistent
deformations of an ungauged supergravity. We will show that even though
the first-order formulation is manifestly duality invariant but due to
the rigidity of the first-order formulation [ 2 ] it is not suited for
the discussion of the deformations. Therefore, in order to discuss the
consistent deformations of supergravity, it is inevitable to work in the
second-order formulation.

The embedding tensor formalism introduced by [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ]
, is a procedure of gauging a supergravity theory by promoting abelian
vector fields to non-abelian ones, replacing the ordinary derivatives by
covariant ones and adding extra interactions in order to restore the
symmetry. In this formalism the embedding of the gauge group in the
global symmetry group is described through constant parameters given by
the so-called embedding tensor; hence the gauged Lagrangian depends on
the embedding tensor which must satisfy a set of constraints. The
embedding tensor formalism will provide a gauged Lagrangian for the
supergravity theories where one can see that the possible deformations
are those which require changing the gauge algebra. However, there are
in general other types of deformations where even though the gauge
symmetry is deformed but the gauge algebra remains unchanged. It is then
an interesting question to explore the possibility of gauging the
symmetries corresponding to these type of deformations [ 33 ] . In order
to do that we use the BV-BRST deformation formalism [ 34 , 35 , 36 , 37
] which provides precise tools to answer this question in a systematic
manner.

We will first show that [ 2 ] the space of deformations of embedding
tensor formalism is isomorphic to the space of deformation of a
scalar-vector Lagrangian (describing the bosonic action of supergravity
without spin-2 field) in a chosen duality frame determined by the
embedding tensor. The infinitesimal local deformations are controlled by
the cohomology of the BRST differential at ghost number zero in the
space of local functionals. The BRST cohomology at ghost number one is
related to the possible anomalies in the theory. In fact, we show that
the BRST cohomology at all ghost numbers is equivalent for the embedding
tensor Lagrangian and the one of scalar-vector coupled model. Then,
performing a thorough analysis of BV-BRST deformation [ 3 ] of the
scalar-vector Lagrangian, we will obtain all possible symmetry
deformations controlled by the BRST cohomology at ghost number minus
one. It includes the symmetries of both types; those which deform the
gauge algebra and the types which do not. The consistent deformations
then is implemented by a set of constraints (similarly to the embedding
tensor formalism) and one finds that the only symmetries which satisfy
these conditions are of the type already considered in the embedding
tensor formalism. The other types of symmetries even though are part of
the electric symmetry group but they cannot be gauged. We will
demonstrate this explicitly in different examples including the one of
@xmath supergravity in four dimensions.

The thesis is organized as follows:

In Chapter 2 we provide definitions regarding the notion of parallelism
and the relation between parallelizability and division algebras. In
Chapter 3 we use the division algebras to show the parallelizability on
specific seven-dimensional topologies rediscovering the results of
Cartan-Schouten and Wolf.

In Chapter 4 , we start by reviewing the effect of time-like T-duality
and the structure of dual @xmath -theories. Then, we show all possible
solutions of compactification of @xmath -, @xmath - and @xmath -theories
on seven-dimensional (pseudo-)sphere or (pseudo-)hyperbolic manifolds in
both cases of Freund-Rubin compactification, described by Hull [ 38 ] ,
and the Englert compactification where the internal manifolds are the
parallelizable ones of Chapter 3 . We will show that the reduction of
the @xmath - dimensional supergravity, low energy limit of @xmath
-theory, on the seven- dimensional parallelizable pseudo-sphere @xmath ,
similarly to the reduction of standard supergravity on the
parallelizable @xmath -sphere, will result in well defined theories in
@xmath background. The difference with the reduction on a ‘round’
pseudo-sphere is that in the latter the dimensionally reduced four-
dimensional theories are maximally supersymmetric with @xmath gauge
symmetry while the former solutions are non-supersymmetric with @xmath
gauge symmetry. The presence of fluxes due to the flattening torsions on
a parallelizable manifold breaks the supersymmetry.

In Chapter 5 , we review the electric-magnetic duality and explain the
enhancement of the symmetry in the presence of scalars. In Chapter 6 ,
we give a quick review of embedding tensor formalism and then we
describe how the scalar-vector Lagrangian describing the maximal
supergravity in four dimensions is captured as the undeformed limit of
the embedding tensor gauged Lagrangian in a frame parameterized by the
embedding tensor coefficients.

In Chapter 7 , after explaining the BV-BRST deformation formalism we go
on to prove the isomorphism between the space of local deformations of
embedding tensor Lagrangian and the described scalar-vector coupled
Lagrangian and therefore complete the analysis of previous chapter. In
Section 7.5 , we explicitly show the extra fields present in the
embedding tensor formalism will disappear since whether they are
auxiliary fields (like two-forms) or of pure gauge type.

In Chapter 8 , we present a detailed computation of BRST cohomology in
different ghost degrees analyzing the global symmetries, infinitesimal
deformations and anomalies described respectively by @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . We provide then various examples to demonstrate the solutions
to the obstruction equations for the consistent deformations and to show
which symmetries can be gauged. We specifically show this for @xmath
supergravity in four dimensions where one can in fact solve the
constraints in practice. In principle, the result obtained in this
chapter can be used for the gauging of supergravitis with @xmath in four
dimensions.

Finally, we will give a summary of all results in Chapter 9 . The future
perspective of the works along the line of thoughts of this thesis is
also discussed.

Four appendices were included at the end. Appendix A contains the list
of all notations used in the thesis. Appendix B provides a quick review
of Cayley-Dickson construction of division algebras and definitions of
the algebra of octonions and split octonions relevant to Chapter 2 .
Appendix C includes the definitions of (pseudo-)sphere and
(pseudo-)hyperbolic spaces and a presentation of two infinite families
of parallelism (similarly to the ones of Cartan and Schouten) of the
pseudo-sphere @xmath . We also explained the relation between different
groups @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath which are relevant in
describing the parallelized @xmath . The final appendix, Appendix D
contains a proof of a critical relation being used in Chapter 8 .

\@part Parallelizable manifolds

## Chapter 2 Parallelizability

### 2.1 Absolute Parallelism

In this chapter we provide some definitions and theorems necessary to
understand the mathematics behind the next chapter.

We first start with explaining the meaning of absolute parallelism where
we use the definition given by Wolf [ 10 ] . An absolute parallelism on
a differentiable manifold @xmath , is an isomorphism map @xmath between
tangent spaces at any two points @xmath which does not depend on
additional choices. More precisely,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which satisfies the consistency condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the regularity condition that guarantees the smoothness of the
isomorphism @xmath . Given @xmath , one says that the tangent vector
@xmath and the tangent vector @xmath are parallel iff @xmath .

On a simply connected differentiable manifold @xmath one can show that
there is a one-to-one correspondence between an absolute parallelism on
@xmath , smooth trivialization of the frame bundle on @xmath and the
existence of flat connections (zero curvature) on the frame bundle, see
[ 10 ] for the proof.

Cartan and Schouten [ 8 , 9 ] described curvature-free connections on
Lie groups and as a result exhibited parallelisms on group manifolds.
They then generalized it to provide a description of parallelism (in
terms of curvature-free metric-compatible connections with torsion) on
Riemannian manifolds which are products of flat manifolds, compact
simple group manifolds and 7-spheres.

Later, Adams [ 14 ] using a metric-free topological description of
parallelism (i.e. existence of a global section on the frame bundle)
showed that the only parallelizable spheres are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . The @xmath -sphere is the simplest example where the
parallelism fails to hold and one can still use the geometrical tools to
see this. It is known that one cannot define a coordinate patch that
covers the @xmath -sphere thoroughly. In fact, using the sterographic
map it can be seen that one needs at least two different patches in
order to cover the whole @xmath -sphere.

In the following, we shall focus on the relation between parallelizable
spheres and normed division algebras. In the next section we define the
normed division algebras and explain what will be necessary to use later
on. We state a number of theorems without including the proofs since it
would be a digression from our presentation.

### 2.2 Division Algebras

Consider an algebra @xmath over the field @xmath , that is @xmath is a
vector space equipped with a bilinear map @xmath and a nonzero unit
element @xmath . Consider any two arbitrary elements @xmath and @xmath
of the algebra @xmath . In addition, we assume that @xmath is a non-zero
element of @xmath . If linear equations @xmath and @xmath are uniquely
solved for @xmath , then the algebra @xmath is called a division algebra
over the field @xmath .

In other words, @xmath is a division algebra if given @xmath with @xmath
, then either @xmath or @xmath . Equivalently, @xmath is a division
algebra if the operations of left and right multiplication by any
nonzero element are invertible.

Whenever @xmath is real, then @xmath is a real division algebra. For
example we will see later on in this section that real quaternion and
octonion algebras are real division algebras.

A normed division algebra is a division algebra which is also a Banach
algebra, i.e. it is a normed vector space with a multiplicative property
@xmath .

#### Associativity and Alternative Algebra

Given an algebra @xmath , it need not be necessarily associative. One
can define a trilinear map, called associator,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which measures the non-associativity of the algebra. For an associative
algebra, the associator vanishes. If the associator of an algebra is
totally antisymmetric, i.e. @xmath , then the algebra is called an
alternative algebra. An alternative algebra is equivalently defined [ 39
, 40 ] as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

for any two elements @xmath of the algebra. One very important feature
of any alternative algebra is that even though the algebra itself is
non-associative for elements @xmath , any subalgebra of an alternative
algebra generated from any two elements @xmath is associative [ 39 , 40
] . For any alternative algebra, the following identities always hold
for any three elements @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

These relations are known as Moufang identities and those algebras that
satisfy these identities are known as Malcev algebras [ 39 , 40 ] .

#### Dimension of Normed Division Algebras

###### Proposition 2.1.

Let @xmath be a non-associative algebra and @xmath a fixed element of
@xmath . Then the left multiplication @xmath and the right
multiplication @xmath are linear operators in the vector space @xmath ,
i.e., @xmath , defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.1.

For any @xmath , we have @xmath where @xmath is the identity
multiplication operator defined by @xmath , @xmath is the complex
conjugate of @xmath defined as @xmath and @xmath is the scalar product.

###### Proof.

For the proof of the lemma see Section 3.1 and Proposition 1 in Chapter
one of [ 41 ] . ∎

###### Theorem 2.2.

(Bott-Milnor, Kervaire [ 42 , 43 , 44 ] ) The dimension of a normed
division algebra is restricted to @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

For the proof of theorem see Chapter three of [ 41 ] . For completeness,
a sketch of the proof is given in Appendix B . ∎

This theorem is particularly interesting since it relates the dimension
of irreducible representations of Clifford algebra on @xmath dimensional
vector space to @xmath the dimension of a normed division algebra, see
Appendix B .

#### Quaternions and Octonions

The alternative property of an algebra is important. In fact, the only
alternative division algebras are @xmath and @xmath [ 39 , 40 , 45 ] .
This together with Theorem 2.2 will result in the following theorem:

###### Theorem 2.3.

@xmath and @xmath are the only normed divison algebras.

###### Proof.

The proof of this theorem requires identities for normed divison
algebras which we do not repeat here. See Section 3.1 of [ 41 ] for the
complete proof. ∎

@xmath and @xmath are real and complex vector spaces respectively,
@xmath is the quaternion algebra and @xmath is the octonion algebra.
These division algebras have peculiar properties; @xmath is an ordered,
commutative and associative algebra, @xmath is a commutative and
associative algebra, @xmath is an associative but non-commutative
algebra and @xmath is a non-commutative, non-associative algebra.
However, they have one common feature that makes them distinct and that
all these algebras are alternative. This is indeed the reason that the
sequence of normed division algebras stops at octonions [ 46 ] .

In Appendix B , we give a short review of Cayley-Dickson construction of
division algebras, in particular we provide the example of the
construction of octonions.

As the final remark, we mention that it has been shown by Adams that for
an @xmath dimensional normed division algebra, @xmath is parallelizable
[ 14 ] , for an illustrative proof see [ 46 ] . This is an important
statement that we will use repeatedly in the next chapter.

## Chapter 3 Lorentz Flatness

In the previous chapter, we pointed out that parallelism is in
one-to-one correspondence with the existence of a flat connection. This
can be interpreted as path-independence of parallel transport. It means
that transporting a vector from the point @xmath to another point @xmath
always leads to the same vector at @xmath no matter what path is chosen.
When there is no torsion then the condition that the parallel transport
is path-independent is satisfied if the Riemann curvature – defined in (
3.6 ) below as the curvature of the Levi-Civita connection – vanishes.
Therefore, in the absence of torsion a manifold is parallelizable if its
Riemann curvature vanishes. Flat (simply connected) space is the
simplest example of a parallelizable manifold where the curvature
vanishes and the Levi-Civita connection is the flat affine connection
that provides a path-independent parallel transport.

However, in the presence of torsion, the parallel transport is not
defined by the Levi-Civita connection and the vanishing of its curvature
is not necessary for parallelism to hold. Torsion introduces new
possibilities. This can be most easily discussed in local Lorentz frames
where the metric takes the Minkowskian form. Parallel transport is
captured by the differential equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a tangent vector @xmath at @xmath . This equation is a consequence
of the fact that @xmath transforms as a vector under the Lorentz group,
i.e. @xmath .

This can be seen as @xmath obtained by parallel transport from @xmath
where @xmath is the covariant derivative of @xmath . The @xmath -form
@xmath is called the Lorentz connection because we consider local
orthonormal frames, and the condition that the covariant derivative of
the Lorentz metric vanishes identically ( @xmath ) implies that @xmath .
If the expression ( 3.1 ) is to have the same meaning in any Lorentz
frame, @xmath should transform under the Lorentz group in the same
representation as @xmath (see, e.g., [ 47 , 48 ] ).

The integrability condition for ( 3.1 ) or in other words the
path-independence of the parallel transport is governed by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the curvature two-form @xmath is defined as ¹ ¹ 1 From now on
wedge products ( @xmath ) of exterior forms will be implicitly
understood.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the condition ( 3.2 ) is to be fulfilled for an arbitrary @xmath
everywhere in an open region @xmath , the curvature @xmath must vanish
identically in that region. Therefore a parallelizable manifold requires
its Lorentz curvature @xmath to vanish. It is equivalent to the
existence of a flat Lorentzian connection on the manifold.

### 3.1 Flatness of a (Pseudo-)Riemannian Manifold

For any @xmath , consider the manifold @xmath which is equipped with a
symmetric non-degenerate bilinear form @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This bilinear form is invariant under the adjoint action of the @xmath
group. Now consider an @xmath dimensional ( @xmath ) manifold @xmath
defined by @xmath invariant equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The bilinear form on @xmath induces a generalized Lorentz invariant
metric @xmath on the tangent space @xmath at any point @xmath . The
induced metric is diagonal @xmath with the signature

-   @xmath and @xmath with a constant positive curvature,

-   @xmath and @xmath with a constant negative curvature.

@xmath is also equipped with a generalized Lorentz connection one-form
@xmath (with @xmath ) and a local orthonormal basis @xmath that provides
the metric, @xmath . The indices @xmath are tangent space indices and
run over @xmath , while @xmath are coordinate indices.

The geometry of a curved (pseudo-)Riemannian manifold with metric @xmath
is characterized by the Riemann curvature two-form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection one-form. This Riemannian
curvature is similar to –but not necessarily equivalent to– the
curvature ( 3.3 ) defined for the Lorentz connection @xmath . The
difference stems from the fact that @xmath is defined by the metric only
while @xmath may involve a non-trivial torsion. The Levi-Civita
connection is determined by the torsion-free part of the Lorentz
connection, denoted by @xmath , and is defined by the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the inverse vielbein. The two connections @xmath and
@xmath define different notions of parallelism that give rise to
different curvature forms, @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

In Minkowski space, there is a torsion-free Lorentz connection @xmath .
In this case, the connection is trivial, in the sense that the holonomy
group of the connection is trivial in an obvious manner since the
tangent bundle is naturally trivialized on Minkowski space. It is
equivalent to say that the Riemann curvature vanishes. The question we
examine here is what (pseudo-)Riemannian manifolds have flat connection.
As we have already seen the Adams’ theorem [ 14 ] states that for
Euclidean signature, the spheres @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
parallelizable, that is, they admit globally defined orthonormal frames.
The connection for the corresponding @xmath rotation groups have trivial
holonomy group and the corresponding curvatures vanish. We would like to
explore the extension of this result for other metric manifolds of
arbitrary signature.

One way to address this question is to look for a necessary condition
for flatness, which is equivalent to the statement

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a family of linearly independent vectors. In a smooth
manifold, a weaker but necessary condition is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which would be the case if the torsion two-form is covariantly constant,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, in a Lorentz-flat manifold, the torsion may not be zero but it
must be covariantly constant, @xmath . The torsion two-form can be
expressed in a basis of local orthonormal frames as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a scalar zero-form, @xmath is a zero-form antisymmetric
in the lower indices, and @xmath is a scalar one-form. Then, the
necessary condition for Lorentz flatness ( 3.10 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

A sufficient condition for solving this equation is to assume for the
functions multiplying @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath to be independent and
therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath      (3.14)
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

By Poincaré’s lemma, ( 3.13 ) means that in an open region @xmath and (
3.14 ) becomes @xmath , where @xmath . In other words, the coefficients
@xmath are, up to a conformal factor, covariantly constant. Moreover,
since the connection is flat it can always be trivialized in an open
region by a local Lorentz transformation and without loss of generality
one can take @xmath , where @xmath . As we shall see in the next
section, it is very easy to achieve these conditions in three
dimensions, while the situation in seven dimensions is less
straightforward but as it is discussed in Section ( 3.2 ) non-trivial
solutions still exist.

#### 3.1.1 Three Dimensional Example

As explained before, conditions ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.14 ) imply that @xmath
, where @xmath , which is automatically satisfied if @xmath are the
structure constants of the Lorentz algebra. This means that @xmath is an
invariant tensor of the Lorentz group, in which case ( 3.15 ) is the
Jacobi identity. For @xmath this means that modulo local rescalings,
@xmath where @xmath is the Levi-Civita tensor defined with the
convention ² ² 2 The Lorentz indices of @xmath are raised and lowered
with @xmath and @xmath . @xmath .

Consequently, in three-dimensions the torsion two-form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

is covariantly constant by construction. By rescaling the frame as
@xmath with @xmath an arbitrary constant, the torsion can be written
(after dropping the tildes) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation @xmath is a condition for the metric structure of the
manifold. But, what does this imply for the Riemannian tensor?

In order to address this question, let us separate the torsion-free part
of the Lorentz connection @xmath and the contorsion @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined by the torsion-free condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the contorsion contains the information about the torsion, @xmath
. Equation ( 3.19 ) determines @xmath as a function of the metric
structure of the manifold, and corresponds to the projection onto the
tangent space basis of the Levi-Civita connection. The Lorentzian
curvature splits as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the projection onto the tangent space of the Riemann
curvature tensor.

In three dimensions, ( 3.17 ) means that @xmath , which in turn implies
that @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, ( 3.20 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the Riemann curvature of a three-dimensional Lorentz-flat
manifold is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation implies that for @xmath there are two distinct
possibilities ³ ³ 3 There are two other options that one obtains from
the solutions shown here just by a metric transformation which flips the
sign of the metric and that too changes the sign of the curvature. for a
three-dimensional manifold admitting a Lorentz-flat connection:

1.  The metric @xmath is Riemannian, @xmath . Then @xmath and the
    three-dimensional manifold is a constant positive curvature
    manifold, i.e. @xmath -sphere (of finite radius) @xmath , in
    agreement with [ 14 ] .

2.  The metric @xmath is pseudo-Riemannian, @xmath then @xmath and the
    three-dimensional manifold has constant negative curvature, i.e. AdS
    @xmath . This is the case considered in [ 49 ] .

There is also the degenerate solution @xmath : flat Riemannian manifolds
@xmath and pseudo-Riemannian flat manifolds @xmath and @xmath .

#### 3.1.2 A General Discussion

As we discussed before, an @xmath dimensional manifold @xmath is called
parallelizable (i.e. it admits framing) if one can find @xmath
globally-defined linearly independent tangent vector fields on the
manifold. This is always possible if there exists a flat connection in
the frame bundle of the manifold. One can make sense of it as
integrability of @xmath where @xmath is a tangent vector defined at each
point on the manifold.

Given a manifold with a connection in the fiber bundle @xmath and a
local frame @xmath at each point (vielbein) ⁴ ⁴ 4 In fact, @xmath is a
solder form and defines a canonical isomorphism between the tangent
space of @xmath and the fibre @xmath . , the equations ( 3.3 ) and (
3.10 ) can be viewed as structure equations for the connection [ 50 , 51
, 52 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming there is a torsion-free connection, @xmath , then @xmath . From
here, we can define the torsion @xmath -form @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath in fact plays the role of the contorsion @xmath -form. Here
the coefficient @xmath is a zero-form Lorentz tensor whose main function
is to map two vectors into a third one. In other words, it defines an
antisymmetric bilinear map of the tangent space @xmath into itself,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In ( 3.17 ) @xmath was identified (up to a constant) with @xmath , which
defines the vector cross product in three dimensions. The cross product
is defined as a bilinear map which maps two elements of a vector space
@xmath to another element of @xmath ( @xmath ). In three dimensions,
@xmath is the structure constants of @xmath Lie algebra and since @xmath
then @xmath are invariant under @xmath Lorentz transformations. Now
recalling the definition of the quaternion algebra, see Appendix ( B ),
if we only consider the imaginary elements of quaternions, i.e. @xmath
with @xmath , they form an @xmath Lie algebra. Then one can define an
isomorphism between the three dimensional vector space @xmath and the
imaginary quaternion vector space @xmath .

A feature which is of great importance is the existence of the cross
product in seven dimensions. In the same way that the three dimensional
cross product is related to quaternions ( @xmath ), the seven
dimensional one is related to octonions ( @xmath ). One defines this
cross product as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is a totally antisymmetric tensor, with ⁵ ⁵ 5
Note that this is only one choice of octonion multiplication table and
it is not unique.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, unlike the situation in three dimensions that the structure
constant @xmath was invariant under @xmath transformations, @xmath is
not invariant of @xmath transformations. The seven dimensional cross
product defines a Moufang-Lie algebra (Malcev algebra) with @xmath as
corresponding structure constants [ 53 ]

The exceptional Lie group @xmath is the automorphism group of the
octonions [ 54 ] . Its Lie algebra @xmath is @xmath , the derivations of
the octonions [ 40 ] . This can be considered as the definition of
@xmath and its Lie algebra. The group @xmath is the isotropy group of
@xmath ⁶ ⁶ 6 @xmath is the double cover of @xmath and can be built with
the use of spinor representations of @xmath . which fixes the identity
and since it is the automorphism group of octonions, it thus preserves
the space orthogonal to the identity. This seven dimensional orthogonal
space is the space of imaginary octonions @xmath and there is an
inclusion @xmath . Now, consider the adjoint representation of the
algebra of imaginary octonions defined as @xmath where @xmath , @xmath
are spaces of linear transformations of @xmath given by left and right
multiplications by imaginary octonions. At the Lie algebra level, @xmath
can then be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the annihilator of the identity element of
@xmath . Therefore, @xmath has a 7-dimensional representation @xmath .

There is another definition for the group @xmath . The exceptional group
@xmath which was introduced as the automorphism group of octonions can
also be thought of as a subgroup of @xmath which preserves a
non-degenerate @xmath -form [ 55 , 56 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Also, @xmath is the group of all real linear
transformations of @xmath preserving the cross product.

### 3.2 Flat Connections in Seven Dimensions

#### 3.2.1 Euclidean Signature

Let’s consider a seven-dimensional simply-connected symmetric Riemannian
manifold with the metric @xmath and the connection @xmath . By imposing
the flatness of @xmath , the corresponding curvature ( 3.3 ) vanishes.
Then, it has been shown by Cartan-Schouten [ 8 , 9 ] and Wolf [ 10 , 11
] that such a manifold is the @xmath -sphere given by the symmetric
coset space @xmath . The metric @xmath is invariant under @xmath
isometry group of @xmath .

The group @xmath acts transitively on unit octonions @xmath ( @xmath )
with the isotropy group @xmath where @xmath is the identity element of
@xmath . We can also write @xmath generators of @xmath in terms of
@xmath generators of the subalgebra @xmath and @xmath the remaining
seven generators of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following we show that one can define another parallelism with
respect to the metric @xmath with the connection @xmath in the presence
of torsion. It turns out that the metric @xmath is @xmath invariant
metric and the torsion, given by the structure constants of imaginary
octonions, breaks the isometry group down to @xmath .

@xmath acts on unit spinors in seven dimensions with @xmath a subgroup
of which fixing a unit spinor.

We can define the flat @xmath connection as @xmath , with @xmath a
closed @xmath -form, (or more generally @xmath for any @xmath -form
@xmath ). Given the decomposition of @xmath to @xmath and @xmath , it is
implied that the @xmath connection @xmath (with @xmath a @xmath -form)
cannot be a flat connection. However, one can construct a flat
connection by adding a piece to @xmath , roughly speaking, in order to
compensate for those terms in @xmath which are not in @xmath .

Precisely, it means the flat connection @xmath is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -forms, defined as @xmath and @xmath
. We can choose a basis where @xmath and we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the connection @xmath is a flat connection and the corresponding
curvature vanishes.

As we discussed, the coefficients @xmath define an invariant tensor
under @xmath , which means that for any @xmath group element @xmath ,
the structure coefficients ⁷ ⁷ 7 We assume Euclidean signature so that
@xmath takes the same values as @xmath , but we still keep track of
upper and lower indices to facilitate the transition to other
signatures. @xmath transform as the components of an invariant tensor,
i.e. @xmath , or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note, however, that @xmath does not define an invariant tensor under
@xmath , but only under its subgroup @xmath . Let @xmath be an element
near the identity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the generators @xmath belong to the Lie algebra @xmath and satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the structure constants of @xmath . The invariance of the
cross product under the action of @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

An important property of @xmath which was taken as a definition of
@xmath in Section ( 3.1.2 ) is stated in the following theorem:

###### Theorem 3.1.

(Bryant [ 55 ] ) The subgroup of @xmath that leaves invariant the 3-form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a local basis of vector 1-forms in seven dimensions, is
a compact, simply connected Lie group of dimension 14, isomorphic to
@xmath . Moreover, @xmath is also the holonomy group of squashed
7-sphere.

The @xmath manifold with the new structure, the metric @xmath which is
invariant under @xmath and the torsion given by @xmath which is
invariant under @xmath , is defined by the coset @xmath and is a
squashed ⁸ ⁸ 8 The @xmath invariant metric @xmath induces a @xmath
invariant metric @xmath on squashed @xmath . Since the metric @xmath is
@xmath invariant, the described squashed sphere is known in physics
literature as the (round) seven-sphere with torsion. @xmath .

We can then compute the curvature corresponding to the connection @xmath
. From ( 3.34 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is the flat connection, then @xmath . The next job is to
compute @xmath .

We can consider different notions of parallel transport associated to
@xmath , @xmath , and torsion-free @xmath connections ⁹ ⁹ 9 Note that
@xmath is the universal cover of @xmath and hence simply connected and
acts transitively on @xmath . In the following, we will use @xmath
instead of @xmath wherever we refer to the group representation or
@xmath for the Lie algebra of @xmath . , denoted by @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath respectively. Each of these connections has a corresponding
covariant derivative, which we denote by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
Since @xmath , the connection @xmath can also be viewed as a piece of
the connection of @xmath . These connections are enjoying independent
properties,

-   @xmath connection @xmath is torsionful, i.e. @xmath .

-   @xmath connection @xmath is a torsion-free connection, i.e. @xmath .

-   @xmath is the automorphism group of octonions, hence @xmath
    connection @xmath satisfies @xmath .

The @xmath connection @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the 14 generators of @xmath in a @xmath antisymmetric
representation of the Lie algebra @xmath (for concrete examples of this
@xmath representation, see [ 57 ] ).

We can define the torsion @xmath connection @xmath by splitting to
@xmath connection and another @xmath -form which then has to be a
multiple of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a constant parameter. This is a consequence of ( 3.34 )
together with splitting torsionful @xmath connection @xmath to a @xmath
connection and an extra piece proportional to @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

This can be made more precise in the following way. Consider the
generators of @xmath algebra @xmath and the split @xmath where @xmath
are generators of @xmath subalgebra and @xmath are the remaining seven
generators of @xmath . As we mentioned before @xmath are the generators
of the adjoint representation of the algebra of imaginary octonions.
Then @xmath connection is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with 1-form functions @xmath and @xmath . Writing @xmath for @xmath a
@xmath -form function, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

which simplifies to ( 3.43 ) where we write @xmath . By evaluating the
left hand side of this relation (i.e., @xmath ), one can determine
@xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath .

Now from ( 3.43 ), we can simply find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging this back in ( 3.41 ), we get the @xmath curvature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we discussed in previous section, the covariant constancy of torsion,
@xmath , is a requirement for flatness. It can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

which imposes a relation between @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Direct computation using the explicit form of @xmath given in ( 3.29 )
for the Euclidean signature metric shows that for @xmath the right hand
side is proportional to @xmath , and finally we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the curvature of @xmath connection @xmath which has the form of
the curvature of a symmetric space.

From ( 3.50 ), we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

which by comparing to the curvature of a seven dimensional symmetric
manifold, one can determine @xmath in terms of @xmath the scalar
curvature of the manifold or @xmath the radius of @xmath -sphere @xmath
. Therefore, there are two flat connections written as [ 4 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The occurrence of the prefactor @xmath is not a surprise. In fact, in
the theory of interacting quantum fields in the presence of torsion, new
currents must be considered due to symmetries corresponding to the
torsion which results in the appearance of new interacting terms in the
action. Specifically, there is an interaction @xmath which couples to
the current @xmath . This interaction term is proportional to the
torsion @xmath with the coupling @xmath [ 58 , 59 ] . In Chapter 4 , we
will see how the torsion @xmath is related to @xmath .

As the final remark, we emphasize that the coset space @xmath which
describes the parallelized @xmath is a non-symmetric space [ 21 , 58 ,
60 ] . It is shown explicitly in [ 61 ] .

#### 3.2.2 Pseudo-Riemannian Signature

The discussion of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds is the same as previous
section. Let’s consider a seven-dimensional simply-connected symmetric
pseudo-Riemannian manifold with the metric @xmath and the connection
@xmath . By imposing the flatness of @xmath , the corresponding
pseudo-Riemannian curvature vanishes. Then, as shown by Wolf [ 10 , 11 ]
, such a manifold is the pseudo-sphere @xmath given by the coset space
@xmath or the pseudo-hyperbolic space @xmath given by the coset space
@xmath . The metric @xmath is invariant under @xmath isometry group of
@xmath or @xmath . In fact, Wolf showed that these are the only
parallelizable pseudo-sphere or pseudo-hyperbolic spaces, see the proof
of theorem 8.13 of [ 11 ] .

The group @xmath acts on split-octonions @xmath with the isotropy group
@xmath or @xmath depending on the signature of the induced metric on the
space of imaginary split-octonion which is orthogonal to the identity
element of @xmath . More precisely, we should consider @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath which are the connected components of the corresponding
@xmath group. In fact, @xmath is the group which acts transitively on
@xmath or @xmath .

Similarly to previous section, we show that one can define another
parallelism with respect to the metric @xmath with the connection @xmath
in the presence of torsion. In this case, the metric @xmath is @xmath
invariant and the torsion, given by the structure constants of imaginary
split-octonions, breaks the isometry group down to @xmath .

The complex Lie algebra @xmath has, besides the compact form, a split
real form @xmath to which corresponds the Lie group split @xmath ,
referred to as @xmath in the following. This group is the group of
automorphism of split octonions @xmath , see [ 56 , 62 ] . The split
octonion vector space defines a product with a bilinear form of the
signature @xmath . This induces a metric of the signature @xmath (or
@xmath ) on the tangent space which is spanned by the basis of imaginary
split octonions @xmath , see appendix B.3 . This defines a cross product
on @xmath (or @xmath ) with the coefficients of cross product @xmath
being components of a totally antisymmetric tensor and taking the values
@xmath with @xmath for ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The ordering written here is once again
only a choice, consistent with our chosen convention for the octonionic
multiplication table. @xmath . Therefore, there is a @xmath -form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is invariant under @xmath .

There is a definition for the group @xmath along the same line as
Theorem 3.1 :

###### Theorem 3.2.

The subgroup of @xmath that leaves invariant the 3-form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a local basis of vector 1-forms in 7 dimensions, is a
non compact Lie group of dimension 14, isomorphic to @xmath .

The @xmath manifold with the new structure, the metric @xmath which is
invariant under @xmath and the torsion given by @xmath which is
invariant under @xmath , is written as the coset @xmath and can be
called a squashed @xmath . We can write the flat connection, in a chosen
basis, similar to the previous section as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the corresponding curvature given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similar to the Euclidean discussion of previous section, we can take
into account different notions of parallel transport associated to
@xmath and @xmath ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Note that @xmath is the universal cover of
@xmath and it is not connected (it has two components). Its connected
component @xmath acts transitively on @xmath . In the following, we will
use @xmath instead of @xmath whenever we refer to the group
representation or @xmath for the Lie algebra of @xmath , but keeping in
mind we are always referring to connected component of each group. , and
torsion-free @xmath denoted by @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath
respectively. Each of these connections has a corresponding covariant
derivative, which we denote by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Since
@xmath , the connection @xmath can also be viewed ¹² ¹² 12 We should
emphasize an important point that one has to in fact consider the group
@xmath which is a centerless group to be obtained from @xmath and is the
stabilizer of @xmath . See Appendix C.3 for details. as a piece of the
connection of @xmath . These connections are enjoying independent
properties,

-   @xmath connection @xmath is torsionful, i.e. @xmath .

-   @xmath connection @xmath is a torsion-free connection, @xmath .

-   @xmath is the automorphism group of split-octonions, @xmath .

The structure constants of split octonions are invariant with respect to
the @xmath connection @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath connection @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the 14 generators of @xmath in a @xmath antisymmetric
representation of the Lie algebra @xmath .

Then, one can write a similar equation as ( 3.43 ), @xmath , in order to
find a relation between @xmath and @xmath which leads us to get the
curvature of @xmath connection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relation ( 3.49 ) was obtained with no reference to the actual value
of @xmath and as a result it holds in the case of split-octonion where
it imposes the condition @xmath .

Direct computation using the explicit form of @xmath given in ( 3.53 )
for the pseudo-Riemannian signature metric and @xmath , and in a chosen
basis, shows that if the tangent space is spanned by the imaginary
split-octonion basis, the induced metric on the tangent space is a
pseudo-Riemannian metric of signature @xmath and the curvature of the
manifold is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the determinant of the metric @xmath on the quaternionic
subspace of @xmath spanned by the basis @xmath , @xmath and @xmath where
@xmath is the index for which @xmath is non-zero [ 4 ] . This result
holds for the case where the metric has the signature @xmath . It is
straightforward to see since the only change under metric reversal is
@xmath which does not affect the result as it appears quadratically in
the expression for the curvature.

We can summarize the result in seven dimensions as follows:

-   If @xmath , then the induced metric @xmath on the tangent space is
    Euclidean. The manifold is a seven dimensional constant positive
    curvature symmetric manifold, that is @xmath or constant positive
    curvature non-symmetric coset space @xmath in the presence of
    torsion.

-   If @xmath , then the induced metric @xmath on the tangent space is a
    diagonal metric

    1.  with the signature @xmath , @xmath , and consequently @xmath .
        The manifold @xmath is a constant negative curvature symmetric
        manifold @xmath written as the coset @xmath if there is no
        torsion or a constant negative curvature non-symmetric coset
        space @xmath in the presence of torsion.

    2.  with the signature @xmath , @xmath , and consequently @xmath .
        The manifold @xmath is a constant positive curvature symmetric
        manifold @xmath written as the coset @xmath if there is no
        torsion or a constant positive curvature non-symmetric coset
        space as @xmath in the presence of torsion.

This is consistent with the discussion of parallelizability for both
@xmath and @xmath in seminal papers by Cartan-Schouten [ 8 , 9 ] and
Wolf [ 10 , 11 ] .

## Chapter 4 @xmath Reduction and Exotic Solutions

### 4.1 Duality and Unorthodox Spacetime Signatures

In general, dualities are nontrivial isomorphisms relating two models
that are seemingly completely unrelated. Dualities have been a
cornerstone in different branches of mathematics. As examples of
dualities in mathematics we can mention the isomorphism between a finite
dimensional vector space and its dual vector space, the relation which
maps points to lines and lines to points in Desarguesian geometry and
many other examples in different areas of mathematics. A very well known
example of duality in physics is the electric-magnetic duality where the
Maxwell equations are invariant under the transformation @xmath , where
@xmath is the Hodge dual operator. Since the early 1980’s, with the
discovery of Mirror symmetry in string theory, it has been understood
that dualities can relate theories with different gauge groups,
different spacetime dimensions, different amounts of supersymmetry, and
even relate theories of gravity to gauge theories. Moreover, there are
dualities suggesting that even the spacetime signature is a relative
concept that depends on the description [ 6 , 7 ] .

In any duality prescription between two dual models, each model has a
moduli space of physical quantities and duality is the mean to relate
these moduli spaces in a one-to-one correspondence. In a sense,
observable quantities depend on a “frame of reference” and duality is a
map between these frames. As an example in string theory S-duality is a
relation between a theory in strong coupling regime and another theory
in weak coupling regime where the coupling constant bears the relative
concept of the “frame of reference”. The other example is the T-duality
where a string theory with strings wrapped around a circle of radius
@xmath is proved to be equivalent to another string theory with strings
wrapped around a circle of radius @xmath . In both S-duality and
T-duality the dual theory can be in a different scale of coupling or in
different spacetime dimensions but always the signature of spacetime is
Lorentzian. In [ 6 , 7 ] , Hull extended this to include the
relativeness of the notion of signature. T-duality maps type IIB
superstring theory to type IIA while Heterotic theory is mapped to
itself. @xmath -theory in @xmath dimensions compactified on a 2-torus
@xmath in the limit where the torus shrinks to zero size, gives a type
IIB theory in @xmath dimensions, while compactifying the @xmath
dimensional @xmath -theory on a 3-torus @xmath in the zero size limit
gives again @xmath -theory. In all these cases, the compactification was
done on a spacelike circle. In order to change the signature of the dual
theory one needs to compactify the theory on a timelike circle. This can
in principle produce ghosts or tachyons due to presence of closed
timelike curves and brings about instabilities. Therefore a dual theory
obtained by compactifying on a timelike circle can be pathological as a
theory itself, however there are few reasons to consider them. First, it
is true that while doing the dimensional reduction, truncating the
dependence on the internal dimensions leaves a dimensionally reduced
theory in which some of the fields have kinetic terms of the wrong sign,
but in the full compactified theory such ghosts can be gauged away [ 63
] . This is similar to the example of dimensional reduction of (super)
Yang-Mills theory from @xmath dimensions to @xmath dimensions by
reducing on a Lorentzian torus @xmath which gives Yang-Mills plus @xmath
scalars in Euclidean space, acted on by an @xmath R-symmetry. The scalar
field coming from @xmath has a ‘wrong’ sign for the kinetic term but in
the full compactified theory @xmath can be gauged away leaving the
theory with no ghost.

Secondly, one notices that even though the dual theories themselves can
be pathological but the theories obtained through timelike duality can
be written on flat space independently without resorting to the timelike
duality and avoiding possible pathologies with which will come.
Moreover, since all these theories are related through the chain of
dualities to an @xmath -theory which is known to be free of the
mentioned pathologies, the dual theories are as ‘good’ as (or as ‘bad’
as) the @xmath dimensional standard @xmath -theory.

Given the possibility of timelike reduction, the @xmath -theory in
@xmath dimensions will be linked to a theory in @xmath dimensions, which
will be referred to as @xmath -theory, and a theory in @xmath
dimensions, @xmath -theory. Timelike T-duality maps Heterotic string
theory to itself but type IIA and type IIB theories are mapped to type
IIB @xmath and type IIA @xmath theories respectively. The strong
coupling limit of the IIA @xmath theory is the @xmath -theory in @xmath
dimensions. Compactifying @xmath -theory on @xmath on the zero size
limit of 3-torus gives @xmath -theory in @xmath dimensions. Then
compactifying @xmath -theory on a Euclidean 3-torus @xmath in the limit
that torus shrinks to zero size gives the @xmath -theory in @xmath
dimensions. One can understand the appearance of extra three dimensions
by looking at the strong coupling limit of type IIA and IIA @xmath
theories in the following way: in the case of @xmath -theory, the type
IIA theory is T-dual to @xmath -thoery. Type IIA theory has D @xmath
-branes, which in the compactification limit on @xmath -torus, are
wrapped around the compact @xmath -torus. At strong coupling limit, i.e.
@xmath where @xmath is the string coupling, three spacelike @xmath
-cycles of @xmath become light and signals opening of the three extra
spacelike dimensions. In the case of @xmath -theory, one observes that
the type IIA @xmath theory and @xmath -theory are T-dual. The IIA @xmath
theory has E @xmath -branes wrapped around one spacelike and two
timelike @xmath -cycles of compact @xmath geometry which becomes light
at strong coupling limit and can be considered as the whole tower of
Kaluza-Klein modes from the decompactification of extra dimensions. It
hints towards opening one spacelike and two timelike dimensions. The
complete list of string theories and their strong coupling limit and the
net of dualities which relate them can be seen in [ 6 ] . It has been
reviewed more recently in [ 64 ] , however the notation is different
than what we use here.

The change of signature induced by duality transformations can be given
a group theoretical interpretation in terms of the infinite-dimensional
Kac-Moody algebras @xmath or @xmath that have been conjectured to be
“hidden symmetries” of 11-dimensional supergravity or an appropriate
extension [ 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 ] . Weyl reflections
in the exceptional root may change the spacetime signature. In the orbit
of the standard signature @xmath of @xmath -theory appear also the
signatures @xmath @xmath -theory, @xmath @xmath -theory, and the
theories with reversed signatures @xmath , @xmath and @xmath [ 73 , 74 ,
75 , 76 ] . In @xmath , @xmath is the number of space directions, @xmath
the number of time directions, and @xmath refers to the sign of the
kinetic term of the @xmath -form of eleven-dimensional supergravity
where @xmath means the kinetic term has a ‘wrong’ sign.

For all these reasons, it is of interest to explore solutions with
exotic spacetime signatures in the context of @xmath -theory. This is
the the path we follow in this chapter. The analogues of Freund-Rubin
solutions [ 17 ] have been already studied in [ 38 ] . In this chapter,
we derive the analogue of Englert solution [ 21 ] .

As we discussed in Chapter 3 , the seven-sphere @xmath is one of the
four spheres that are parallelizable. If one considers pseudo-Riemannian
signatures, in seven dimensions the pseudo-sphere @xmath , which is the
space of constant curvature @xmath or space of unit split octonions ¹ ¹
1 The negative curvature spaces obtained by multiplying the metric by an
overall minus sign, which are the pseudo-hyperbolic spaces @xmath and
@xmath (see appendix A for conventions) also enjoy this property. ,
turns out to be parallelizable. The @xmath -sphere plays an important
role in eleven-dimensional supergravity [ 77 ] , either through
Freund-Rubin compactification where it leads to the @xmath gauged
supergravity [ 18 ] or through Englert solution which breaks the @xmath
symmetry down to @xmath [ 78 ] due to the presence of internal fluxes.
We shall see that there is an analogue of the Englert solution in @xmath
-theory, which takes the form @xmath . Similar to the original proposal
by Englert where the solution characterized by internal fluxes provided
by a torsion that parallelizes @xmath , this exotic form of the Englert
solution is characterized by internal fluxes provided by a torsion that
flatten a connection on the tangent bundle of @xmath . These internal
fluxes break the @xmath symmetry of the pseudo-sphere @xmath down to ² ²
2 For more information on the split octonions and the relevant
associated groups see Appendix B and see Appendix C for information on
the pseudo-sphere @xmath . @xmath .

### 4.2 Action Principle and General Ansatz

#### Action

Our starting point is the bosonic action of eleven-dimensional
supergravity with mixed signature [ 77 , 6 , 7 ] , written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the Lagrangian @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath -dimensions ( @xmath ) refers to @xmath spacelike
directions and @xmath timelike directions and @xmath . The sign of
@xmath is determined as ³ ³ 3 From the point of view of fermionic
content of the theory, whenever @xmath there exists a purely real
representation of Clifford algebra and as a result spinors are Majorana.
However, if @xmath then there exists a purely imaginary representation
of Clifford algebra and the spinors are pseudo-Majorana [ 79 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Therefore, in dimensions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the kinetic term of
the @xmath -from has the correct sign ( @xmath ) while in dimensions
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath the kinetic term of @xmath -form comes with
the ‘wrong’ sign ( @xmath ). As mentioned in Section 4.1 , @xmath
-theory corresponds to @xmath , @xmath , whereas @xmath -theory
corresponds to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath -theory corresponds to @xmath
, @xmath .

The equations of motions can be obtained by varying the Lagrangian ( 4.2
) with respect to the metric @xmath and the @xmath -from @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The equations of motion are invariant under the simultaneous
transformations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

accompanied with the sign change @xmath . We recall that with our
conventions, @xmath changes sign since in the transformation @xmath ,
the parity of the number of time directions changes. Because of this
invariance, we concentrate on @xmath -theory, @xmath -theory and @xmath
-theory, knowing that the solutions for the reversed signature theories
corresponding to the other theories in the same duality orbit as
ordinary supergravity can be readily obtained using the invariance.

#### Product of Constant Curvature Spaces

We assume that the eleven-dimensional spacetime manifold (referred to as
the “ ambient space ” in the sequel) splits as the product of a
four-dimensional manifold (“ background spacetime ”) and a
seven-dimensional manifold (“ internal space ”) ⁴ ⁴ 4 We stress that the
“internal space” is thus in our terminology always a seven-dimensional
manifold, independently of its curvature or signature. . The metric
itself is a direct sum and splits into two parts, the metric on the
internal space, and the one on the background spacetime. Capital Latin
indices @xmath run over @xmath . Small Latin indices @xmath are internal
space indices and run over @xmath . Greek indices @xmath are background
spacetime indices running over @xmath . Notice that here @xmath is the
absolute value of the determinant of the metric of the total space. We
use the absolute value everywhere when needed for the determinant of the
ambient, internal and background metrics since, a priori, there is no
restriction on the signature of the aforementioned metrics.

We also assume that spacetime and the internal space are spaces of
constant curvature, i.e., either a pseudo-sphere or a pseudo-hyperbolic
space, with curvatures respectively given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants, which are positive for
pseudo-spheres and negative for pseudo-hyperbolic spaces ⁵ ⁵ 5 The
conventions and notations used in this chapter are collected in Appendix
A . . This implies in particular

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Assuming that some of the internal or background fluxes are turned on,
we can find different type of solutions for the bosonic system of
supergravity given the above ansatz for the internal and the spacetime
geometry.

### 4.3 Freund-Rubin Type Solutions

We first derive the analogues of Freund-Rubin solutions. These were
already considered in [ 38 ] .

In addition to conditions ( 4.10 )-( 4.12 ) on the metric, Freund-Rubin
ansatz assumes that the only @xmath -form flux is in spacetime and reads
explicitly as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant. There is no internal flux.

Now, from ( 4.5 ) and the ansatz, one finds that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of timelike directions in the
four-dimensional background spacetime metric. We shall also introduce
@xmath as the number of timelike directions in the internal space, so
that @xmath (the number of timelike directions of the eleven-dimensional
ambient space) is equal to @xmath . Comparing with ( 4.10 ) and ( 4.11
), we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

as in [ 38 ] . For example, the standard Freund-Rubin solution is
obtained by setting @xmath , @xmath .

The Freund-Rubin solutions constitute a one-parameter family of
solutions. One can take @xmath as the free parameter characterizing the
solutions. The curvature of the background spacetime and of the internal
space are then determined by @xmath and are of opposite signs. Note that
the dependence of both curvatures on @xmath is always through @xmath in
( 4.17 ) and therefore they are invariant under @xmath .

The sign of @xmath is easily seen to be always equal to @xmath . For
@xmath -theory and @xmath -theory, @xmath and @xmath is an odd number
and therefore one has @xmath . This is also true for the reversed @xmath
-theory with signature @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath -theory, one has
@xmath but @xmath is now an even number resulting in @xmath . The same
is true for the reversed signature @xmath - and @xmath -theories.
Therefore, the sign of @xmath is always equal to @xmath . In all cases,
the curvatures in the four-dimensional spacetime and in the internal
manifold have opposite signs.

All Freund-Rubin solutions that can be obtained in this way are listed
in Table 4.1 . All these solution are maximally supersymmetric and their
corresponding brane construction can be found in [ 38 ] .

### 4.4 Englert Type Solutions

The Englert type solutions [ 21 ] can be considered as spontaneous
breakings of the Freund-Rubin solutions through non-vanishing
expectation values for some of the internal components of the @xmath
-form. In other words there is now an internal flux which breaks
completely the supersymmetry.

The Englert construction corresponds to the compactification on a
parallelized internal manifold. This occurs when the internal space of
constant curvature is either the sphere @xmath , corresponding to the
original Englert solution [ 21 ] , or the pseudo-sphere @xmath (as well
as the cases trivially obtained from these ones by an overall change of
sign of the metric, corresponding to the pseudo-hyperbolic spaces @xmath
and @xmath ). All the other cases ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath etc) are
not parallelizable.

By matching the signatures, one easily sees that there are a priori four
cases where the parallelizable seven-(pseudo-)spheres might appear for
the theories in the time-like duality orbit of @xmath -theory. These are

-   Case 1: @xmath -theory with spacetime manifold @xmath ,

-   Case 2: @xmath -theory with spacetime manifold @xmath ,

-   Case 3: @xmath -theory with spacetime manifold @xmath ,

-   Case 4: reversed @xmath -theory with spacetime manifold @xmath ,

as well as the reversed signature solutions. Here, @xmath is a priori
either @xmath or @xmath , i.e., we leave the sign of the curvature of
four-dimensional spacetime undetermined. It will be determined by
solving the equations of motion. We shall show that only cases 1 and 3
are actually compatible with the equations of motion and furthermore,
that @xmath is then the anti-de Sitter space @xmath .

It may be worth mentioning that in all above cases, the product @xmath ,
where @xmath is the number of time directions in the four-dimensional
background spacetime, is equal to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, one has @xmath for cases 1 and 3 with @xmath odd, and @xmath for
cases 2 and 4 but @xmath is now even.

Furthermore, we point out that in all cases the curvature @xmath of the
internal space ( @xmath or @xmath ) is positive, @xmath , and @xmath the
number of time directions in the internal space is even. For the
reversed signature solution, the curvature @xmath would be negative and
@xmath odd.

The Englert ansatz [ 21 ] consists in imposing the conditions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which are the conditions ( 4.8 ), ( 4.9 ) and ( 4.13 ) with an extra
condition ( 4.22 ) on the fluxes. The condition that the internal flux
should vanish is, however, relaxed, i.e., one allows @xmath . In fact,
one postulates instead

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is one of the (metric compatible) torsions that
parallelizes the internal space, i.e., such that when added to the
Levi-Civita torsion-free connection, the resulting connection is flat
(zero curvature) ⁶ ⁶ 6 The relation between the torsion coefficients
@xmath in the equation ( 3.26 ) and @xmath in ( 4.23 ) is given by
@xmath . . In ( 4.23 ), @xmath is a constant parameter.

As Cartan and Schouten showed [ 8 , 9 ] (see also [ 21 ] ), the torsions
satisfy the following identities:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to prove these identities, recall the equation ( 3.20 ) with
@xmath where @xmath . Now, given that for a flat connection @xmath , if
one rewrites ( 3.20 ) in the coordinates then the Riemann curvature is
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Using the symmetries of curvature tensor and Bianchi
identities, with a bit of work, we can show ( 4.26 ). To prove the
equations ( 4.24 ) and ( 4.25 ), we can substitute the left hand side of
( 4.27 ) with ( 4.8 ) and multiply both sides with @xmath and @xmath to
get ( 4.24 ) and ( 4.25 ) respectively. It is noted that the torsion
tensor is totally antisymmetric, i.e., @xmath .

The parallelisms are respectively related to the octonion and split
octonion algebras. Because these algebras are non-associative, there are
in each case two infinite classes, denoted @xmath and @xmath , which are
related to left and right multiplications. We refer to [ 80 ] for useful
information concerning the @xmath sphere, easily extendable to @xmath .
The corresponding torsions can be expressed in terms of the structure
constants of the octonion or split-octonion algebras. The invariance
group (at any given point) of these @xmath -forms structure constants is
isomorphic to @xmath or @xmath in the Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian
case respectively (see Appendix C ). Once again, the fact that there are
only two possible internal manifolds @xmath or @xmath , and that @xmath
, @xmath etc are excluded, is connected with the fact that there are
only two real forms of the octonion algebra, and two real forms of the
Lie algebra @xmath .

Furthermore, one finds from ( 4.24 )-( 4.26 ) that the torsion @xmath
-forms are eigenfunctions of the (pseudo-)Laplace operator in seven
dimensions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can also prove that the torsions are dual or anti-dual to their
curvature [ 21 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath sign depends on the @xmath -class to which the torsion
belongs.

With the above assumptions, the equation ( 4.6 ) for @xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is therefore solved in view of ( 4.23 ) and ( 4.28 ) if we impose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given @xmath , the two choices @xmath correspond to the @xmath or @xmath
parallelism, respectively.

Now, the equation ( 4.5 ) is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the form of the fields obtained so far, the @xmath -components of
( 4.33 ) read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

yielding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , this equation has no (real) solution when @xmath , i.e.,
for cases 2 and 4 above. When @xmath , this equation determines @xmath
in terms of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -components of ( 4.33 ) determine then the radius of
curvature @xmath of the four-dimensional background spacetime,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is thus negative. The four-dimensional background spacetime is
therefore anti-de Sitter space @xmath .

#### Summary

We thus see that there are only two cases among the cases listed above
that can actually be realized (and the cases obtained by reversing the
signature). These are [ 1 ]

1.  The Englert solution @xmath in @xmath -theory.

2.  The “exotic” Englert solution @xmath in @xmath -theory.

For all these solutions @xmath and @xmath , in consistency with [ 21 ] .

The parallelizable seven-sphere or seven-pseudo-sphere with internal
torsion (fluxes) turned on is therefore a possible solution only in
@xmath -theory and @xmath -theory. @xmath -theory does not accommodate
such solutions. Furthermore, the four-dimensional background spacetime
is in both cases anti-de Sitter, with a single time direction. There is
no solution with two time directions in the four-dimensional background
spacetime.

#### 4.4.1 Breaking of Symmetry

All Freund-Rubin solutions listed table ( 4.1 ) are maximally
supersymmetric. However, the Englert solution of @xmath -theory not only
breaks supersymmetry but also breaks the @xmath -symmetry of the
seven-sphere down to @xmath [ 78 ] . This is what we explained in
Section 3.2 that the due to presence of torsion not all @xmath Killing
vectors of @xmath isometry group of @xmath are preserved. As we
discussed, in the presence of torsion the @xmath isometry group of
@xmath breaks down to @xmath .

A similar situation occurs in @xmath -theory. The internal fluxes of the
“exotic” Englert solution break the @xmath symmetry of the pseudo-sphere
@xmath . This is because the @xmath -form @xmath at any given point is
not invariant under the full isotropy subgroup @xmath . In fact, the
@xmath -form field strength @xmath is only invariant under the subgroup
@xmath of @xmath . The reason is that the torsion @xmath is determined
by the structure constants of the algebra of split octonions which is
invariant under @xmath . The group @xmath is the non compact group with
the trivial center corresponding to the split real form of the complex
Lie algebra @xmath and is the automorphism group of split octonions.
Now, the pseudo-sphere is also equal to @xmath , where the group @xmath
is the connected component of @xmath (see [ 81 ] and Appendix C ). This
implies that the symmetry group of the @xmath -theory “exotic” Englert
solution is @xmath . This solution, similarly to the Englert solution of
@xmath -theory, breaks the supersymmetry.

\@part BRST Cohomology

## Chapter 5 Electric-Magnetic Duality

### 5.1 Electric-magnetic duality in Maxwell theory

It has long been known that the vacuum Maxwell equations

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

are invariant under the @xmath transformations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the two dimensional plane @xmath of electric and magnetic fields.
From the covariant form of vacuum Maxwell equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

one can see that the @xmath transformations rotate the Maxwell field
strength @xmath and its dual @xmath to each other,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

hence they are called electric-magnetic duality transformations. Even
though it is not the concern of our thesis but it is worth to mention
that this duality can also be generalized to realize as the symmetry of
Maxwell equations in the presence of sources. In that case, one requires
to turn on not only an electric source @xmath but also a magnetic source
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that these sources transform under duality symmetry as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

However, one has to be careful since @xmath , one cannot solve the
homogeneous wave equation in order to find the electromagnetic field
@xmath everywhere. In other words, only if the magnetic source is
spatially localized, then we are able to find @xmath where @xmath
vanishes. In the rest of this thesis we focus on the free theory without
sources.

Even though we found the electric magnetic duality as the symmetry of
the equation of motion, it is important to notice that the
electric-magnetic duality transformations are in fact an off-shell
symmetry which leaves the action invariant. The action for a free
Maxwell vector field in four dimensions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

is invariant under the duality transformations, although not manifestly
[ 24 , 25 , 26 ] . This means that in order to realize the invariance of
this action under (infinitesimal) duality transformations, the
electromagnetic field @xmath needs to transform (infinitesimally)
non-locally in space (but local in time) such that transformations of
@xmath and @xmath on-shell coincide with the transformations ( 5.5 )
written infinitesimally.

However, if one considers the first-order Maxwell action, which puts
electric and magnetic potentials on the same footing and that is called
the “first-order action”, one loses the manifest Lorentz invariance but
instead the duality symmetry of the action can be realized manifestly.
In order to do so, one goes to the Hamiltonian formulation by
introducing the conjugate momenta @xmath (conjugate to @xmath ) as
independent variables in the Hamiltonian action. Then one solves Gauss’s
law, @xmath , for new variables @xmath introducing a second vector
potential @xmath , @xmath , and at the same time getting rid of @xmath
component of the electromagnetic field which appears as Lagrange
multiplier in the Hamiltonian action. Putting back the new fields in the
Hamiltonian action one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are the Levi-Civita tensor
and the Kronecker delta respectively. Now, it is obvious that this
action is invariant under the duality transformations @xmath , with
@xmath the @xmath transformations, since both @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath invariant tensors, i.e. @xmath and @xmath .

As we saw the first order action is manifestly duality invariant at the
expense of losing manifest Lorentz invariance, while in the manifestly
Lorentz invariant second order action the duality symmetry is not
locally manifest in the sense that part of duality symmetry acts
non-locally (in space) on the fields. Later, we will see that for
example in supergravity there is a subgroup of the duality symmetry
group that acts locally on fields in the second order action.

Now, for @xmath free abelian Maxwell vector fields @xmath , @xmath , the
duality invariant first order action takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now @xmath is the antisymmetric canonical symplectic form and
@xmath . Therefore, in order to keep both the kinetic term and the
Hamiltonian invariant under duality transformations, the duality group
needs to be a subgroup of @xmath of linear transformations of potentials
@xmath which preserve both the symplectic form and the scalar product.
It turns out that this group is @xmath , the maximal compact subgroup of
the group of symplectic transformations @xmath in @xmath dimensions [ 82
, 27 , 22 , 83 ] .

### 5.2 Non-compact duality group

The duality group of Maxwell theory of @xmath free abelian vector field
is the unitary group @xmath which is compact. The non-compact duality
symmetry group is possible only in the presence of non-minimally coupled
scalar fields where the non-linear transformations of scalars play an
important role. Let’s consider a general case of @xmath abelian
electromagnetic fields coupled to @xmath scalar fields,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and the matrices @xmath and @xmath give the non-minimal
couplings between the scalars and the abelian vectors.

In order to realize a group @xmath as the symmetry of this action,
scalar fields have to transform in a specific way both to compensate for
the transformations of vector fields under the symmetry group and to
keep the scalar Lagrangian invariant under @xmath . This requires that
@xmath and matrices @xmath and @xmath transform in a specific form. This
can be achieved if for example scalar fields parameterize the coset
@xmath where @xmath is the maximal compact subgroup of @xmath . This is
the case in the ungauged supergravity theories. In fact, neglecting
gravity, the Lagrangian ( 5.13 ) is the generic bosonic sector of
ungauged supergravity. We discuss the symmetries of this system in
detail later in Sections 6.6 and 8.3 .

We want to write the first-order Lagrangian obtained from ( 5.13 )-(
5.15 ) following the discussion of previous section and to find the
duality symmetry group of this system. In what comes next in the thesis
we only consider theories in four spacetime dimensions unless otherwise
explicitly stated.

We start by writing the canonical momenta conjugate to the @xmath which
are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

along with the constraint @xmath . This relation can be inverted to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we can compute the first-order Hamiltonian action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The time components @xmath appear in the action as Lagrange multipliers
for the constraints

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

These constraints can be solved by introducing new (dual) potentials
@xmath through the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which determines @xmath up to a gauge transformation @xmath . Note that
the introduction of these potentials is non-local but permitted in
(flat) contractible space. Putting this back in the action gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the doubled potentials are packed into a vector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and their curls @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrices @xmath and @xmath are the @xmath matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

each block being @xmath . The dual vector potentials @xmath are
canonically conjugate to the magnetic fields @xmath .

The kinetic term for the potentials in the first-order action ( 5.23 )
can be rewritten

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath defines a (pre-)symplectic structure in the
infinite-dimensional space of the @xmath and is antisymmetric for the
simultaneous exchange of @xmath with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Explicitly, @xmath is given by the product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The internal part @xmath is antisymmetric under the exchange of @xmath
with @xmath , while the spatial part @xmath is symmetric under the
simultaneous exchange of @xmath with @xmath . A necessary condition for
a linear transformation in the internal space of the potentials to be a
symmetry of the action is that it should leave the kinetic term
invariant, which in turn implies that @xmath must remain invariant under
these transformations, i.e., they must belong to the symplectic group
@xmath .

At this point, it is worth mentioning that the situation will be
completely different if one considers a system of @xmath -forms
interacting with scalars in six spacetime dimensions.

In that case, for @xmath -forms @xmath in six spacetime dimensions, the
expression analogous to ( 5.27 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the (pre-)symplectic form @xmath is given by the product of a
matrix in internal space and a matrix involving the spatial indices
(including ( @xmath )),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a (pre-)symplectic form, @xmath must be antisymmetric for the
simultaneous exchange of @xmath with @xmath . But now, the spatial part
@xmath is antisymmetric ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore the internal part @xmath must be symmetric . And indeed,
this is what one finds [ 84 , 85 ] . The signature of @xmath is @xmath
and its diagonalization amounts to splitting the @xmath -forms into
chiral (self-dual) and anti-chiral (anti-self-dual) parts. A necessary
condition for a linear transformation in the internal space of the
potentials to be a symmetry of the action is again that it should leave
the kinetic term invariant, but this implies now that @xmath must be
invariant under these transformations, i.e., they must belong to the
orthogonal group @xmath .

In general, for a @xmath -form in @xmath spacetime dimensions, the
electric and magnetic fields are exterior forms of the same rank @xmath
and one may consider electric-magnetic duality transformations that mix
them while leaving the theory invariant. The above analysis proceeds in
exactly the same way in higher (even) dimensions. The (pre-)symplectic
form @xmath for the @xmath -form potentials @xmath is equal to the
product @xmath . The spatial part @xmath is symmetric in spacetime
dimensions @xmath equal to @xmath ( @xmath odd) and antisymmetric in
spacetime dimensions @xmath equal to @xmath ( @xmath even). Accordingly
the matrix @xmath in electric-magnetic internal space must be
antisymmetric for @xmath ( @xmath ) and symmetric for @xmath ( @xmath ),
implying that the relevant electric-magnetic group is a subgroup of
@xmath or of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath dimensions respectively. These
results were established in [ 86 , 87 , 69 , 65 ] which were further
developed in [ 88 , 89 , 90 , 91 ] . As it was pointed out in [ 69 ] ,
they do not depend on the spacetime signature.

As we have just discussed in @xmath spacetime dimensions scalars
parameterize a coset @xmath . If there is a smaller set of scalars in
the theory, then the scalars parametrize a coset @xmath where now @xmath
is the duality symmetry group of the action and @xmath is its maximal
compact subgroup. In the case of maximal @xmath supergrvaity in four
dimensions, the duality group is @xmath which is a subgroup of @xmath
and the @xmath scalars are parameterizing the coset @xmath .

### 5.3 A toy model inspired by @xmath supergravity in four dimensions

Here we consider as an example a model that can be easily extended to
capture the gravity multiplet of the bosonic sector of @xmath
supergravity in four dimensions. Consider the Lagrangian ( 5.13 ) for a
system constitutes of one vector field and two scalars @xmath (in fact
one scalar @xmath and one pseudo-scalar @xmath ), i.e. @xmath and @xmath
, with the scalar and vector Lagrangians

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The full Lagrangian is invariant under

1.  constant shift of @xmath ( @xmath ),

2.  simultaneous transformations

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.36)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

The non-linear scalar transformations are those of the coset @xmath
generated by the upper-triangular matrices, @xmath , in the matrix
representation of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scalar Lagrangian is also invariant under another transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

which acts locally on scalars and enlarges the group of transformations
to full @xmath . However, this transformation acts non-locally on vector
fields in the second-order formalism. In order to see that @xmath is in
fact the group of electric-magnetic duality of this model, one can
consider the first-order form of the action. The first-order action is
written as ( 5.23 ) with @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, all @xmath transformations act linearly on vector fields as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are generators of @xmath , ( 5.37 ) together with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, in the first-order formulation the group @xmath is manifest
as the group of electric-magnetic duality of the system.

The @xmath (or @xmath ) invariant-formulation [ 16 , 92 , 93 , 94 ] of
@xmath supergravity in four dimensions is obtained by considering @xmath
vector fields in the gravity multiplet of theory, once again enlarging
the duality group to @xmath . We will come back to this point later when
we discuss examples of gauging of scalar-vector models in Section 8.4.3
.

## Chapter 6 Equivalent description in terms of the Embedding tensor
formalism

### 6.1 Gauged Supergravity

As we discussed before in Section 4.1 the @xmath -theory, or the eleven
dimensional supergravity as its low energy limit, is unique (up to
T-duality invariant theories) with supersymmetry fixing its field
content to that of the gravity multiplet [ 77 ] . The toroidal
compactification of the @xmath -theories or superstring theories results
in the ungauged supergravity theories in lower dimensions in flat
backgrounds. The ungauged supergravities, however, do not appear to fit
phenomenology at least at the classical perturbative level. Also, since
the moduli space of vacua of scalars are not determined dynamically, the
appearance of scalars in the interaction terms in the Lagrangian
destroys the predictive power of the theory. For example, the maximal
supergravity in four dimensions contains @xmath scalars part of which
can be interpreted as the moduli of the internal manifold @xmath and the
other part comes from the @xmath -form field of the eleven dimensional
supergravity during the compactification [ 92 , 15 ] . There is no
scalar potential in the classical theory which could fix the values of
these scalars on the vacuum. One attempt to overcome this issue is to
gauge the ungauged theories by @xmath vector fields of gravity
supermultiplet through minimally coupling of the vector fields and other
fields. In this way, one can obtain an @xmath gauged supergravity in
four dimensions [ 18 ] . This in turn introduces a scalar potential in
the Lagrangian which fixes the problem of moduli degeneracy already at
the classical level.

Moreover, if the @xmath -theory is the correct UV-completion of the
effective quantum field theories in four dimensions then the standard
model of fundamental interactions needs to be realized as a solution of
the supergravity theory. In order to describe the standard model of
particle physics one needs ultimately to gauge the ungauged
supergravities obtaining a low energy effective action describing the
known interactions between the gauge fields of standard model. This is
an ongoing program which despite promising progress has not yet been
successful. It should be however mentioned that the most interesting
supergravity theories are in Anti-de Sitter background. As of today, a
supergravity theory with a non-supersymmetric de Sitter (quasi
Minkowski) stable vacuum, a residual gauge symmetry @xmath , and with
the matter content of the standard model has not been discovered.

One can build different gauged supergravities by gauging different
subgroups of global symmetry of the ungauged theories by introducing the
minimal coupling with the vector fields. In many cases, the
non-perturbative strong coupling limit of these gauged supergravities is
described by superstring/ @xmath -theories. The compactification of the
superstring/ @xmath -theories on some non-toroidal internal manifolds
leads to finding the gauged supergravities in lower dimensions, however,
it is not always possible to uplift an effective lower dimensional
gauged supergravity theory to its UV complete superstring/ @xmath
-theory.

In order to obtain gauged supergravities from compactification, one has
to turn on internal form fluxes, namely non-vanishing vacuum expectation
values of field strengths. These fluxes will appear in the Einstein
equation through their energy-momentum tensors and may affect in a
non-trivial way the geometry of the background, including the internal
manifold. They change the structure and topology of the internal
manifolds.

In the presence of fluxes one is then led to consider spontaneous
compactifications of superstring/ @xmath -theory on more general
backgrounds which have the form of a warped product @xmath of a
non-compact @xmath -dimensional spacetime and an internal manifold which
in general is no longer Ricci-flat, at least in the sense of Ricci
flatness of Levi-Civita connection, see Chapters 3 and 4 . The problem
of finding backgrounds of this kind which preserve a minimal amount of
supersymmetries requires considering more general geometries for
internal manifold and hence leads to the so called @xmath -structure
manifolds. This class of internal manifolds comprises geometries
characterized by background quantities, called geometric fluxes, which
define topology-deformation of traditional Ricci-flat manifolds like
tori or Calabi-Yau spaces.

In Chapter 3 we discussed the @xmath -structure manifolds where we
focused on manifolds with @xmath -structure. In the @xmath -theory
compactification, the global existence of Killing spinors restricts the
structure group allowing the internal manifold with @xmath -structure.
In Chapter 4 we explained two ways of compactification in the presence
of internal fluxes; Freund-Rubin compactification which preserves all
supersymmetries and Englert spontaneous compactification which prompts a
non-supersymmetric low energy effective theory. Also, we have seen that
in the case of Englert(-like) compactification, the torsion on the
-parallelizable- internal manifold @xmath ( @xmath ) plays the role of
geometric fluxes.

The first examples of gauged extended supergravities [ 95 , 96 , 97 , 98
, 99 ] exhibited some of the characteristic features of these theories
such as fermion masses, spontaneous supersymmetry breaking and a scalar
potential, or a cosmological constant when scalars were not present.

The gauged @xmath maximal supergravity with @xmath gauge group is
obtained from Kaluza-Klein reduction of eleven dimensional supergravity
on round @xmath where the SO(8) local symmetry is related to the
isometry group of @xmath [ 100 , 101 , 102 ] . This was later
generalized to maximal gauged supergravities with non-compact gauge
group in [ 103 , 104 , 105 ] .

As we pointed out before, at the classical level supergravities in lower
dimensions are consistently defined independently of their string or
@xmath -theory origin and are characterized by the amount of
supersymmetry which they preserve, their field content and the local
internal symmetry group gauged by the vector fields (for the gauged
supergravities). They are also invariant under @xmath abelian gauge
symmetry. At the classical level, gauged supergravities are obtained
from ungauged ones, with the same amount of supersymmetry, field content
and @xmath abelian gauge symmetry, through the well defined gauging
procedure. It involves promoting a suitable subgroup of the global
symmetry group to local symmetry of the theory and modifying the action
by the introduction of fermion mass terms and of a scalar potential in
order to restore the same number of supersymmetries as the original
ungauged theory. This uniquely defines the gauged supergravity, provided
a set of consistency conditions to be satisfied by the gauge group. The
gauging procedure is the only known way for introducing fermion mass
terms or a scalar potential in an extended supergravity without
explicitly breaking supersymmetry. In the @xmath -theory
compactification, these additional terms in the action as well as the
gauge group are determined by the background fluxes and therefore by the
structure of internal manifold. The background fluxes typically induce,
in the lower dimensional effective theory, minimal couplings as well as
mass terms and a scalar potential.

It is important to emphasize again that not all gaugings can be obtained
from compactification of supergravity theories. There are known examples
of gauged supergravities in lower dimensions for which it is not
possible to find an uplift to the @xmath -theory [ 106 , 107 , 108 ] .
Even in those cases where the gauged supergravities can be obtained from
the dimensional reduction, it is not always an easy task to find a
consistent reduction ansatz. Therefore, it is tempting to seek a
formulation that can provide all possible gaugings in a systematic way
regardless of whether it can or cannot be obtained through dimensional
reduction.

The BV-BRST formulation [ 34 , 109 , 35 , 110 , 111 ] , which is
described in Chapter 7 , will provide a powerful tool in order to deal
with the question of finding all possible consistent gaugings of
supergravity theories. This is the path we pursue in this thesis.

### 6.2 Electric-Magnetic duality and Gauging

As we have seen in Chapter 5 in the second-order Lagrangian formulation
of supergravity, only the electric vector fields appear in the
Lagrangian. The minimal coupling then, involving only the electric
vector fields, manifestly breaks the electric-magnetic duality symmetry
of the original ungauged theory.

The electric-magnetic duality is therefore particularly relevant in the
context of gaugings of supergravities in their second-order formulation
since the available gaugings depend on the Darboux frame in which the
theory is formulated. The Darboux frame is also known as the “duality
frame” or the “symplectic frame”. The use of symplectic frame is
referring to the fact that the real symplectic group preserves the
symplectic tensor, written in Darboux form, on the @xmath electric and
magnetic field directions. We should distinguish the action of the full
symplectic group acting on the frame from the “duality” symmetry
subgroup @xmath that acts also on the scalar fields and may be strictly
smaller.

To be specific, the second-order Lagrangian, describing the maximal
supergravity toroidally reduced to four spacetime dimensions [ 16 ] , is
invariant under the non-compact rigid symmetry @xmath (a subgroup of the
symplectic group @xmath ) which contains standard electric-magnetic
duality rotations among the electric and magnetic fields. The invariance
of the equations of motion under duality symmetry group was already
demonstrated in [ 16 ] . However, as we explained in Section 5.2 , the
invariance of the action is more easily verified in the first-order
formalism. This was explicitly achieved in [ 112 ] , following the
crucial pioneering work of [ 24 ] further developed in [ 84 , 86 ] .

Now, while the full @xmath group is always present as an off-shell
symmetry group of the Lagrangian, only a subgroup of which acts locally
on all fields in the second-order formulation. The other transformations
act non-locally (in space). The explicit non-local form of the duality
transformations for standard electromagnetism may be found in [ 25 , 26
] .

The subgroup of symmetries that acts locally on the fields of the
second-order formalism depends on the symplectic frame and is called the
‘‘electric symmetry subgroup” in that symplectic frame. A subgroup of
this electric symmetry subgroup is the seed for the local deformations
of the abelian gauge symmetry and of the action of the ungauged theory
usually considered in the literature ¹ ¹ 1 We should point out an abuse
of the word “ungauged” in the jargon of gauged supergravity. The
original ungauged theory is really already a gauge theory, since it has
abelian vector fields, each with its own @xmath gauge invariance. The
terminology “gauging” might for that reason not be very precise, since
one is actually not gauging an initial theory without gauge invariance,
but deforming the abelian gauge transformations of an original theory
that is already gauged. In the process, one may charge not only the
vector fields but also the matter fields through minimal coupling. For
that reason, it might be more appropriate to use the terminology
“charging” or “deforming” though we adopt the terminology “gauging”
commonly used in the literature. . For instance, the original gaugings
of maximal supergravity were performed in [ 23 ] starting from the
Lagrangian formulation of [ 16 ] with a specific choice of 28 “electric”
vector potentials out of the 56 potentials that one may introduce to
render dualities manifest. The electric subgroup is @xmath and the
subgroup into which the abelian gauge symmetry is deformed is @xmath .
Changing the duality frame, as in [ 113 , 114 ] , opens new inequivalent
possibilities, the most recent examples of which were proposed in [ 115
, 116 , 117 ] . A systematic investigation of the space of inequivalent
deformations of the Yang-Mills type has been undertaken in [ 118 , 119 ]
.

Due to the dependence of the available deformations on the duality
frame, it is of interest to keep the duality frame unspecified in the
gaugings in order to be able to contemplate simultaneously all
possibilities. There are at least three different ways to do so. One of
them is simply to try to deform directly the manifestly duality
invariant action of [ 112 ] . In that first-order formulation, all
duality transformations are local and no choice of duality frame is
needed. However, as we show in Section 6.4 , generalizing the argument
of [ 83 ] by introduction of scalar fields one finds that all standard
non-abelian Yang-Mills deformations are obstructed for this Lagrangian,
so that one needs to turn to a second-order Lagrangian in order to have
access to non-abelian deformations including those of the Yang-Mills
type. As the change of variables from the second-order formulation to
the first-order one is non-local (in space), the concept of local
deformations changes.

The transition from a Hamiltonian formulation to the usual second-order
formulation involves a choice of symplectic frame. Explicitly, one needs
to determine what are the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s where a point on a
symplectic manifold is given by @xmath . We always refer to those
potentials which are kept, during the transition from first-order to
second-order formulation, as @xmath ’s and to those which are eliminated
as @xmath ’s. Since the electric and magnetic potentials of the
first-order formulation play the respective roles of coordinates and
momenta, this amounts to choosing which potentials are electric and
which ones are magnetic. It is the reason why this step breaks manifest
duality. One can nevertheless keep track of the symplectic
transformation that relates the chosen symplectic frame to a fixed
reference symplectic frame. The symplectic matrix coefficients appear
then as constant parameters that define the second-order Lagrangian. So,
one is really dealing with a family of Lagrangians depending on constant
parameters. In order to treat all symplectic frames on the same footing,
one should study the gaugings in a uniform manner independently of the
values of these constants – although the number and features of the
solutions will depend on their actual values. There are moreover
redundancies, because many choices of the symplectic matrix
coefficients, i.e. of symplectic frame, lead to locally equivalent
second-order formulations. We will discuss this approach in Section 6.5
.

A third way to keep track of the symplectic frame is through the
“embedding tensor” formalism [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ] , where both
electric and magnetic vector potentials are introduced from the
beginning without choosing a priori which one is electric and which one
is magnetic. Furthermore, extra @xmath -forms are added in order to
prevent doubling of the number of physical degrees of freedom. In
addition to these fields, the Lagrangian contains also constants which
form the components of the embedding tensor @xmath and indicate how the
subgroup to be gauged is embedded in the duality group @xmath . These
constants are not to be varied in the action so that, up to some
equivalences, one has a family of Lagrangians depending on external
constants and any choice destroys the manifest symmetry between
electricity and magnetism. In Section 6.3 we review the important
features of this formalism and the gauging procedure using the embedding
tensors.

The last two formulations are classically equivalent since their
corresponding second-order Lagrangians yield equivalent equations of
motion [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ] . One may, however, wonder whether the
spaces of available local deformations are isomorphic. In Section 7.5 we
prove that this is indeed the case and the space of local deformations
of both pictures are isomorphic.

### 6.3 Embedding Tensor

In the embedding tensor formulation of the gauging construction [ 28 ,
29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ] , all the deformations of the original ungauged
model are expressed in terms of a single embedding tensor @xmath which
is covariant with respect to the global symmetries of the theory and
defines the embedding of the gauge algebra into the global symmetry
algebra. The choice of gauge group inside the global symmetry group is
constrained by consistency conditions which depend on the original
ungauged model. They hint to the point that the dimension of gauge group
cannot exceed the number @xmath of electric vector fields. The
consistency conditions appear in the form of a set of linear and
quadratic @xmath -covariant (purely group-theoretical) constraints on
the components of embedding tensor @xmath .

We shall review a general formulation of the gauging procedure in four
dimensions which was developed in [ 29 , 30 ] and does not depend on the
symplectic matrices @xmath . The matrices @xmath relate the chosen
symplectic frame to a fixed reference symplectic frame, so that the
kinetic terms are not written in terms of the electric vector fields.

We start by introducing a symplectic-invariant gauge connection of the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the symplectic vector fields and @xmath are the
generators of the gauge group @xmath . Here the index @xmath and one
should notice that even though there are @xmath generators @xmath but
there are at most @xmath independent ones which generate the gauge
group. The embedding tensors describe the embedding of the gauge group
in the global symmetry group @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath generators of the algebra of global symmetry transformation,
therefore @xmath . One can, for the sake of simplicity, reabsorb the
gauge coupling constant @xmath into @xmath .

There is a redundancy in the choice of the dynamical fields between
@xmath and @xmath ; half of them play the role of auxiliary fields and
at most @xmath linear combinations @xmath of the @xmath vectors @xmath
and @xmath effectively enter the gauge connection

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the index @xmath is referring to the @xmath physical vector fields
² ² 2 This could be easily seen bearing in mind that there is a
symplectic matrix @xmath which takes the frame to the electric one where
@xmath vanishes. .

The consistency of gauging requires that the embedding tensor satisfies
a set of linear and quadratic algebraic @xmath -covariant constraints [
32 ] . The constraints are written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.5)
              @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath .

The linear constraint ( 6.4 ) is also known as the representation
constraint [ 32 ] . The first quadratic constraint ( 6.5 ) guarantees
that there exists a symplectic matrix @xmath which rotates the embedding
tensor @xmath to an electric frame in which the magnetic components
@xmath vanish.

The second quadratic constraint ( 6.6 ) is the condition that the gauge
algebra close within the global symmetry algebra @xmath and implies that
@xmath is a singlet with respect to @xmath . To see this one can rewrite
( 6.6 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are generators of the adjoint representation of the global
symmetry group @xmath .

The locality constraint ( 6.5 ) is not in general independent of other
constraints. As it was proved in [ 32 ] , it will pose as an independent
constraint only in theories featuring scalar isometries with no duality
action, namely those theories in which the symplectic duality
representation @xmath of the isometry algebra @xmath is not faithful.
This is the case of the quaternionic isometries in @xmath theories. In
general, in theories in which all scalar fields sit in the same
supermultiplets as the vector fields, as it is the case of
supergravities with @xmath or @xmath with no hypermultiplets, the
locality condition ( 6.5 ) is not independent but follows from the other
constraints.

Following the known prescription of gauging a theory through minimal
coupling, the covariant derivatives are then defined in terms of ( 6.1 )
and replaces ordinary derivatives everywhere in the action; therefore
the gauge fields @xmath are transformed under the gauge symmetry as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Here, @xmath is referring to the symplectic matrix
representation of the generators @xmath acting on covariant vectors. The
symplectic covariant non-Abelian field strengths @xmath is then defined
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Although in the present formulation both vectors @xmath and @xmath
appear in the kinetic term but in a symplectic frame which is not the
electric one, @xmath fields are not well defined since the Bianchi
identity (Gauss constraint) is not satisfied for their corresponding
curvature. This is due to the non-vanishing components @xmath of the
embedding tensor in such a frame; these are nothing but magnetic
charges. It can be indeed seen from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in particular one finds @xmath since @xmath vanishes only in the
electric frame where @xmath . This can be also interpreted as the
failure to satisfy Jacobi identity for the structure constants @xmath of
gauge algebra in the @xmath -representation [ 32 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This problem can be resolved by adding extra @xmath -form gauge fields
@xmath and a set of gauge symmetries to preserve the number of degrees
of freedom. Then by combining the non-abelian vector field strengths
@xmath with a set of massless antisymmetric tensor fields @xmath one is
able to construct gauge-covariant field strength @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order for the field strength @xmath to be gauge covariant, the @xmath
-form field @xmath should transform under the gauge symmetry such that
it cancels the non-covariant terms in the variation of @xmath . We have
thus introduced, together with the new fields @xmath and @xmath , extra
gauge symmetries parametrized by @xmath and @xmath . This ensures the
correct number of propagating degrees of freedom. The fields are
transformed under these symmetries as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the covariant derivatives are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally the vector-tensor part of the gauged bosonic Lagrangian
invariant under the above symmetries is written as [ 28 , 29 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we restored the coupling @xmath and wrote them down explicitly.

The @xmath is the topological term which is added in order to guarantee
the invariance under the Peccei-Quinn transformations. Notice that if
the magnetic charges @xmath vanish, which will happen in the electric
frame, @xmath disappears from the action since ( 6.19 ) vanishes as well
as the @xmath -dependent Stueckelberg term in @xmath .

One can add the Einstein-Hilbert and the scalar Lagrangians to this
action to obtain the complete bosonic action of gauged supergravity in
four dimensions and @xmath . One can do the same analysis in the
presence of fermions since the only constraint required by supersymmetry
is the linear constraint ( 6.4 ). In fact, the consistency of gauging in
the bosonic Lagrangian already imposes this condition and one just needs
to covariantize the fermionic sector, add the mass shift term and
introduce the scalar potential in order to restore the supersymmetry of
the original ungauged theory.

After this short review of embedding tensor formalism, it might be good
to look back at the second way of gauging, mentioned in Section 6.1 ,
where one uses the action ( 5.13 )-( 5.15 ) with @xmath vector fields.
Then, one can formulate the theory in any arbitrary frame by means of a
symplectic transformation which relates the arbitrary frame to the
reference frame. But first, we want to show that the first-order
formulation is rigid even in the presence of scalars.

### 6.4 Yang-Mills deformations of first-order action

One may think that it is more tractable to consider the gauging
procedure in the first-order formulation since the duality symmetry is
manifest in this formulation. However, it was shown in [ 83 ] that the
first-order action ( 6.32 ) without scalar fields,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

does not admit non-abelian deformations of the Yang-Mills type.

For the future reference, it is good to make the abelian gauge
invariance of the action ( 6.21 ) manifest by introducing the temporal
component @xmath of the potentials and rewrite the action ( 6.21 ) in
terms of the abelian curvatures @xmath . One can replace @xmath by
@xmath in ( 6.21 ) because the magnetic fields are identically
transverse and one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, due to the result of [ 83 ] , there is no subgroup of the duality
group @xmath that can be deformed into a non-abelian one. A much
stronger result was actually derived earlier in [ 120 ] through the BRST
formalism, namely, that the action ( 6.21 ) admits no local deformation
that deforms the gauge algebra at all.

In fact, this obstruction as described in [ 83 ] does not depend on the
scalar sector and obstructs Yang-Mills deformations even when scalar
fields are present. The obstruction prevails due to the incompatibility
of an adjoint action, required by the Yang-Mills construction, and the
symplectic condition as required by the invariance of the
scalar-independent kinetic term. It was explained in [ 83 ] , that the
obstruction persists to remain even in the presence of scalar fields.
This is because even in the presence of scalars, the kinetic term of
vector fields is independent of scalars. Following [ 2 ] , we give a
detailed proof of the rigidity of Yang-Mills deformation in the presence
of scalar fields.

Let’s consider the Yang-Mills deformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

of the original abelian gauge symmetry of ( 6.22 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with gauge parameters @xmath . Here, the @xmath are the structure
constants of the gauge group @xmath of dimension @xmath into which the
original abelian gauge group is deformed, and @xmath is the deformation
parameter. Since the @xmath are the structure constants of the gauge
group, they satisfy @xmath .

Under the Yang-Mills deformation, the abelian curvatures are replaced by
the non-abelian ones,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which transform in the adjoint representation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the ordinary derivatives @xmath of the scalar fields are replaced by
the covariant derivatives @xmath . These contain linearly the
undifferentiated vector potentials @xmath .

Therefore the deformed action is written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The important point is that the kinetic term for the vector potentials
is the same as in the absence of scalar fields. Invariance of the
kinetic term under the Yang-Mills gauge transformations yields therefore
the same conditions as when there is no scalar @xmath . The kinetic term
must be invariant by itself since the scalar Lagrangian is invariant and
there can be no compensation with the energy density @xmath since it
does not contain any time derivative.

As in the case with no scalars [ 83 ] , the compatibility conditions are
that the adjoint representation ( 6.26 ) of the gauge group @xmath
should preserve the symplectic form @xmath in internal electric-magnetic
space, i.e. writing @xmath then the matrices @xmath must be symplectic
hence to satisfy @xmath or explicitly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The symmetry of @xmath under the exchange of its first and
last indices, and its antisymmetry in its last two indices, force it to
vanish,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the structure constants @xmath must also vanish and there can be
no non-abelian deformation of the gauge symmetries. The Yang-Mills
construction in which the potentials become non-abelian connections is
unavailable in the manifestly duality invariant first-order formulation
[ 83 ] . However, one should notice that the other types of
deformations, charging the matter fields or adding functions of the
gauge-invariant abelian curvatures, are not excluded by the argument
since they preserve the abelian nature of the gauge group.

In order to surpass the obstruction to the non-abelian deformations, one
must avoid the condition ( 6.28 ) expressing the invariance of the
symplectic form. This is naturally attainable once one goes to the
second-order formalism by choosing a Lagrangian submanifold, on which
the pull-back of @xmath is by definition zero. This is explained in the
next section.

### 6.5 Transition to the second-order formalism

While the first-order and second-order formalisms are equivalent in
terms of symmetries in the sense that any symmetry in one formalism is
also a symmetry of the other, they are not equivalent regarding the
concept of locality, more specifically locality in space. A local
function in one formulation may not be local in the other and
consequently the spaces of consistent local deformations are not the
same in both formalisms. This subtle difference may open a window of
possibilities for the non-abelian deformations in second-order formalism
which were not accessible in the first-order formalism. Below, we will
shed light on the origin of this practically important difference.

#### 6.5.1 Choice of symplectic frame and locality restriction

Let’s consider the first-order Lagrangian discussed in Section 5.2 which
is written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath given by ( 5.26 ).

Of special interest are the symmetries of @xmath for which the vector
fields transform linearly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

accompanied by a transformation of the scalars that may be nonlinear,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the @xmath ’s are infinitesimal parameters. One might consider
more general (nonlinear canonical) transformations of the vector fields,
and the scalars might have their own independent symmetries, but the
concern of the thesis is duality symmetries which are governed by the
transformations of type ( 6.33 ) and ( 6.34 ).

For the first-order action to be invariant, the transformation ( 6.33 )
should not only be symplectic, but also such that the accompanying
transformation ( 6.34 ) of the scalar field is given by a Killing vector
of the scalar metric @xmath (so as to leave the scalar Lagrangian @xmath
invariant) which implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

It also guarantees to leave the energy density of the electromagnetic
fields invariant. In finite form, the symmetries are @xmath , @xmath
where the symplectic transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the isometry @xmath of the scalar manifold are such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The algebra of transformations of the type ( 6.33 ) and ( 6.34 ) that
leave the action invariant is called the duality algebra @xmath , while
the corresponding group is the duality group @xmath . As it was
indicated in Section 5.2 , the duality algebra is a subalgebra of @xmath
. This symplectic condition holds irrespective of the scalar sector and
its couplings to the vectors, since it comes from the invariance of the
vector kinetic term which assumes always the same form. Which
transformations among those of @xmath are actually symmetries depend,
however, on the number of scalar fields, their internal manifold and
their couplings to the vectors [ 82 , 27 , 22 , 92 , 93 , 121 ] .

In order to go from the first-order formalism to the standard
second-order formalism, one has to tell what are the “ @xmath ”’s (to be
kept) and the “ @xmath ”’s (to be eliminated in favour of the velocities
through the inverse Legendre transformation). We have actually made the
choice to use Darboux coordinates in ( 5.26 ) and we call the
corresponding frame a Darboux frame or symplectic frame.

Since we consider here only linear canonical transformations, a choice
of canonical coordinates amounts to a choice of an element of the
symplectic group @xmath relating that symplectic frame (i.e., symplectic
basis) to a reference symplectic frame.

Once a choice of symplectic frame has been made, one goes from ( 6.32 )
to the second-order formalism by following the steps reverse to those
that led to the first-order formalism:

-   One keeps the first half of the vector potentials @xmath , the
    “electric ones” in the new frame ( @xmath ).

-   One replaces the second half of the vector potentials @xmath (the
    “magnetic ones”) by the momenta

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

    subject to the constraints

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which one enforces by introducing the Lagrange multipliers @xmath .
    This is the non-local step (in space).

-   One finally eliminates the momenta @xmath , which can be viewed as
    auxiliary fields, through their equations of motion which are
    nothing else but the inverse Legendre transformation expressing
    @xmath in terms of @xmath .

One can encode the choice of symplectic frame through the symplectic
transformation that relates the chosen symplectic frame to a reference
symplectic frame,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a symplectic matrix in the fundamental representation of
@xmath , while @xmath and @xmath are respectively the potentials in the
reference and new duality frames. The symplectic property @xmath ensures
that the kinetic term in ( 6.32 ) remains invariant. The first-order
action therefore takes the same form, but with matrices @xmath and
@xmath related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the fact that @xmath and @xmath are symplectic, a straightforward
but not very illuminating computation shows that @xmath determines
matrices @xmath , @xmath uniquely such that equation ( 5.26 ) with
primes holds, i.e, there exist unique @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrices @xmath and @xmath depend on the scalar fields, but also on
the symplectic matrix @xmath . Performing the steps described above in
reverse order, one then gets the second-order Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new Lagrangian ( 6.43 ) depends on the parameters of the symplectic
transformation @xmath used in equation ( 6.41 ). So we really have a
family of Lagrangians labelled by an @xmath element @xmath . By
construction, these Lagrangians differ from one another by a change of
variables that is in general non-local in space.

There are of course redundancies in this description. The presence of
these redundancies will be important in the study of deformations. There
are in general two sets of redundancies:

1.  The stability subgroup @xmath of a Lagrangian subspace consists of
    the block lower triangular symplectic transformations.

2.  The duality symmetries.

First, the different symplectic transformations can lead to the same
final @xmath dimensional Lagrangian subspace of @xmath ’s upon
elimination of the momenta. The choice of @xmath ’s is equivalent to a
choice of Lagrangian linear subspace, or linear polarization, because
@xmath ’s form a complete set of commuting variables (in the Poisson
bracket). The same is true for a choice of @xmath ’s. The stability
subgroup @xmath of a Lagrangian subspace consists of the block lower
triangular symplectic transformations yielding

-   The canonical point transformation where the second-order
    Lagrangians differ by a redefinition of the @xmath ’s,

-   The canonical phase transformation where the second-order
    Lagrangians modified by a total derivative.

Second, duality symmetries correspond also to redundancies in the
transition to the second-order formalism since they do not modify the
first-order Lagrangian (when the scalars are transformed appropriately)
and hence clearly lead to the same final second-order Lagrangian.

One can characterize the redundancies as follows. The symplectic
transformations ( 6.40 ) with matrices @xmath and @xmath are equivalent.
Here, @xmath belongs to the stability subgroup @xmath of the final
Lagrangian subspace and @xmath belongs to the duality group @xmath .
Indeed, the first-order Lagrangian is left invariant under the
transformation @xmath provided the scalars are transformed
appropriately, and two sets of new symplectic coordinates @xmath and
@xmath yield equivalent second-order Lagrangians after elimination of
the momenta. One could also consider what happens when the coordinates
@xmath defined by ( 6.40 ) are taken as the reference frame. Then, the
changes of frame @xmath and @xmath are equivalent, where @xmath is the
matrix associated with the duality symmetry @xmath in the @xmath –frame
and @xmath is an element of the stability subgroup of the Lagrangian
subspace in the @xmath –frame. This gives an equivalent description of
the redundancies.

The relevant space is thus the quotient @xmath . Here we considered the
invariance of action that means the invariances up to a total derivative
which does not matter classically. However, if one just considers the
invariance of the Lagrangian instead of the action then the stability
subgroup reduces to @xmath .

#### 6.5.2 Electric group

The duality transformations @xmath , @xmath , where the symplectic
matrix @xmath and the isometry @xmath of the scalar manifold are such
that the condition ( 6.37 ) holds, generically mix the electric and
magnetic potentials. Accordingly, when expressed in terms of the
variables of the second-order formalism they will, in general, take a
non-local form since the magnetic potentials become non-local functions
of the electric potentials ³ ³ 3 Given a duality symmetry of the action
@xmath , one gets the corresponding duality symmetry of the first-order
action @xmath by (i) expressing in the variation @xmath the magnetic
potentials @xmath (if they occur) in terms of @xmath , which is a
non-local expression and determined up to a gauge transformation that
can be absorbed in a gauge transformation of the electric variables;
(ii) computing the variation @xmath from @xmath ; and (iii) determining
the variation of the Lagrange multipliers @xmath so that the terms
proportional to the constraints @xmath cancel in @xmath . One gets the
symmetry of the second-order action by expressing the auxiliary fields
@xmath that are eliminated in terms of the retained variables. and their
time derivatives in the second-order formalism [ 24 , 25 , 26 ] .

Thus, an electric symmetry transformation is characterized by the
property that the matrix @xmath is lower-triangular, i.e., given that it
must be symplectic

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

An electric symmetry is therefore a transformation @xmath of the
electric potentials for which there is a symmetric matrix @xmath and an
isometry @xmath of the scalar manifold such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given by ( 6.44 ). The terminology “electric group” for the
group of transformations characterized by ( 6.44 ) is standard. The
transformations with @xmath involve transformations of Peccei-Quinn type
describing the axion shift symmetry [ 122 , 123 ] .

The electric group @xmath in a given frame depends of course on the
chosen duality frame. Indeed, going to another duality frame with the
symplectic matrix @xmath as in ( 6.40 ) will replace the matrices @xmath
by their conjugates @xmath , and these might not be lower-triangular.
The condition that @xmath has the lower-triangular form ( 6.44 )
therefore depends on the choice of @xmath .

We have repeatedly emphasized that a local expression in the @xmath ’s
need not be local when expressed in terms of the @xmath ’s and thus of
the Lagrangian variables. This is because the magnetic potentials are
not local functions of the conjugate momenta. But the @xmath ’s are
local functions of the @xmath ’s given by @xmath and so it would seem
that any local function of the @xmath ’s, and thus of the Lagrangian
variables, should also be a local function of the @xmath ’s. This is
true as long as the relation @xmath is not modified. In deformations of
the second-order Lagrangians one allows, however, deformations that
could modify this relation. For instance, after Yang-Mills deformations,
the abelian constraints @xmath get replaced by non-abelian ones and
their local solution gets replaced by a non-local expression involving
both kinds of potentials.

The interest of the electric group @xmath is that its transformations
are local in the second-order formalism. Therefore, among the duality
transformations, it is the electric ones that are candidates for (local)
gaugings.

### 6.6 Deformation leading to the embedding tensor formalism

In Section 6.1 we explained that another way to cover arbitrary choices
of symplectic frames is given by the embedding tensor formalism of [ 29
, 30 , 31 , 32 ] . As we have seen in Section 6.3 in this formalism in
addition to the @xmath electric vector fields @xmath , the Lagrangian
also contains @xmath magnetic vector fields @xmath and @xmath two-forms
@xmath with @xmath , where @xmath is the full duality group in which one
can also include pure scalar symmetries. The Lagrangian ( 6.18 ) also
depends on the embedding tensor @xmath , which are constants in
spacetime and not to be varied in the action. They contain information
about the embedding of the gauge group in the duality group through the
@xmath -valued connection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Lie algebra of @xmath and we wrote @xmath . @xmath
are the magnetic potentials called @xmath in Section 6.5 but for more
harmonious notation used below, we use @xmath in the following. The
embedding tensor also contains information about the choice of
symplectic frame; an important feature upon which our analysis in the
following based. The consistency of gaugings in this formalism controls
by three sets of constraints ( 6.4 )-( 6.6 ). The locality constraint (
6.5 ) guarantees the existence of a symplectic matrix which takes a
chosen symplectic frame to the electric one and hence implies that the
gauged group must be a subgroup of an electric subgroup @xmath of @xmath
, i.e. @xmath . Here @xmath is again referring to the @xmath physical
vector fields.

The gauged Lagrangian ( 6.18 )-( 6.20 ), after restoring the coupling
constant @xmath , can be reorganized as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , @xmath are the Yang-Mills curvatures, differing from the
abelian ones by @xmath -terms. The term @xmath in ( 6.47 ) are terms
necessary to secure gauge invariance and will vanish in the limit
explained below; their explicit form can be extracted from ( 6.18 )-(
6.20 ). The complete form of supersymmetric action in the presence of
matter couplings can be found in [ 29 , 32 ] , but we just focus on the
bosonic action with no matter coupling. Note that the full duality group
is in general not faithfully represented.

The gauged Lagrangian ( 6.47 ) is an interacting Lagrangian. To view it
as a deformation of an ungauged Lagrangian with the same field content,
so as to phrase the gauging problem as a deformation problem, we observe
that the straightforward free limit @xmath of ( 6.47 ) is just the
Lagrangian ( 5.15 ), without any additional fields and without the
embedding tensor. However, one notices that all terms in ( 6.47 ) depend
on the two-forms @xmath only through the combination @xmath . The @xmath
’s are necessary to shift away some field strengths even for the
undeformed limit @xmath . If we redefine the two-forms appearing in the
Lagrangian ( 6.47 ) as @xmath and then take the limit @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath , @xmath the abelian curvatures. This Lagrangian contains the
extra fields and has the ability to cover generic symplectic frames
through the embedding tensor components @xmath and @xmath . These
tensors satisfy the so-called “locality” quadratic constraint ( 6.5 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

In addition to ( 6.51 ), the embedding tensor fulfills other constraints
( 6.4 ) and ( 6.6 ), however, we stress that the locality constraint is
the only condition relevant to our analysis. The other constraints have
to appear as the solution of obstruction equations in the process of
deformation. We will come back to this in Chapter 8 while we discuss
BV-BRST deformation of such a model.

The Lagrangian ( 6.6 ) is invariant under the @xmath gauge
transformations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.52)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the @xmath generalized gauge transformations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we redefined the gauge parameter as @xmath with respect to the
gauge parameter of the corresponding symmetry of ( 6.18 ). The
parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary functions. The
@xmath ’s and @xmath ’s correspond to standard @xmath gauge symmetries
of the associated one-form potentials. The @xmath ’s define ordinary
abelian two-form gauge symmetries and also appear as shift
transformations of the one-form potentials. This set of gauge symmetries
is reducible since adding a gradient to @xmath and shifting
simultaneously the @xmath and @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

leads to no modification of the gauge transformations.

By construction, the non-abelian Lagrangian of ( 6.18 ) can be viewed as
a consistent local deformation of ( 6.6 ), since one can charge the
fields in ( 6.6 ) in a smooth way – by adding @xmath and @xmath terms –
to get the non-abelian Lagrangian. The abelian Lagrangian ( 6.6 ) is
thus a sensible starting point for the deformation procedure. The space
of consistent local deformations of ( 6.6 ) will necessarily include the
non-abelian Lagrangian ( 6.18 ), given in [ 29 ] . If the embedding
tensor components @xmath and @xmath do not fulfill the extra constraints
( 6.4 ) and ( 6.6 ) of the embedding formalism, one will simply find
that there is no Yang-Mills type deformation, as in [ 29 ] , among the
consistent deformations of ( 6.6 ).

A natural question then is whether the space of local deformations of (
6.6 ) is isomorphic to the space of local deformations of the
conventional Lagrangian ( 6.43 ) in an appropriate symplectic frame. We
will show that it is indeed the case.

To that end, we will now perform a sequence of field redefinitions and
show that the Lagrangian ( 6.6 ) with a given definite (arbitrary)
choice of embedding tensor differs from the Lagrangian ( 6.43 ) in a
related symplectic frame by the presence of algebraic auxiliary fields
that can be eliminated without changing the local BRST cohomology. The
other extra fields are pure gauge with gauge transformations that are
pure shifts so that they do not appear in the Lagrangian and do not
contribute to the local BRST cohomology either. We shall explain this
later in Section 7.5 but for now we recall that the local BRST
cohomology at ghost number zero is what controls the space of
non-trivial deformations [ 36 ] .

The steps performed below for the limit @xmath follow closely the steps
given in [ 29 ] to prove that the extra fields appearing in the
embedding tensor formalism do not add new degrees of freedom with
respect to conventional gaugings. As shown by the examples of the
first-order and second-order formulations discussed in the previous
sections, however, equivalent actions might admit inequivalent spaces of
local deformations. Another example is given in [ 124 , 125 , 126 ] .
Therefore it seems important to relate the local BRST cohomologies;
particularly we monitor how locality goes through each field
redefinition. Furthermore, we do not fix the gauge at any stage in order
to make it clear that the analysis is gauge-independent. This is also
important since gauge fixing might have an impact on local cohomology.

The magnetic components @xmath of the embedding tensor form a
rectangular @xmath matrix. Let @xmath be its rank. Then, there exists an
@xmath invertible matrix @xmath and a @xmath invertible matrix @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an @xmath invertible matrix ⁴ ⁴ 4 The matrices @xmath
and @xmath can be constructed as a product of the matrices that
implement the familiar elementary operations on the rows and columns of
@xmath . .

We also define the new electric components by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the new components still satisfy the locality constraint ( 6.51
)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly to what has been done in [ 29 ] , one splits the indices as
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, we
define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this split, equations ( 6.57 ) and ( 6.59 ) become

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Now, we make the field redefinitions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the new primed-variables, the Lagrangian takes the same form ( 6.6 )
but with primed quantities everywhere,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new matrices @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

These field redefinitions are local, so any local function of the old
set of variables is also a local function of the new set of variables.

Using equation ( 6.6 ), it can be seen that the magnetic vector fields
@xmath and the two-forms @xmath do not appear in the Lagrangian. This
means that their gauge symmetries are in fact pure shift symmetries. In
particular, a complete description of the gauge symmetries of the
two-forms @xmath is actually given by @xmath rather than @xmath ,
implying that the above set of gauge transformations is not complete.

Let us also redefine the gauge parameters as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. The gauge variations of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are then

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.66)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.67)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.68)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

They suggest the further changes of variables

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.70)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.71)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which we complete in the @xmath -sector by taking other independent
linear combinations of the @xmath , @xmath , that can be taken to be for
instance @xmath . The change of variables is again such that any local
function of the old set of variables is also a local function of the new
set of variables. Using the constraint @xmath , one finds that the
variation of the new variables simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the gauge parameters @xmath and @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.73)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We have used a different symbol @xmath to emphasize that it does not
transform anymore as a generalized gauge potential. Because @xmath is
invertible, the gauge parameters @xmath and @xmath provide an equivalent
description of the gauge symmetries as ( 6.67 )-( 6.69 ). However, they
provide an irreducible set of gauge symmetries contrary to description
given by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Written in those variables, the Lagrangian only depends on @xmath vector
fields @xmath and @xmath and on @xmath two-forms @xmath . The variables
@xmath drop out in agreement with the shift symmetry @xmath .

The Lagrangian is explicitly

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.75)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The gauge variations of the fields are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two-forms @xmath are auxiliary fields and can be eliminated from the
Lagrangian ( 6.75 ), yielding a Lagrangian of the form ( 6.43 ) in a
definite symplectic frame. This is because the relevant quadratic form
is invertible, see section 5.1 of [ 29 ] for details.

One can get this Lagrangian more directly as follows. After the
auxiliary fields are eliminated, the variables that remain are the
scalar fields and the @xmath vector fields @xmath and @xmath . We thus
see that the embedding tensor determines a symplectic frame. The matrix
@xmath defining the symplectic frame can be viewed in this approach as
the function @xmath of the embedding tensor obtained through the above
successive steps that lead to the final Lagrangian where only half of
the potentials remain. Of course, there are ambiguities in the
derivation of @xmath from the embedding tensor, since choices were
involved at various stages in the construction. One gets the matrix
@xmath up to a transformation of the stability subgroup of the
Lagrangian subspace of the @xmath electric potentials @xmath and @xmath
.

More explicitly, one gets the matrix @xmath from the above construction
as follows: the change of variables ( 6.62 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the full change ( 6.70 ), including the trivial redefinitions of the
other vector fields, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

with respect to ( 6.70 ) in order to have the same kind of indices. The
matrix @xmath is therefore simply given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the matrices appearing in equations ( 6.78 )
and ( 6.79 ) respectively. Using the property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

which follows from the last of ( 6.6 ) upon contractions with @xmath ,
one can show that @xmath defined in this way is indeed a symplectic
matrix. Once @xmath is known, the final Lagrangian in this symplectic
frame, i.e. the Lagrangian that follows from the elimination of @xmath
in ( 6.75 ), is then simply the Lagrangian ( 6.43 ) with @xmath and
@xmath determined from ( 6.42 ) where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, the matrix @xmath will have an upper triangular part, and
hence, will not belong to the stability subgroup of the original
electric frame.

Finally, we make a remark that, as we have seen, it is the rank of the
magnetic part of the embedding tensor that controls how many original
magnetic fields become “electric”. In particular, if the rank is zero,
all original electric fields remain electric, while if the rank is
maximum, all original magnetic fields become electric.

We delay the detailed discussion of deformations in the language of BRST
cohomology to the end of Chapter 7 after we introduce BRST cohomology
and the tools necessary to develop the discussion.

## Chapter 7 BV-BRST Formalism and Deformation

### 7.1 A quick look at BV-BRST formalism

The nature as we know, including the phenomena we deal with in our every
day life and those which happens in microscopic scales, is described by
the gauge theory of fundamental interactions between particles. It is
common for the gauge theories to be formulated in a local and manifestly
covariant manner as it may facilitate otherwise computational
difficulties. However, the price to be paid is to introduce the extra
(non-propagating) degrees of freedom to render the locality and the
covariance of the theories manifest. The theories then, in the presence
of non-dynamical local degrees of freedom, show invariance under the
symmetries which account for the freedom of field transformations while
leaving the theories unchanged; these symmetries are known as gauge
symmetries.

The presence of gauge symmetries specially for the non-abelian theories
causes issues once one wants to quantize the classical gauge theories.
Typically, a gauge-fixing procedure is used to remove the non-dynamical
degrees of freedom. Ghost fields are used to compensate for the effects
of the gauge degrees of freedom so as the final theory yet remains
unitary. In the theory of electrodynamics in the linear gauges, ghosts
decouple while in non-abelian gauge theories, convenient gauges
generically involve interacting ghosts. The Faddeev-Popov quantization
procedure [ 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 ] , particularly well-defined in the
path integral formulation of field theories, was proposed in order to
address this issue. In this procedure, the presence of ghost fields is
essential to produce the correct measure for the functional integral by
introducing quadratic terms in the ghost fields in the Lagrangian. The
gauge-fixed action then is invariant under a nilpotent global symmetry,
the so-called BRST symmetry [ 131 , 132 , 133 , 134 ] , involving
transformations of both fields and ghosts.

There are though systems that cannot be treated by the Faddeev-Popov
quantization procedure of which are the theories involving higher order
ghost vertices and the gauge theories with reducible gauge group. An
important example is supergravity where the algebra does not necessarily
close off-shell, i.e. the commutator of two off-shell gauge symmetries
will be written by terms proportional to the equations of motion.
Moreover, in the presence of higher order @xmath -forms, as in the
supergravity, the gauge algebra is usually reducible.

Since the presence of ghost fields are useful in the discussion of
quantization and renormalization of gauge theories (most importantly of
the non-abelian ones), it is of interest to have a formalism that not
only includes the ghost fields from the beginning but also encompasses
the remnant BRST symmetry of the theory. The Batalin-Vilkovisky (BV)
formulation, originally proposed by Zinn-Justin in the context of
renormalization of Yang-Mills theories [ 135 , 136 ] and developed by
Batalin and Vilkovisky to more generalized models [ 34 , 109 , 35 , 110
, 111 ] , does indeed provide the appropriate means. It involves
anti-fields which source the BRST symmetries and a canonical symplectic
structure, given by an odd non-degenerate symplectic form on the space
of fields and anti-fields known as the anti-bracket map, which controls
the dynamics of the theory.

The BV formalism has many advantages; it enjoys the manifest gauge
invariance, allows for a perturbative expansion of the quantum theory
and makes possible to study the quantum corrections to the symmetry
structure of the theory. Furthermore, the formalism can treat the
theories with an open algebra or reducible gauge symmetries by
introducing the extra fields and antifields, the ghosts of ghosts and
their corresponding anti-fields and so on.

In the rest of this chapter, we introduce in Section 7.2 the BRST
cohomology and in Section 7.3 show its importance in the BV deformation
procedure. Afterward, in Section 7.5 we go back to the question asked in
Chapter 6 that if the spaces of local deformations of the undeformed
Lagrangian ( 6.6 ) of embedding tensor formalism and the one of
scalar-vector model ( 6.43 ) are equivalent. We use the BV-BRST
deformation techniques of Section 7.3 to have a thorough analysis and to
answer to this question.

### 7.2 BRST cohomology

The BRST differential @xmath is a nilpotent differential defined on the
space of all fields (including ghost fields) @xmath and their
anti-fields @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -forms and the
matter fields respectively and ellipses stand for the ghosts of ghosts
and their corresponding anti-fields. Therefore, one has

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the BRST cocycles are those objects @xmath that are BRST-closed,
i.e. elements of the kernel of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the BRST coboundaries are those BRST-closed objects that are
BRST-exact, i.e. elements of the image of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The BRST cohomolgy is formally defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

An element in @xmath is an equivalence class of BRST-cocycles, where two
BRST-cocycles are identified if they differ by a BRST-coboundary.

One can consider the BRST cohomology in the space of local functions
where the cochain @xmath are local functions of the fields @xmath and a
finite number of their derivatives (and depend on spacetime coordinates)
or in the space of local functionals where the elements of @xmath are
the integral of forms built from the local functions.

In the standard field theoretic setting, one insists on spacetime
locality which implies that the cohomology is computed in the space of
local functionals in the fields and antifields. In turn, this can be
shown to be equivalent to the cohomology of @xmath in the space of local
functions up to total derivatives or, in form notation, to the
cohomology of @xmath in top form degree @xmath , up to the horizontal
exterior derivative of an @xmath -form. The horizontal exterior
derivative is not the de Rham differential but is instead given by
@xmath , where @xmath is the total derivative. Here @xmath is referring
to fields and antifields collectively, @xmath .

Therefore the cocycle and coboundary conditions are written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are @xmath -form local functions and @xmath are some @xmath
-form local functions. In the following we use @xmath for the
BRST-cohomology in the sapce of local functions and @xmath for the
BRST-cohomology in the space of local functionals. One could consider a
grading of these cohomologies with the ghost numbers, then one defines
@xmath , isomorphic to @xmath , as the cohomology of local functions of
form degree @xmath and ghost number @xmath modulo total derivatives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We already mentioned the importance of BV-BRST formalism in the
quantization of gauge systems at the quantum and classical level. In the
language of BRST cohomology, important problems at the quantum level
like the gauge anomalies and the counterterms in order to render the
gauge theories renormalizable are equivalent to finding @xmath and
@xmath , see [ 137 ] .

At the classical level, the BRST cohomology is a useful tool to explain
the generalized conservation laws and to build all consistent
interactions that one can add to a free theory while preserving the
number of gauge symmetries of starting theory. The former is captured by
the characteristic cohomology @xmath and the latter is described by
@xmath and @xmath of the undeformed theory [ 33 ] . We will explain this
in more detail in the next section.

### 7.3 Batalin-Vilkovisky antifield formalism

In order to systematically construct consistent interactions in gauge
theories, it is useful to reformulate the problem in the context of
algebraic deformation theory [ 138 , 139 , 140 , 141 ] . The appropriate
framework is provided by the Batalin-Vilkovisky antifield formalism [ 34
, 35 , 36 , 37 ] .

The structure of an irreducible gauge system, i.e., the Lagrangian
@xmath with field content @xmath , generating set of gauge symmetries ¹
¹ 1 We use the condensed De Witt notation. @xmath and their algebra, is
captured by the Batalin-Vilkovisky (BV) master action @xmath (see e.g. [
137 , 142 ] for reviews). The master action is a ghost number @xmath
functional

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

that satisfies what is called the master equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this equation, the BV antibracket is the odd graded Lie bracket
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the extended space @xmath of original fields and ghosts (and ghosts
for ghosts in the case of reducible gauge theories) and their antifields
@xmath . The ghost number and the Grassmann number of each fields and
their anti-fields are summarized in Table ( 7.1 ).

The Lagrangian, gauge variations and structure functions of the gauge
algebra are contained in the first, second and third term of the master
action ( 7.8 ) respectively.

For the deformation problem, one assumes the existence of an undeformed
theory described by @xmath satisfying the master equation @xmath and one
analyzes the conditions coming from the requirement that, in a suitable
expansion, the deformed theory

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfies the master equation ( 7.9 ). This results in a chain of
equations at different order in deformation parameters

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (7.12)
        @xmath      (7.13)
        @xmath      (7.14)
        @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -- --------

This can be easily proved using the properties of anti-bracket map, see
for example section 4 of [ 142 ] for a review of all properties of
anti-bracket map. The deformed Lagrangian, gauge symmetries and
structure functions can then be read off from the deformed master action
( 7.11 ).

The first condition ( 7.13 ) on the infinitesimal deformation @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation admits solutions @xmath , for all @xmath of ghost number
@xmath . Such deformations can be shown to be trivial in the sense that
they can be absorbed by (anticanonical) field-antifield redefinitions.
Moreover, trivial deformations in that sense are always of the form
@xmath for some local @xmath . It thus follows that equivalence classes
of deformations up to trivial ones are classified by @xmath , the ghost
number zero cohomology of the antifield dependent BRST differential
@xmath of the undeformed theory,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For our problem of determining the most general deformation, we start by
computing @xmath and couple its elements with independent parameters to
the starting point action to obtain @xmath . The parameters thus play
the role of generalized coupling constants. In a second step, we
determine the constraints on these coupling constants coming from the
existence of a completion such that ( 7.9 ) holds. The expansion is then
in terms of homogeneity in these generalized coupling constants and not,
as often done, in homogeneity of fields (in which case @xmath
corresponds to an action quadratic in the fields). In particular, this
approach treats the different types of symmetries involved in the
determination of @xmath on the same footing.

The BRST differential is defined on the undifferentiated fields and
antifields by @xmath , @xmath . It is extended to the derivatives
through @xmath resulting in @xmath . This reformulation allows one to
use systematic homological techniques (descent equations) for the
computation of these classes (see e.g. [ 143 ] ).

At second order, the condition ( 7.14 ) on the infinitesimal deformation
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The antibracket gives rise to a well defined map in cohomology ² ² 2 In
the following, whenever we refer to the cohomology of local functional
of a top form-degree, we drop the index @xmath and write it as @xmath .
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

For cocycles @xmath with @xmath , it is explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Condition ( 7.17 ) constrains the infinitesimal deformation @xmath to
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

If this is the case, @xmath in ( 7.17 ) is defined up to a cocycle in
ghost number @xmath . Higher order brackets and constraints can be
analyzed in a similar way, see e.g. [ 144 , 145 ] .

Besides the group @xmath that describes infinitesimal deformations, and
@xmath that controls the obstructions to extending these to finite
deformations, one can furthermore show [ 146 ] that @xmath for @xmath .
The characteristic cohomology groups are defined by forms @xmath in the
original fields @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and where @xmath denote terms that vanish on all solutions
to the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion. In particular, these groups
can be shown to vanish for @xmath in irreducible gauge theories [ 146 ,
33 ] . The group @xmath describes equivalence classes of “global”
reducibility parameters, i.e., particular local functions @xmath such
that @xmath where @xmath with @xmath . This terminology reflects the
fact that this cohomology may be non trivial even for (locally)
irreducible gauge systems, in other words in the absence of @xmath -form
gauge fields with higher @xmath . This will become clear momentarily and
is crucial throughout our discussion. These classes correspond to global
symmetries of the master action rather than of the original action alone
[ 147 , 148 ] . The associated characteristic cohomology @xmath captures
non-trivial (flux) conservation laws. More generally in the case of free
abelian @xmath -form gauge symmetry it was shown in [ 149 ] that one can
generalize the first Noether theorem ( @xmath ) and deduce by a similar
formula a class of @xmath generalizing the electric flux which
corresponds to the case @xmath , i.e., to ordinary gauge invariance. The
groups @xmath appear for @xmath -form gauge theories and vanish for
@xmath in the irreducible case [ 150 ] . The group @xmath describes and
generates the inequivalent global symmetries, with @xmath encoding the
associated inequivalent Noether currents. We mention these groups here
since they play an important role in the determination of @xmath as it
will be seen in Section 8.1 .

When @xmath , @xmath ; in this case the antibracket map encodes the Lie
algebra structure of the inequivalent global symmetries [ 151 ] . More
generally, it follows from @xmath that, for any ghost number @xmath ,
the BRST cohomology classes form a representation of the Lie algebra of
inequivalent global symmetries.

From here on, for notational simplicity, we will drop the square
brackets when computing the antibracket map, but keep in mind that it
involves classes and not their representatives.

#### 7.3.1 Depth of an element

Consider a BRST-cocycle @xmath at ghost number @xmath and form degree
@xmath . Using ( 7.5 ) or ( 7.7 ), any cocycle @xmath of the local BRST
cohomology is associated with a @xmath -descent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

that stops at some BRST cocycle @xmath . The length @xmath of the
shortest non trivial descent is called the “depth” of @xmath . The last
element @xmath is then non trivial in @xmath . The usefulness of the
depth in analyzing the BRST cohomology is particularly transparent in [
143 , 152 , 153 ] .

Local BRST cohomology classes @xmath are thus characterized, besides
ghost number @xmath and form degree @xmath , by the depth @xmath . Here,
we explain how the antibracket map behaves with respect to the depth of
its elements.

Both the covariantizable and non-covariantizable currents ³ ³ 3 By
“covariantizable”, we mean that one can choose the ambiguities in the
Noether currents so as to take them gauge invariant; otherwise the
current is “non-covariantizable”. as elements of @xmath are
distinguished by the property that for which the depth is @xmath . The
associated infinitesimal deformations as elements of @xmath are
distinguished by the property that the depth is deeper than one.
Therefore, the following will be relevant when studying the obstruction
to infinitesimal deformations.

###### Proposition 7.1.

The depth of an image of the antibracket map is less than or equal to
the depth of its most shallow argument.

###### Proof.

Consider @xmath , where we can assume without loss of generality that
@xmath . For the antibracket, let us not choose the expression with
Euler-Lagrange derivatives on the left and right that is graded
antisymmetric without boundary terms, but rather the one that satisfies
a graded Leibniz rule on the right

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.23)
  -- -- -- --------

and the following version of the graded Jacobi identity without boundary
terms,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

(see appendix B of [ 151 ] for details and a proof). Furthermore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath be the BV master action. We have @xmath . Using these
properties, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

which proves the proposition. ∎

By using @xmath , it follows that :

(i) Characteristic cohomology in degree @xmath described by @xmath is a
Lie algebra. It is the Lie algebra of non trivial global symmetries. It
also describes the Dirac or Dickey bracket algebra of non trivial
conserved currents (up to constants or more generally topological
classes),

(ii) @xmath is a module thereof (module structure of flux charges -
Gauss or ADM type surface charges - under global symmetries). The
proposition gives rise for instance to the following refinements:

###### Corollary 7.1.

Covariantizable characteristic cohomology in form degree @xmath forms an
ideal in the Lie algebra of characteristic cohomology in form degree
@xmath . The module action of covariantizable characteristic cohomology
of degree @xmath on characteristic cohomology in degree @xmath is
trivial.

Similar results hold for the associated infinitesimal deformations.

### 7.4 Properties of BRST differential

The BRST differential @xmath is defined as @xmath which acts on the
extended phase space of fields and antifields. The differentials @xmath
and @xmath are horizontal differential and Koszul-Tate differential
respectively. The horizontal differential @xmath has a non-trivial
action when acting on fields, while it vanishes on anti-fields. The
Koszul-Tate differential @xmath has a non-trivial action on anti-fields
but vanishes when acting on fields. The “more” part in the definition of
BRST differential is introduced in order to guarantee the nilpotency of
@xmath , i.e. @xmath . When the gauge transformations form an abelian
group or the gauge algebra closes off-shell, one simply has [ 154 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath the graded commutating nilpotent differentials
satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, @xmath and @xmath have the properties

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

such that the BRST differential @xmath defined to increase the ghost
number by @xmath .

In order to have a covariant formalism, the space of all observable
quantities, the so-called phase space, has to be covariant. In the
absence of gauge invariances, given the space of all possible smooth
fields, a subspace of which is called the covariant phase space and is
defined as the space @xmath of all smooth fields which are the solutions
of equations of motion. When there is a gauge symmetry, then the
covariant phase space is comprised of all functions in @xmath which are
also gauge-invariant. Since the gauge transformations are integrable
on-shell, therefore they generate a congruence of gauge orbits on @xmath
along which the gauge-invariant quantities are conserved. The
Koszul-Tate differential @xmath and the horizontal differential @xmath
in fact take care of the first and the second steps in defining
gauge-invariant observables respectively.

The first step is possible to achieve with the help of the Koszul-Tate
resolution [ 137 ] , which states as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Then since the only non-vanishing homology of @xmath is @xmath , one can
easily implement the second step by defining a differential along the
orbits of gauge groups acting on the space @xmath of smooth functions
given by @xmath . It is shown that in general one has [ 155 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We should emphasize that the cohomology of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in
the space of local functional are in general different and for example
@xmath for @xmath . This is an important feature that we will discuss in
the next chapter. For more details and complete review of definitions,
properties of different differentials and the homological and
cohomological arguments regarding each, see [ 137 , 33 , 146 ] .

### 7.5 Deformation of the Embedding tensor formalism

We discussed in Chapter 6 that the systems described by the Lagrangian (
6.6 ), of the embedding tensor formalism, and the Lagrangian ( 6.43 ) of
ungauged scalar-vector model are governed by the same physics and how
one can obtain one Lagrangian from the other one by a series of
symplectic transformations. However, the space of deformations of these
models can in general be different. As we just discussed through this
chapter, the BRST cohomology provides us a strong tool to obtain the
consistent deformation of a theory. In this section, we show that the
space of deformations of ( 6.6 ) and ( 6.43 ) are equivalent.

We recall that the space of equivalence classes of non-trivial,
consistent deformations of a local action is isomorphic to the BRST
cohomology @xmath in field-antifield space [ 34 ] at ghost number zero [
36 ] . The question, then, is to determine how the variables appearing
in addition to the standard variables of the Lagrangian ( 6.43 ) could
modify @xmath .

From the discussion of Section 6.6 , these extra variables are of two
types:

-   either they are of pure gauge type or equivalently invariant under
    arbitrary shifts, and therefore they drop out from the Lagrangian;

-   or they are auxiliary fields appearing quadratically and
    undifferentiated in the Lagrangian, consequently they can be
    eliminated algebraically through their own equations of motion.

We collectively denote by @xmath the fields of pure gauge type. So the
@xmath ’s stand for the @xmath vector potentials @xmath , @xmath and the
(dim @xmath ) two-forms @xmath . The auxiliary fields are the @xmath
two-forms @xmath . For convenience, we absorb in ( 6.75 ) the linear
term in the auxiliary fields by a redefinition @xmath where the term
@xmath is @xmath -independent. Once this is done, the dependence of the
Lagrangian on the auxiliary fields simply reads @xmath with an
invertible quadratic form @xmath .

The BRST differential acting in the sector of the first type of
variables read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the ghosts of the shift symmetry and @xmath , @xmath
the corresponding antifields, so that @xmath and @xmath form
“contractible pairs” [ 137 ] .

Similarly, the BRST differential acting in the sector of the second type
of variables read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the antifields conjugate to @xmath , showing that the
auxiliary fields and their antifields form also contractible pairs since
@xmath is non degenerate.

Now, the above BRST transformations involve no spacetime derivatives so
that one can construct a “contracting homotopy” [ 137 ] in the sector of
the extra variables @xmath , their ghosts and their antifields that
commutes with the derivative operator @xmath . The algebraic setting is
in fact the same as for the variables of the “non-minimal sector” of [
34 ] . This implies that the extra variables neither contribute to
@xmath nor to @xmath [ 146 ] .

To be more specific, let us focus on the contractible pair @xmath . The
analysis proceeds in exactly the same way for the other pairs. One can
write the BRST differential in that sector as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sum is over all derivatives of the fields. Define the
“contracting homotopy” @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

One has by construction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

just as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is equivalent to @xmath . Furthermore, the counting operator @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

is explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

and commutes with the BRST differential,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operator @xmath gives the homogeneity degree in @xmath , @xmath and
their derivatives. So, for the polynomial @xmath , we have @xmath with
@xmath a non negative integer if and only if @xmath is of degree @xmath
in @xmath , @xmath and their derivatives (by Euler theorem for
homogeneous functions).

Because @xmath commutes with @xmath , we can analyze the cocycle
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

at definite polynomial degree, i.e., assume that @xmath , @xmath where
@xmath is a non-negative integer. Our goal is to prove that the
solutions of ( 7.42 ) are trivial when @xmath , i.e., of the form @xmath
, so that one can find, in any cohomological class of @xmath , a
representative that does not depend on @xmath or @xmath – that is,
@xmath and @xmath “drop from the cohomology”.

To that end, we start from @xmath ( @xmath ), which we rewrite as @xmath
using the definition of @xmath . The first term is equal to @xmath and
hence is BRST-exact. The second term is equal to @xmath (using ( 7.42
)), which is the same as @xmath since @xmath and @xmath anticommute. So
it is @xmath -exact. We thus have shown that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . This is what we wanted to prove.

We can thus conclude that the local deformations ( @xmath ) – and in
fact also @xmath and in particular the candidate anomalies ( @xmath ) –
are the same whether or not one includes the extra fields @xmath . This
is what we wanted to prove:

BRST cohomologies computed from the Lagrangians ( 6.6 ) and ( 6.43 ) are
isomorphic.

As a final remark, we point out [ 156 ] where a dual formulation of
three dimensional non-linear Einstein gravity with similar features have
been studied.

## Chapter 8 BRST cohomology of scalar-vector coupled models

In Chapter 6 we proved that not only the Lagrangian of embedding tensor
formalism ( 6.6 ) and the one of ungauged scalar-vector model of the
form ( 6.43 ) (in a symplectic frame determined by the coefficients of
embedding tensor) are equivalent ¹ ¹ 1 We recall that these Lagrangians
are the same only after the elimination of auxiliary fields in ( 6.75 )
which leads to a Lagrangian of the form ( 6.43 ) in a definite
symplectic frame. but also the space of deformations of both theories
are in fact isomorphic. In Chapter 7 , we discussed that the space of
infinitesimal deformations of a theory is entirely determined by the
ghost number zero cohomology of BRST differential. We explicitly showed
that @xmath for both theories are isomorphic.

In this chapter, following the discussion of Section 7.3 , we seek for a
systematic study of all consistent deformations of general scalar-vector
models described by the gauge invariant actions of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

depending on @xmath uncharged scalar fields @xmath and @xmath abelian
vector fields @xmath . In what comes next we consider that the
Lagrangian has Poincaré invariance (which is guaranteed in the presence
of gravity) even though it is not much used for the most part of our
computations in this chapter. It is in practice possible to work out the
result in the case of non-Poincaré invariant Lagrangians with a little
bit of effort. We assume that the only gauge symmetries of ( 8.1 ) are
the standard @xmath gauge transformations for each vector field, so that
the gauge algebra is abelian and given by @xmath copies of @xmath . A
generating set of gauge invariances can be taken to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lagrangian takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a function that depends on the vector fields through the
abelian curvatures @xmath only, and which can also involve the scalar
fields @xmath . Derivatives of these variables are in principle allowed
in the general analysis carried out below, but actually do not occur in
the explicit Lagrangians discussed in more detail. The scalar fields can
occur non linearly, e.g. terms of the form @xmath as in the Lagrangian (
5.15 ). In addition, the scalar Lagrangian need not to be quadratic in
general case. We will discuss this in more detail below in Section 8.1.1
.

The gauge transformations ( 8.2 ) are sometimes called “free abelian
gauge transformations” to emphasize that the scalar fields are uncharged
and do not transform under them. This does not mean that the abelian
vector fields themselves are free since non linear terms (non minimal
couplings) are allowed in ( 8.3 ).

This class of models contains the vector-scalar sectors of ungauged
extended supergravities, of which @xmath [ 157 , 121 , 93 ] and @xmath [
77 , 16 ] supergravities offer prime examples. These will be considered
in detail in Sections 8.3 and 8.4 . Born-Infeld type generalizations [
158 ] are also covered together with first order manifestly duality
invariant formulations [ 24 , 83 , 26 ] , which fall into this class
when reformulated with suitable additional scalar fields [ 159 ] .

From previous chapter, we recall that consistent deformations of a gauge
invariant action are deformations that preserve the number (but not
necessarily the form or the algebra) of the gauge symmetries. In the
supergravity context, these are called “gaugings”, and the deformed
theories are called gauged supergravities, even though the undeformed
theories possess already a gauge freedom. We shall consider only local
deformations, i.e., deformations of the Lagrangian by functions of the
fields and their derivatives up to some finite (but unspecified) order.

Gaugings in extended supergravities have a long history that goes back
to [ 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 , 99 ] . For maximal supergravity, the first
gauging has been performed in [ 23 ] in the Lagrangian formulation of [
16 ] , which involves a specific choice of so-called duality frame. More
recent gaugings involving a change of the duality frame have been
constructed in [ 116 ] .

These works consider from the very beginning deformations in which the
vector fields become Yang-Mills connections for a non-abelian
deformation of the original abelian gauge algebra. The corresponding
couplings are induced through the replacement of the abelian curvatures
by non-abelian ones and the ordinary derivatives by covariant ones, plus
possible additional couplings necessary for consistency. Given the
question that whether this embraces all possible consistent
deformations, it was shown in [ 2 ] , see Sections 6.6 and 7.5 , that
the space of consistent deformations in the embedding formalism is
isomorphic to the space of consistent deformations for the action ( 8.1
) written in the duality frame picked by the choice of embedding tensor.
For that reason, one can investigate the question of gaugings by taking
( 8.1 ) as starting point of the deformation procedure, provided one
allows the scalar field dependence in the vector piece of the Lagrangian
to cover all possible choices of duality frame. By doing so, one does
not miss any of the gaugings available in the embedding tensor
formalism. This is what we are going to do in this chapter.

Since the BV-BRST formalism [ 36 ] is a systematic way to explore
deformations of theories with a gauge freedom, we completely
characterize the BRST cohomology for the theories defined by ( 8.1 ),
i.e., we completely characterize, in four spacetime dimensions, the
deformations of abelian vector fields coupled non-minimally to scalar
chargeless fields with a possibly non polynomial dependence on the
(undifferentiated) scalar fields.

In particular, we show that besides the obvious deformations that
consist in adding gauge invariant terms to the Lagrangian without
changing the gauge symmetries, the gaugings can be related to the global
symmetries of the action ( 8.1 ). These gaugings modify the form of the
gauge transformations.

The global symmetries can be classified into two different types:

1.  global symmetries with covariantizable Noether currents, where by
    “covariantizable”, we mean that one can choose the ambiguities in
    the Noether currents so as to take them gauge invariant ( @xmath
    -type symmetries),

2.  global symmetries with non-covariantizable Noether currents which in
    turn can be subdivided into two subtypes:

    1.  global symmetries with non-covariantizable Noether currents that
        lead to a deformation that does not modify the gauge algebra (
        @xmath -type symmetries),

    2.  global symmetries with non-covariantizable Noether currents that
        lead to a deformation that does modify also the gauge algebra (
        @xmath -type symmetries).

Only the type (i) global symmetries directly gives rise to an
infinitesimal consistent deformation through minimal coupling of the
corresponding current to the vector potentials. The gaugings associated
with the other types of global symmetries need to satisfy additional
constraints.

The Noether current corresponding to the global symmetries of type (a)
contains non-gauge invariant Chern-Simons terms that cannot be removed
by suitably adjusting trivial contributions. The global symmetries of
type (b) are associated with ordinary free abelian gauge symmetries with
co-dimension 2 conservation laws (see e.g. [ 149 ] for an early
discussion). The divergence of a current of type (a) is itself gauge
invariant, while the divergence of a current of type (b) is not.
Yang-Mills gaugings are associated with currents of type (b) and are
hence of @xmath -type. Topological couplings [ 160 ] are associated with
non-covariantizable Noether currents of either type (a) or (b). Charging
deformations (if available), in which the scalar fields become charged
but the gauge transformations of the vector fields are not modified and
remain therefore abelian, are of @xmath - or @xmath -type.

The BRST deformation procedure applies not only to the consistent first
order deformations, but also to higher orders where one might encounter
obstructions. That procedure provides a natural deformation-theoretic
interpretation of quadratic constraints and higher order constraints in
terms of what is called the antibracket map.

After establishing general theorems on the BRST cohomology valid without
assuming a specific form of the Lagrangian or the rigid symmetries,
including the above classification of the deformations and useful
triangular properties of their algebra, we turn to various models that
have been considered in the literature, for which we completely compute
the deformations of @xmath and @xmath -types.

In Section 8.1 , we compute the local BRST cohomology of the models
described by the action ( 8.1 ). This is done by following the method of
[ 146 , 161 ] where the BRST cohomology was computed for arbitrary
compact – in fact reductive – gauge group. The difficulty in the
computation comes from the free abelian factors by which we mean abelian
factors of the gauge algebra such that all matter fields are uncharged,
i.e., invariant under the associated gauge transformations. This is
precisely the case relevant to the action ( 8.1 ), which needs thus
special care. The method of [ 146 , 161 ] is based on an expansion
according to the antifield number. It makes direct contact with
symmetries and conservation laws through the lowest antifield number
piece of the BRST differential, that is the Koszul-Tate differential,
which involves the equations of motion [ 162 , 163 ] . The Noether
charges appear through the characteristic cohomology, given by the local
cohomology of the Koszul-Tate differential [ 146 ] .

We then discuss in Section 8.2 the structure of the antibracket map,
which is relevant for the consistency of the deformation at second order
and the possible appearance of obstructions, and provide information on
the structure of the global symmetry algebra.

The method of [ 146 , 161 ] provides the general structure of the BRST
cocycles in terms of conserved currents. In order to reach more complete
results, one must use additional information specific to each model. We
therefore specify further the models in Section 8.3 , where we
concentrate on scalar-coupled second order Lagrangians that are
quadratic in the vector fields and their derivatives. These specialized
models still cover the scalar-vector sectors of extended supergravities.
Explicit examples are treated in detail to illustrate the method in
Section 8.4 , where complete results for the local BRST cohomology, up
to the determination of @xmath -type symmetries, are worked out. In
Section 8.5 , we then illustrate our techniques in the case of the
manifestly duality-symmetric first order action ( 5.23 ) of [ 26 ] , in
the formulation of [ 159 ] , which is adapted to the direct use of the
methods developed here.

### 8.1 Abelian vector-scalar models in 4 dimensions

#### 8.1.1 Structure of the models

We now apply the formalism discussed in Section 7.3 to the scalar-vector
models described by the action ( 8.1 ). We write @xmath . In four
spacetime dimensions, there is no Chern-Simons term in the Lagrangian,
which can be assumed to be strictly gauge invariant and not just
invariant up to a total derivative. Gauge invariant functions are
functions that depend on @xmath , @xmath and their derivatives, but not
on @xmath , etc. Thus @xmath depends on the vector potentials @xmath
only through @xmath and their derivatives.

We define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath are also manifestly gauge invariant functions. The
equations of motion for the vector fields can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the Lagrangian can be taken to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The vector Lagrangian @xmath has been written in the form of a homotopic
integral [ 164 ] . It simply counts the number of vector fields in the
integrand in order to produce the correct prefactor in each term coming
from @xmath . This is a compact way to include all possible terms in
@xmath . As an example consider the case where @xmath is a series of
homogeneous functions of order @xmath in the field strength @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are in general functions of scalar
fields @xmath . The Lagrangian is then written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The associated solution to the BV master equation is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The ghost number, antifield number and pure ghost number of the various
fields and antifields are given in the Table ( 8.1 ).

The BRST differential @xmath splits according to antifield number as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the action of each differentials on all field and antifields are
summarized in the Table ( 8.2 ).

The Koszul-Tate differential @xmath and the differential @xmath have
antifield number @xmath and @xmath respectively and we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of the Koszul-Tate differential, the cocycle condition for
@xmath in characteristic cohomology takes the form @xmath . This
equation is the same as the (co)cycle condition for @xmath in the local
(co)homology of @xmath , which is indeed @xmath . Using this
observation, and vanishing theorems for @xmath and @xmath in relevant
degrees, one can establish isomorphisms between the characteristic
cohomology and @xmath [ 146 ] . For example, the characteristic
cohomology @xmath is given by the 2-forms @xmath , while @xmath is given
by the 4-forms @xmath . The isomorphism is realized through the @xmath
-descent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

#### 8.1.2 Consistent deformations

One can characterize the BRST cohomological classes with non trivial
antifield dependence in terms of conserved currents and rigid symmetries
for all values of the ghost number. For definiteness, we illustrate
explicitly the procedure for @xmath in maximum form degree, which
defines the consistent local deformations. We consider next the case of
general ghost number.

The main equation to be solved, see ( 7.5 ), for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has form degree 4 and ghost number @xmath . To solve it, we
expand the cocycle @xmath according to the antifield number,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because @xmath has total ghost number zero, each term @xmath has
antifield number @xmath and pure ghost number (degree in the ghosts)
@xmath as well. As shown in [ 161 ] , the expansion stops at most at
antifield number @xmath . The term @xmath is the (first order)
deformation of the Lagrangian. A non-vanishing @xmath corresponds to a
deformation of the gauge variations, while a non-vanishing @xmath
corresponds to a deformation of the gauge algebra. All three terms are
related by the cocycle condition ( 8.13 ).

##### 8.1.2.1 Solutions of @xmath-type (@xmath non trivial)

The first case to consider is when @xmath is non-trivial. This defines
“class I” solutions in the terminology of [ 161 ] , which we call here “
@xmath -type” solutions to comply with the general terminology
introduced below. One has from the general theorems of [ 146 , 161 ] on
the invariant characteristic cohomology that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath are some constants, antisymmetric in @xmath , @xmath . The
reason why the coefficient @xmath of the ghosts in @xmath is determined
by the characteristic cohomology follows from the equation @xmath that
@xmath must fulfill in order for @xmath to be a cocycle of @xmath .
Given that @xmath has antifield number equal to @xmath , and the
isomorphisms @xmath for negative @xmath , it is the characteristic
cohomology in form degree @xmath that is relevant ² ² 2 The precise way
to express the relation between the local cohomology of @xmath and the
highest term of the equation obeyed by @xmath is given in section 7 of [
161 ] : @xmath must be a non trivial representative of invariant
cohomology @xmath , more precisely it must come from @xmath in ghost
number zero. This relates the U-type deformations to the free abelian
factors of the undeformed gauge group. . The emergence of the
characteristic cohomology in the computation of @xmath will be observed
again for @xmath below, where it will be the conserved currents that
appear. This central feature follows from the fact that the Koszul-Tate
differential, which encapsulates the equations of motion, is an
essential building block of the BRST differential. We must now find the
lower terms @xmath and relate them as expected to Noether currents that
correspond to @xmath .

By the argument of section 8 of [ 161 ] suitably generalized in section
12, the term @xmath is then found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The term @xmath (to be determined by the next
equation) is linear in @xmath and can be taken to be linear in the
undifferentiated antifields @xmath and @xmath since derivatives of these
antifields, which can occur only linearly, can be redefined away through
trivial terms. We thus write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath are gauge invariant functions which are arbitrary
at this stage but will be constrained by the requirement that @xmath
exists.

We must now consider the equation @xmath that determines @xmath up to a
solution of @xmath . This equation is equivalent to

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.20)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have passed to dual notations ( @xmath , @xmath ) and where we
have set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Writing @xmath “terms containing derivatives of the ghosts”, we read
from ( 8.20 ), by comparing the coefficients of the undifferentiated
ghosts, that

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.22)
  -- -- -- --------

A necessary condition for @xmath (and thus @xmath ) to exist is
therefore that @xmath and @xmath define symmetries.

To proceed further and determine @xmath , we observe that the non-gauge
invariant term @xmath in @xmath can be written as @xmath plus a gauge
invariant term, so that @xmath has a gauge invariant divergence. Results
on the invariant cohomology of @xmath [ 165 , 166 ] imply then that the
non-gauge invariant part of such an object can only be a Chern-Simons
form, i.e. @xmath , or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is gauge invariant and where the symmetries of the
constants @xmath will be discussed in a moment. It is useful to point
out that one can switch the indices @xmath and @xmath modulo a trivial
term.

The equation ( 8.20 ) becomes @xmath , i.e., @xmath . The first two
terms in the current yield manifestly @xmath -exact terms,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so @xmath must be such that the term @xmath is by itself @xmath
-exact modulo @xmath . This is a problem that has been much studied in
the literature through descent equations (see e.g. [ 153 ] ). It has
been shown that @xmath must be antisymmetric in @xmath , @xmath and
should have vanishing totally antisymmetric part in order to be
“liftable” to @xmath and non-trivial,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting things together, one finds for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

A non-trivial @xmath -solution modifies the gauge algebra. Deformations
of the Yang-Mills type belong to this class. A @xmath -solution is
characterized by constants @xmath which are antisymmetric in @xmath ,
@xmath . These constants must be such that there exist gauge invariant
functions @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath define
symmetries of the undeformed Lagrangian. Here @xmath and @xmath are
given by ( 8.21 ). Furthermore, the @xmath -term in the corresponding
conserved current (if any) must fulfill ( 8.25 ). The deformation @xmath
of the Lagrangian takes the Noether-like form.

Given the “head” @xmath of a @xmath -type solution, characterized by a
set of @xmath ’s, the lower terms @xmath and @xmath , and in particular
the @xmath -piece, are not uniquely determined. One can always add
solutions of @xmath , @xmath or @xmath -types described below, which
have the property that they have no @xmath -piece. Hence one may require
that the completion of the “head” @xmath of a @xmath -type solution
should be chosen to vanish when @xmath itself vanishes. But this leaves
some freedom in the completion of @xmath , since for instance any @xmath
-type solution multiplied by a component of @xmath will vanish when the
@xmath ’s are set to zero. The situation has a triangular nature since
two @xmath -type solutions with the same @xmath differ by solutions of
“lower” types, for which there might not be a canonical choice.

Note that further constraints on @xmath (notably the Jacobi identity)
arise at second order in the deformation parameter.

##### 8.1.2.2 Solutions of @xmath and @xmath-type (vanishing @xmath but
@xmath non trivial)

These solutions are called “class II” solutions in [ 161 ] . Here we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath can be taken to be gauge invariant, i.e., annihilated by
@xmath [ 161 ] . We thus find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath are again gauge invariant functions, which we
still denote by the same letters as above, although they are independent
from the similar functions related to the constants @xmath . We also set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation @xmath implies then, as above,

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.32)
  -- -- -- --------

A necessary condition for @xmath (and thus @xmath ) to exist is
therefore that @xmath and @xmath given by ( 8.31 ) define symmetries.
Equation ( 8.32 ) take the same form as Eq. ( 8.22 ), but there is an
important difference: the divergence of the current @xmath is now gauge
invariant, unlike in ( 8.22 ) that the divergence of current, due to the
contribution coming from @xmath , is not gauge invariant.

The current takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

(with @xmath fulfilling the above symmetry properties) yielding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where still

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define @xmath -type solutions to have @xmath , while @xmath -type
solutions have @xmath . Both these types deform the gauge
transformations but not their algebra (to first order in the
deformation). They are determined by rigid symmetries of the undeformed
Lagrangian with gauge invariant variations ( 8.31 ). The @xmath -type
have gauge invariant currents, while the currents of the @xmath -type
contain a non-gauge invariant piece.

Note that again, the solutions of @xmath - and @xmath -types are
determined up to a solution of lower type with no @xmath -“head”, and
that there might not be a canonical choice. In fact one may require
similarly that @xmath -type transformations become trivial when @xmath
tends to zero.

##### 8.1.2.3 Solutions of @xmath-type (vanishing @xmath and @xmath)

In that case,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath .

Since there is no Chern-Simons term in four dimensions, one can assume
that @xmath . The deformation @xmath is therefore a gauge invariant
function, i.e., a function of the abelian curvatures @xmath , the scalar
fields, and their derivatives. The @xmath -type deformations neither
deform the gauge transformations nor (a fortiori) the gauge algebra.
Born-Infeld deformations belong to this type. They are called “class
III” solutions in [ 161 ] .

#### 8.1.3 Local BRST cohomology at other ghost numbers

##### 8.1.3.1 @xmath-terms

The previous discussion can be repeated straightforwardly at all ghost
numbers. The analysis proceeds as above. The tools necessary to handle
the “ @xmath -term” in the non gauge invariant “currents” have been
generalized to higher ghost numbers through familiar means and can be
found in [ 152 , 143 , 153 ] .

The @xmath -terms belong to the “small” or “universal” algebra involving
only the @xmath -forms @xmath , the @xmath -forms @xmath , the ghosts
@xmath and their exterior derivative. The product is the exterior
product. One describes the @xmath -term through a @xmath -descent
equation and what is called the “bottom” of that descent, which is
annihilated by @xmath and has form degree @xmath in four dimensions. The
only possibilities in the free abelian case are the @xmath -forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can assume @xmath since the totally antisymmetric part gives a
trivial bottom. The lift of this bottom goes two steps, up to the @xmath
-form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

producing along the way a @xmath -form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the property of not being gauge (BRST) invariant although its
exterior derivative is invariant (modulo trivial terms).

##### 8.1.3.2 Explicit description of cohomology

By applying the above method, one finds that the local BRST cohomology
of the models of Section 8.1.1 can be described along exactly the same
lines as given below. Note that the cohomology at negative ghost numbers
reflect general properties of the characteristic cohomology that go
beyond the mere models considered here [ 146 ] .

1.  @xmath is empty for @xmath .

2.  @xmath is represented by the @xmath -forms

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.41)
      -- -------- -- --------

    If @xmath , the associated descent equations are

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.42)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Characteristic cohomology @xmath is then represented by the 2-forms
    @xmath .

3.  Several types of cohomology classes in ghost numbers @xmath , which
    we call @xmath , @xmath and @xmath -type, can be described by
    constants @xmath which are antisymmetric in the last @xmath indices,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.43)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and constants @xmath that are antisymmetric in the last @xmath
    indices but without any totally antisymmetric part ³ ³ 3 We write
    @xmath for @xmath . ,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.44)
      -- -------- -- --------

    together with gauge invariant functions @xmath that are
    antisymmetric in the last @xmath indices. They are constrained by
    the requirement that the transformations

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.45)
      -- -------- -- --------

    define symmetries of the action in the sense that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.46)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with currents @xmath that are antisymmetric in the last @xmath
    indices. This can be made more precise by making the gauge
    (non-)invariance properties of these currents manifest. One finds

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.47)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is gauge invariant and antisymmetric in the lower
    @xmath indices. When taking into account that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.48)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and defining

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.49)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath , the “global symmetry” condition ( 8.46 ) is
    equivalent to a @xmath -obstruction equation,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.50)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with @xmath . Note that the last two terms combine into

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    so that this equation involves gauge invariant quantities only. It
    is this form that arises in a systematic analysis of the descent
    equations. One can now distinguish the three types of solutions.

    1.  @xmath -type corresponds to solutions with non vanishing @xmath
        and particular @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath that vanish
        when the @xmath ’s vanish (and that may be vanishing even when
        the @xmath ’s do not). As we explained above, different choices
        of the particular completion @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
        of @xmath exist and there might not be a canonical one, but a
        completion exists if the @xmath -type solution is indeed a
        solution. Similar ambiguity holds for the solutions of @xmath
        and @xmath -types described below. A @xmath -type solution is
        trivial if and only if @xmath ’s vanish. Denoting by @xmath ,
        the expressions as in ( 8.49 ) but involving the particular
        solutions, the associated BRST cohomology classes are
        represented by

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (8.51)
          -- -------- -- --------

        with @xmath ;

    2.  @xmath -type corresponds to solutions with vanishing @xmath ’s
        but non vanishing @xmath and particular @xmath that may be
        chosen to vanish when the @xmath ’s vanish. Such solutions are
        trivial when the @xmath ’s vanish. With the obvious notation,
        the associated BRST cohomology classes are represented by

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (8.52)
          -- -------- -- --------

        with @xmath ;

    3.  @xmath -type corresponds to solutions with vanishing @xmath ’s
        and @xmath ’s. They are represented by

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (8.53)
          -- -------- -- --------

        with @xmath and @xmath . @xmath and its descent have depth
        @xmath .

4.  Lastly, @xmath -type cohomology classes exist in ghost numbers
    @xmath and are described by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.54)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with @xmath , i.e., gauge invariant @xmath that are completely
    antisymmetric in the @xmath indices. Such classes are to be
    considered trivial if the @xmath vanish on-shell up to a total
    derivative. This can again be made more precise by making the gauge
    (non-)invariance properties manifest: an element of @xmath -type
    class is trivial if and only if

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (8.55)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath are gauge invariant @xmath forms that are completely
    antisymmetric in the @xmath indices, while @xmath are constants that
    are completely antisymmetric in the last @xmath indices. Note also
    that the on-shell vanishing terms in ( 8.55 ) need to be gauge
    invariant. When there are suitable restrictions on the space of
    gauge invariant functions (such as for instance @xmath independent,
    Lorentz invariant polynomials with power counting restrictions) one
    may sometimes construct an explicit basis of non-trivial gauge
    invariant @xmath forms, in the sense that if @xmath and @xmath ,
    then @xmath . The associated BRST cohomology classes are then
    parametrized by constants @xmath .

At a given ghost number @xmath , the cohomology is the direct sum of
elements of type @xmath and also @xmath when @xmath .

This completes our general discussion of the local BRST cohomology.
Reference [ 161 ] also considered simple factors in addition to the
abelian factors, as well as any spacetime dimension @xmath . One can
extend the above results to cover these cases. The computation of the
local BRST cohomology @xmath for gauge models involving general
reductive gauge algebras has been done in [ 167 ] by following the
different route adopted in [ 33 ] , which did not consider free abelian
factors in full generality. As requested by the analysis of the
deformations of the action ( 8.1 ), reference [ 167 ] generalizes
Theorem 11.1 of [ 33 ] to arbitrary reductive Lie algebras that include
also (free) abelian factors (and in any spacetime dimension @xmath ).

##### 8.1.3.3 Depth of solutions

The depth of the various BRST cocycles plays a key role in the analysis
of the higher-order consistency condition. The @xmath -type and @xmath
-type solutions have depth @xmath because they involve @xmath with a
non-gauge invariant current. The @xmath -type solutions have depth
@xmath because the Noether term @xmath of them involves a gauge
invariant current. Finally, @xmath -type solutions clearly have depth
@xmath .

### 8.2 Antibracket map and structure of symmetries

#### 8.2.1 Antibracket map in cohomology

We now investigate the antibracket map @xmath for the different types of
cohomology classes described above. It follows from the detailed
discussion of the cohomology in Section 8.1.3 that the shortest non
trivial length of descents, the “depth”, of elements of type @xmath is
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . In particular, the antibracket map
is sensitive to the depth of its arguments: as we have seen in Section
7.3.1 the depth of the map is less than or equal to the depth of its
most shallow element.

The antibracket map involving @xmath in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

More explicitly, it is trivial for @xmath . It is also trivial for
@xmath except for @xmath -type where it is described by @xmath . For
@xmath , it is described by @xmath for @xmath -type, @xmath for @xmath
-type, @xmath and @xmath for @xmath - and @xmath -type.

The antibracket map for @xmath has the following triangular structure:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, @xmath because @xmath -type cocycles can be chosen to be
antifield independent. For all other brackets involving @xmath -type
cocycles, it follows from discussion of Section 7.3.1 that the result
must have depth @xmath and the only such classes are of @xmath type.
Alternatively, since all cocycles can be chosen to be at most linear in
antifields, the result will be a cocycle that is antifield independent
and only classes of @xmath -type have trivial antifield dependence. It
thus follows that @xmath -type cohomology forms an abelian ideal.

Again given the discussion of Section 7.3.1 , the depth of the
antibracket map of @xmath -type cohomology with @xmath -type is less or
equal to @xmath , so it must be of @xmath - or @xmath -type.

Finally, the remaining structure follows from the fact that only
brackets of @xmath -type cocycles with themselves may give rise to terms
that involve @xmath ’s.

#### 8.2.2 Structure of the global symmetry algebra

Let us now concentrate on brackets between two elements that have both
ghost number @xmath , i.e., on the detailed structure of the Lie algebra
of inequivalent global symmetries when taking into account their
different types.

In this case, one may use the table above supplemented by the fact that
@xmath . Let then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

be bases of symmetries of @xmath -type ⁴ ⁴ 4 These are bases in the
cohomological sense, i.e., @xmath @xmath @xmath (and similarly for
@xmath and @xmath ). In terms of the representatives, this becomes
@xmath @xmath @xmath . . At ghost number @xmath , equations ( 8.51 ), (
8.52 ), ( 8.53 ) give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows from ( 8.57 ) that @xmath -type symmetries and the direct sum
of @xmath and @xmath -type symmetries form ideals in the Lie algebra of
inequivalent global symmetries.

The symmetry algebra @xmath is defined as the quotient of all
inequivalent global symmetries by the ideal of @xmath -type symmetries.
In particular, if @xmath -type symmetries form a sub-algebra, it is
isomorphic to @xmath .

First, @xmath -type symmetries are parametrized by constants @xmath ,
@xmath . The gauge invariant symmetry transformation on the original
fields then are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, there exist constants @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds for the cohomology classes. We choose the minus sign because

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the @xmath are the structure constants of the commutator algebra
of the @xmath -type symmetries, @xmath . For the functions @xmath and
@xmath , this gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The “trivial” terms on the right hand side take the form “(gauge
transformation) @xmath (antisymmetric combination of the equations of
motion)” which is the usual ambiguity in the form of global symmetries,
see e.g. section 6 of [ 33 ] . They come from the fact that equation (
8.61 ) holds for classes: for the representatives @xmath themselves, (
8.61 ) is @xmath . The trivial terms in ( 8.63 ) are then the symmetries
generated by the extra term @xmath , which is zero in cohomology. The
graded Jacobi identity for the antibracket map implies the ordinary
Jacobi identity for these structure constants,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, @xmath -type symmetries are parametrized by constants @xmath ,
@xmath and encode the gauge invariant symmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

with associated Noether 3 forms @xmath . There then exist @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

with associated Jacobi identities that we do not spell out. For the
functions @xmath and @xmath , this implies

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.67)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.68)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

up to trivial terms, see the discussion below ( 8.63 ).

Finally, @xmath -type symmetries are parametrized by @xmath , @xmath and
encode the symmetry transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, there exist constants @xmath with various types of indices such
that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.71)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.72)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.73)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with associated Jacobi identities. Working out the term proportional to
@xmath in @xmath gives the commutation relations for the @xmath
matrices,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

In turn, this implies Jacobi identities for this type of structure
constants alone:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath are the structure constants of @xmath .

From equation ( 8.71 ), we get the identities

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.76)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 8.72 ) gives the same identities with the right-hand side
replaced by the appropriate sum, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.77)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Considering the terms proportional to antifields @xmath and @xmath , the
equation ( 8.73 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 8.76 )-( 8.78 ) are again valid only up to trivial
symmetries.

Let us now concentrate on identities containing the @xmath , which
appear in the currents of @xmath and @xmath -type. We first consider
@xmath projected to @xmath -type. Here, we use the alternative form of
anti-bracket defined in Section 7.3.1 since it makes the computation
more easier. Then, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (8.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

When comparing this to @xmath applied to the right hand side of ( 8.72
), using @xmath , @xmath and the fact that @xmath -type cohomology is
characterized by the Chern-Simons term in its Noether current, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

This computation amounts to identifying the Chern-Simons term in the
@xmath -variation @xmath of a current of @xmath -type. The same
computation applied to @xmath shows that @xmath , which implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

since the matrices @xmath are linearly independent (otherwise, the
@xmath would not form a basis). In other words, the @xmath -variation
@xmath of a current of @xmath -type is gauge invariant up to trivial
terms, i.e., is of @xmath -type.

In order to work out @xmath projected to @xmath -type, a slightly
involved reasoning gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some constants @xmath . This is proved in Appendix D in the case
where @xmath does not depend on derivatives of @xmath (but can have
otherwise arbitrary dependence of @xmath ). We were not able to find the
analog of ( 8.82 ) in the higher derivative case.

Applying then @xmath to the chain of descent equations for @xmath and
adding the chain of descent equations for @xmath yields

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (8.83)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Again, this amounts to identifying the Chern-Simons terms in the @xmath
-variation @xmath of a @xmath -type current. Equation ( 8.82 ) is
crucial for this computation since @xmath -type currents contain @xmath
. Using ( 8.80 ), this becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (8.84)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We see that the effect of the @xmath is to shift the structure constants
of type @xmath . The constants @xmath vanish for the explicit models
considered below; it would be interesting to find an explicit example
where this is not the case. As a last comment, we note that antisymmetry
of equation ( 8.2.2 ) in @xmath and @xmath imposes the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

on the constants @xmath .

#### 8.2.3 Parametrization through symmetries

It follows from the discussion of the antibracket map involving @xmath
after ( 8.56 ) that cohomologies of @xmath -type in ghost numbers @xmath
can be parametrized by symmetries of the corresponding type with
suitably constrained coefficients

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way, for @xmath , the problem of finding all infinitesimal
gaugings can be reformulated as the question of which of these
symmetries can be gauged.

In order to do this, it is useful to first rewrite the @xmath appearing
in the cohomology classes of @xmath and @xmath -types in the equivalent
symmetric convention

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ( 8.44 ) is now replaced by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that for @xmath , @xmath .

For cohomology classes of @xmath -type, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.89)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.90)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.91)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath appear in the basis elements @xmath and
@xmath . (One has similar parametrizations for the quantities @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath in the cohomology classes of the various types.) This
guarantees that condition ( 8.46 ) (or ( 8.50 )) is automatically
satisfied.

However, the symmetry properties ( 8.43 ) and ( 8.88 ) imply the
following linear constraints on the parameters:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.92)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.93)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.94)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From the discussion of the cohomology, it also follows that @xmath -type
cohomology classes are entirely determined by @xmath -type symmetries in
terms of @xmath without any additional constraints.

#### 8.2.4 2nd order constraints on deformations and gauge algebra

The most general infinitesimal gauging is given by @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

The infinitesimal deformation @xmath can be extended to second order
whenever the right hand side vanishes in cohomology, resulting in
quadratic constraints on the constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Working all of them out explicitly requires computing all
brackets between @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

However, it follows from the previous section that the only contribution
to @xmath comes from @xmath . The vanishing of the terms containing the
antighosts @xmath requires

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e., the Jacobi identity for the @xmath . The associated @xmath
-dimensional Lie algebra is the gauge algebra and is denoted by @xmath .

Using @xmath and equation ( 8.74 ), the Jacobi identity reduces to the
following quadratic constraint on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the antisymmetry in @xmath of the second term is guaranteed by
the linear constraint ( 8.92 ). The terms at antifield number @xmath
give the constraints

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.98)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.99)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Expressed with @xmath ’s, this gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the capital Greek indices take all values @xmath . This gives
three constraints, according to the type of the free index @xmath . When
@xmath , we get the constraint @xmath , because the only non-vanishing
structure constants with an upper @xmath index are the @xmath . When
@xmath , the possible structure constants are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, giving the constraint

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (8.101)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

When the free index @xmath is of type @xmath , one gets a similar
identity with all possible types of values in the lower indices of the
structure constants,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

### 8.3 Quadratic vector models

#### 8.3.1 Description of the model

To go further, one needs to specialize the form of the Lagrangian, which
has been assumed to be quite general so far. In this section, we focus
on second order Lagrangians ( 5.13 )-( 5.15 ) arising in the context of
supergravities that contain @xmath scalar fields and depend
quadratically on @xmath abelian vector fields, non-minimally coupled to
each other, in four space-time dimensions.

To recall, we consider explicitly @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the scalar Lagrangian is of the sigma model form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is symmetric and invertible. Both @xmath and @xmath depend
only on undifferentiated scalar fields. As we pointed out in Section 5.2
neglecting gravity, this is the generic bosonic sector of ungauged
supergravity. The symmetric matrices @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath
invertible, depend only on undifferentiated scalar fields and encode the
non-minimal couplings between the scalars and the abelian vectors. The
Bianchi identities and equations of motion for the vector fields are
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Lagrangian ( 8.103 ) falls into the general class of models
described previously, with the gauge invariant two-form @xmath and
@xmath .

We also assume [ 3 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that a constant part in @xmath can be put to zero without loss of
generality since the associated term in the Lagrangian is a total
derivative. In most cases, we also take @xmath or assume (writing @xmath
) that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 8.3.2 Constraints on @xmath, @xmath-type symmetries

We assume here and in the examples below that there is no explicit
@xmath -dependence in the space of local functions in order to constrain
@xmath and @xmath -type symmetries. For simplicity, we also assume that
the potential vanishes, @xmath . In Section 8.4 , these constraints will
allow us to determine all symmetries of @xmath and @xmath -type for
specific models.

We need the scalar field equations, which are encoded in

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . For @xmath , equation ( 8.50 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When putting all derivatives of @xmath to zero, one remains with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is here that the assumption that there is no explicit @xmath
dependence in the gauge invariant functions @xmath is used. Using @xmath
, and the decomposition @xmath , where the @xmath depend on
undifferentiated scalar fields and are homogeneous of degree @xmath in
@xmath , the equation implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

by using that @xmath on account of ( 8.44 ). When taking an
Euler-Lagrange derivative of ( 8.111 ) with respect to @xmath , one
concludes that both terms have to vanish separately,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Setting @xmath and using ( 8.106 ) then gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the abelian index is lowered and raised with @xmath and its
inverse. Note that completely skew-symmetric @xmath solve the equations
with @xmath , @xmath . More conditions are obtained by expanding
equations ( 8.114 ) in terms of power series in @xmath .

In all examples considered below, the algebra @xmath and the @xmath
-type symmetries can be entirely determined from the analysis of this
subsection.

#### 8.3.3 Electric symmetry algebra

An important result of our general analysis is that the symmetries of
the action that can lead to consistent gaugings may have a term that is
not gauge invariant. This term is present only in the variation of the
vector potential and is restricted to be linear in the undifferentiated
vector potential, i.e., @xmath , @xmath . Here @xmath are constants, and
@xmath and @xmath are gauge invariant functions. The symbol @xmath
represents the variation of the fields and is of course not the
Koszul-Tate differential. No confusion should arise as the context is
clear.

It is of interest to investigate a subalgebra of the gaugeable
symmetries, obtained by restricting oneself from the outset to
transformations of the gauge potentials that are linear and homogeneous
in the undifferentiated potentials and to transformations of the scalars
that depend on undifferentiated scalars alone,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This means that one takes @xmath and that the functions @xmath only
depend on the undifferentiated scalar fields. These symmetries form a
sub-algebra @xmath that includes the symmetries usually considered in
the supergravity which is called the “electric symmetry algebra” (in the
given duality frame), see Section 6.5.2 . As we discussed there, the
electric group is a subgroup of the duality group @xmath [ 27 ] which is
comprised of lower triangular symplectic transformations. Although our
Lagrangians are not necessarily connected with supergravity, we shall
nevertheless call the symmetries of the form ( 8.116 ) “electric
symmetries” and the subalgebra @xmath the “electric algebra”. It need
not to be a subalgebra of @xmath . It generically does not exhaust all
symmetries and does not contain for example the conformal symmetries of
free electromagnetism.

The transformations of the form ( 8.116 ) are symmetries of the action (
8.103 ) + ( 8.104 ) if and only if the scalar variations leave the
scalar action invariant separately, and @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.117)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.118)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath are constant symmetric matrices. In particular, when
the scalar Lagrangian is given by @xmath , the first condition means
that @xmath must be a Killing vector of the metric @xmath . If @xmath
and @xmath -type symmetries are of electric type, the electric symmetry
algebra contains in addition only @xmath -type symmetries of electric
type, i.e., transformations among the undifferentiated scalars alone
that leave invariant both the scalar action and the matrices @xmath
(i.e., that satisfy @xmath and ( 8.117 ), ( 8.118 ) with @xmath ’s on
the right hand sides). This will be the case in all examples below. In
particular, the @xmath ’s, and thus also the gauge algebra, will be the
same for @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath matrix is determined by the
transformation parameters @xmath and the parity-odd term @xmath of the
action via ( 8.118 ).

We then suppose that we have a basis of symmetries of the action of this
form,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.119)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.120)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

When compared to the previous sections, the index @xmath can take @xmath
, @xmath or @xmath values. Only the @xmath matrices are non-zero. The
@xmath matrices are non-vanishing only for @xmath or @xmath . When
@xmath , the Lagrangian is only invariant up to a total derivative.

Closure of symmetries of this form then implies

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.121)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.122)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.123)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where one can obtain the equation ( 8.122 ) by the action of commutator
@xmath on @xmath . Decomposing the indices into @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath -type, this is consistent with the relations of Section 8.2.2
with @xmath . Let us note that ( 8.118 ) expresses the surface term in
the variation of the action.

#### 8.3.4 Restricted first order deformations

We now limit ourselves to first order deformations of the master action
with the condition that all infinitesimal gaugings come from symmetries
that belong to the electric symmetry algebra above. In order to simplify
formulas, we will no longer make the distinction between @xmath -,
@xmath - and @xmath -type which can easily be recovered.

According to Section 8.2.3 , the deformations are parametrized through
electric symmetries by a matrix @xmath , with

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.124)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.125)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.126)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The linear constraints ( 8.92 ) – ( 8.94 ) on the matrix @xmath become

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.127)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.128)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

They guarantee that the first order deformation of the master action is
given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

encodes the first order deformation of the gauge algebra and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

encodes the first order deformation of the gauge symmetries. When taking
( 8.124 ) and ( 8.125 ) into account, this deformation of the gauge
symmetries corresponds to gauging the underlying global symmetries by
using local parameters @xmath . The deformation @xmath of the Lagrangian
is given by the sum of three terms:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.132)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.133)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.134)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The terms @xmath and @xmath are exactly those necessary to complete the
abelian field strengths and ordinary derivatives of the scalars into
covariant quantities. The term @xmath is responsible for charging the
matter fields. The Chern-Simons term @xmath appears when @xmath : its
role is to cancel the variation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that is no longer a total derivative when @xmath [ 168 , 160 ] .

#### 8.3.5 Complete restricted deformations

The second order deformation @xmath to the master action is then
determined by the first order deformation through equation ( 7.17 ). As
discussed in Section 8.2.4 , the existence of @xmath imposes additional
quadratic constraints on the matrix @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Explicit computation shows that @xmath can be chosen such that there is
no further deformation of the gauge symmetries or of their algebra. The
second order terms in the Lagrangian are exactly those necessary to
complete abelian field strengths @xmath and ordinary derivatives of the
scalars to non-abelian field strengths and covariant derivatives,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.137)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.138)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

One also finds a non-abelian completion of the Chern-Simons term @xmath
. Putting everything together, the Lagrangian after adding the second
order deformation is [ 3 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (8.139)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The associated action can be checked to be invariant under the gauge
transformations

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.140)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.141)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

This is equivalent to the fact that the deformation stops at second
order, i.e, that @xmath gives a solution to the master equation @xmath .

Checking directly the invariance of this action under ( 8.140 ) – (
8.141 ) without first parametrizing @xmath , @xmath and @xmath through
symmetries requires the use of the linear identities

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and of the quadratic ones

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.143)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.144)
     @xmath   @xmath      (8.145)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In terms of @xmath , these three quadratic identities all come from the
single quadratic constraint ( 8.136 ) once the algebra of global
symmetries ( 8.121 ) – ( 8.123 ) is taken into account.

#### 8.3.6 Remarks on @xmath transformations

Consider a linear field redefinition of the abelian vector potentials,
@xmath with @xmath . Such a transformation gives rise to a trivial
infinitesimal gauging which corresponds to the antifield independent
part of the trivial ghost number @xmath cocycle

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath .

Two remarks are in order.

The first concerns the relation to the algebra @xmath defined in Section
8.2.2 . It can also be defined as the largest sub-algebra of @xmath that
can be turned into symmetries of the theory by adding suitable gauge
invariant transformations of the vector and scalar fields, or in other
words, for which there exists a gauge invariant @xmath of ghost number
@xmath such that @xmath .

In particular, ( 8.89 ) and ( 8.92 ) for @xmath , as well as ( 8.97 ),
can be summarized as follows: non-trivial @xmath -type gaugings require
the existence of a map (described by @xmath ) from the defining
representation of the symmetry algebra @xmath into the adjoint
representation of the @xmath -dimensional gauge algebra @xmath .

The second remark is about families of Lagrangians related by linear
transformations of the vector potentials among themselves. It is
sometimes useful not to work with fixed (canonical) values for various
@xmath tensors that appear in the action. Instead, one considers the
deformation problem for sets of Lagrangians parametrized by arbitrary
@xmath tensors, for instance generic non-degenerate symmetric @xmath and
symmetric @xmath that vanish at the origin of the scalar field space.

If the tensors of two such Lagrangians are related by a @xmath
transformation, they should be considered as equivalent. Indeed, the
local BRST cohomology for all members of such an equivalence class are
isomorphic and related by the above anti-canonical field redefinition.
In particular, all members of the same equivalence class have isomorphic
gaugings.

All general considerations and results on local BRST cohomology above
apply in a unified way to all equivalence classes. When one explicitly
solves the obstruction equation ( 8.50 ) (for instance at @xmath in
order to determine the symmetries), the results on local BRST
cohomologies do depend on the various equivalence classes.

#### 8.3.7 Comparison with the embedding tensor constraints

In the embedding tensor formalism [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ] , the
possible gaugings are described by the embedding tensor @xmath with
electric and magnetic components ⁵ ⁵ 5 We refer the reader to [ 169 ] ,
where a relation between the embedding tensor formalism and the BV-BRST
antifield formalism has been considered for a different reason. , which
satisfies a number of linear and quadratic constraints ( 6.4 )–( 6.6 ).
Recalling from Section 6.3 , the index @xmath runs from @xmath to @xmath
, while @xmath runs from @xmath to the dimension of the group @xmath of
invariances of the equations of motion of the initial Lagrangian ( 8.103
). More precisely, @xmath is defined only as the group of
transformations that act linearly on the field strengths @xmath and
their “magnetic duals” @xmath , and whose action on the scalars contains
no derivatives. This coincides with the group of symmetries of the first
order Lagrangian discussed in Section 6.5.1 and [ 2 ] , which are of the
restricted form ( 8.116 ).

As explained in Section 6.3 , one can always go to a duality frame in
which the magnetic components of the embedding tensor vanishes, @xmath ,
see Section 6.6 for an explicit construction of such a symplectic
matrix. Moreover, only the components @xmath survive, where @xmath runs
over the generators of the electric subgroup @xmath that act as local
symmetries of the Lagrangian in that frame and as before @xmath is
referring to the @xmath physical vector fields. Then, the gauged
Lagrangian ( 6.18 )-( 6.20 ) in the electric frame is exactly the
Lagrangian ( 8.3.5 ), where the matrix @xmath is identified with the
remaining electric components of the embedding tensor, @xmath . The
linear constraint ( 6.4 ) in the electric frame corresponds to ( 8.127 )
and ( 8.128 ). The quadratic constraint ( 6.6 ) on the embedding tensor
in the electric frame corresponds to the constraint ( 8.136 ) on @xmath
[ 3 ] . As explained in Sections 8.2.3 and 8.2.4 , the constraints can
be refined using the split corresponding to the various ( @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath ) types of symmetries.

We showed in Chapter 6 that the embedding tensor formalism does not
allow for more general deformations [ 2 ] than those of the Lagrangian (
8.103 ) studied in this chapter. Indeed, we have seen in Section 7.5
that their BRST cohomologies are isomorphic even though the field
content and gauge transformations are different. Conversely, as long as
one restricts the attention to the symmetries of ( 8.103 ) that are of
the electric type ( 8.116 ), we showed that the embedding tensor
formalism captures all consistent deformations that deform the gauge
transformations of the fields.

### 8.4 Applications

#### 8.4.1 Abelian gauge fields: @xmath-type gauging

As a first example, let us consider the case where we have no scalars,
@xmath , @xmath . The Lagrangian is then simply

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From ( 8.115 ) and comparing with ( 8.117 ) and ( 8.118 ), it can be
shown that @xmath -type symmetries are of electric form and moreover
there are no @xmath -type symmetries. We have in this case @xmath .

The vector fields transform in the fundamental representation of @xmath
. A basis of the Lie algebra @xmath may be labeled by an antisymmetric
pair of indices @xmath that now plays the role of the index @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Concerning the associated gaugings, the matrices @xmath are
antisymmetric in @xmath ; therefore, the structure constants of the
gauge group

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are automatically antisymmetric in their first two indices. Here the
superscript @xmath means that @xmath is contracted by the kronecker
@xmath , more precisely @xmath . The constraint ( 8.127 ) on @xmath
ensures antisymmetry in the last two indices which in turn implies total
antisymmetry and the Jacobi identity is obtained from ( 8.136 ).
Moreover, any set of totally antisymmetric structure constants can be
obtained in this way by taking @xmath , as can be easily seen using the
expression for @xmath given above.

We thereby recover the result of [ 170 ] stating that the most general
deformation of the free Lagrangian ( 8.147 ) that is not of @xmath or
@xmath -type is given by the Yang-Mills Lagrangian with a compact gauge
group of dimension equal to the number of vector fields.

Remark: Note that Poincaré (conformal) symmetries (for @xmath ) are of
@xmath -type if one allows for @xmath -dependent local functions. If
such a dependence is allowed for @xmath -type symmetries and gaugings as
well, results can be very different. For instance, as shown by equation
(13.21) of [ 33 ] , if @xmath , there are additional @xmath -type
symmetries described by the cohomology class

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where indices @xmath are raised and lowered with the Kronecker delta.
The associated Noether current can be obtained by working out the
descent equation following ( 8.51 ), @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In other words, @xmath . Note also that these @xmath -type symmetries
involve a non-vanishing @xmath . It has furthermore been shown in
section 13.2.2 of [ 33 ] that there are associated @xmath -type gaugings
and cohomology classes in higher ghost numbers. In the present context,
they are obtained as follows: the role of @xmath for the additional
symmetries is played by a symmetric pair of indices @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Once the linear constraints ( 8.92 ) on @xmath are fulfilled, the
associated @xmath -type gaugings and higher cohomology classes can be
read off from equation ( 8.51 ) when taking ( 8.89 ).

After multiplying ( 8.150 ) by @xmath , it represents for @xmath the
@xmath -type symmetry associated with the dilatation of the conformal
group. The associated cubic and higher order vertices for the full
conformal group have been studied in detail in [ 171 ] .

#### 8.4.2 Abelian gauge fields with uncoupled scalars: @xmath-type
gaugings

We now take the case

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where there is no interaction between the scalars and the vector fields.
The @xmath algebra is again @xmath and there are no @xmath -type
symmetries.

The electric symmetry algebra is the direct sum of @xmath with the
electric @xmath -type symmetry algebra @xmath of the scalar Lagrangian.
The matrices @xmath split into two groups and are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath labels the @xmath generators and the antisymmetric pair
@xmath labels the @xmath generators as before. The matrix @xmath
accordingly splits in two components @xmath and @xmath . The constraints
on @xmath again amount to the fact that the quantities @xmath are the
structure constants of a compact Lie group. The constraint on @xmath
tells us that the gauge variations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

close according to the structure constants @xmath . In the case where
these variations are linear, @xmath , the constraint is that the
matrices @xmath form a representation of the gauge group, @xmath .

#### 8.4.3 Bosonic sector of @xmath supergravity

Neglecting gravity, the bosonic sector of @xmath supergravity is given
by two scalar fields parametrizing the coset @xmath along with @xmath
vector fields [ 121 , 157 , 93 , 16 ] . We study three formulations of
this model, where we determine the symmetry algebras @xmath and @xmath
and the allowed gaugings. In all formulations, the scalar Lagrangian is
determined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

They differ by the form of the matrices @xmath and @xmath .

##### @xmath formulation

The vector Lagrangian ( 8.103 ) is determined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When @xmath is antisymmetric, the transformations @xmath define an
@xmath sub-algebra of @xmath -type symmetries on their own. Note also
that we can assume @xmath to be symmetric. Equations ( 8.115 ) then
imply that the traceless parts of @xmath have to vanish.

If @xmath , equations ( 8.115 ) are solved with @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . It then follows that ( 8.114 ) are solved with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equation ( 8.109 ) is then also solved with @xmath and @xmath .
According to equation ( 8.51 ), the associated cohomology class is given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . This cohomology class encodes the symmetry

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . The associated Noether current is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It cannot be made gauge invariant through allowed redefinitions.

For @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is a solution to the full problem ( 8.109 )
since @xmath . This gives then the only class of @xmath -type, which is
also of restricted type. More explicitly, @xmath with @xmath . The
symmetry it describes is @xmath with the associated Noether current
given above that can not be made gauge invariant.

The algebra @xmath is therefore isomorphic to @xmath , where @xmath is
the sub-algebra of @xmath generated by diagonal traceless matrices. It
is a sub-algebra of the electric symmetry algebra @xmath , where @xmath
corresponds to the sub-algebra of @xmath of upper triangular matrices,
see Section 5.3 . The electric algebra acts as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Accordingly @xmath where @xmath are given in ( 8.148 ), while

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The matrix @xmath transforms as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, contrary to the previous examples, the tensor @xmath has a
non-vanishing component @xmath .

The generalized structure constants @xmath are then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The linear constraint ( 8.92 ) now implies that @xmath as can be seen by
taking the first three indices equal and using the antisymmetry of the
matrices @xmath , while @xmath is restricted to be completely
skew-symmetric in all indices. In the same way, the linear constraint (
8.94 ) implies that @xmath . Indeed, it reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

from which we deduce @xmath by taking the first three indices equal.

It follows that there are no cohomology classes of @xmath -type when
@xmath and that the only cohomology classes of @xmath -type when @xmath
are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath a polynomial in @xmath of ghost number @xmath .

In particular, the symmetries of @xmath cannot be gauged and the gauge
algebra is given by a compact sub-algebra of @xmath . The gauged
Lagrangian is the original one, except that the abelian field strengths
and ordinary derivatives are replaced by non-abelian field strength and
covariant derivatives.

##### Dual @xmath formulation

We now have

  -- -- -- ---------
           (8.168)
  -- -- -- ---------

and the same analysis gives similar conclusions:

1.  The cohomology classes ( 8.167 ) are again present since @xmath and
    @xmath are still proportional to @xmath .

2.  There are no additional gaugings or cohomology classes in ghost
    number higher than @xmath of @xmath or @xmath -type.

3.  The only additional non-covariantizable characteristic cohomology
    comes from two additional solutions to ( 8.115 ).

The first of these additional solutions is of electric @xmath -type and
comes from @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath . Equation ( 8.114 )
reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.169)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and is solved by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.170)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This gives also a solution to the full problem since this transformation
leaves the scalar field Lagrangian invariant. According to equation (
8.51 ), the associated cohomology class is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.171)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The second solution is of restricted @xmath -type and comes from @xmath
while @xmath with @xmath , @xmath . Equation ( 8.114 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.172)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and is solved by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.173)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is also a solution to the full problem since these transformations
leave the scalar field Lagrangian invariant. The associated cohomology
class is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.174)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this case, we therefore have @xmath , where @xmath is the sub-algebra
of @xmath of lower triangular matrices.

Again, the symmetries of @xmath cannot be gauged and the gauge algebra
is given by a compact sub-algebra of @xmath .

##### @xmath formulation

The indices split as @xmath , where @xmath , and we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.175)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Spelling out equation ( 8.114 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.176)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Choosing @xmath , @xmath , the first equation reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.177)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Putting @xmath gives @xmath is symmetric under exchange of @xmath ,
@xmath while taking the derivative with respect to @xmath and then
putting @xmath gives @xmath is antisymmetric under exchange of @xmath ,
@xmath , thus @xmath . When combined with the linear constraint ( 8.92
), this implies that the @xmath ’s have to vanish unless all indices are
of @xmath , or of @xmath , type respectively, which is thus a necessary
condition to have non trivial @xmath -type solutions.

When the @xmath ’s vanish, the second part of ( 8.176 ) for @xmath ,
@xmath gives @xmath . When combined with the linear constraint ( 8.94 ),
this implies that for non-trivial solutions of @xmath -type associated
to @xmath one again needs all indices to be either of @xmath or of
@xmath type.

The discussion then reduces to the one we had before in each of the
sectors. For @xmath -type solutions, this gives in a first stage the
symmetries, gaugings and higher ghost cohomology classes associated with
each of the @xmath rotations separately. There are again no additional
solutions of @xmath or @xmath type when @xmath .

Only the remaining non-covariantizable symmetries, i.e., solutions of
type @xmath and @xmath at @xmath that correspond to @xmath , remain to
be discussed. For the @xmath type solutions, one finds in the first
sector that @xmath with ( 8.158 ) holding, while for the second sector
@xmath with ( 8.170 ) holding. This gives a solution to the full problem
if and only if @xmath . Hence @xmath . On the other hand the solutions
of @xmath type for both sectors are solutions to the full problem if and
only if @xmath so that there is no surviving @xmath -type symmetry. In
particular @xmath . The symmetry of @xmath cannot be gauged, and the
gauge algebra is a compact sub-algebra of @xmath .

This concludes the discussion with the expected results (see [ 172 , 96
, 173 ] ).

### 8.5 First order manifestly duality-invariant actions

#### 8.5.1 Non-minimal version with covariant gauge structure

We now investigate the first order formulation [ 26 , 2 ] of the models
discussed previously. Those models are interesting because they contain
more symmetries and therefore potentially more gaugings. In the
original, minimal version, they are given by the action ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note that
in this section the convention for Levi-Civita is @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.178)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the potentials are packed into a vector

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.179)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the magnetic fields are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.180)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The matrices @xmath and @xmath are the @xmath matrices

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.181)
  -- -------- -- ---------

each block being @xmath . The matrix @xmath is symplectic, @xmath .

Local BRST cohomology and gaugings for this class of models with
non-covariant gauge symmetries @xmath could then be discussed by
generalizing the results of [ 120 ] in the presence of coupled scalars.

However, in order to be able to directly use the discussion of local
BRST cohomology developed for the second order covariant Lagrangian in
the case of the first order manifestly duality invariant formulation, we
consider a modification of the non-minimal variant [ 159 ] with
additional scalar potentials for the longitudinal parts of electric and
magnetic fields. More precisely, we now take instead of ( 8.178 ) the
action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.182)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.183)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.184)
  -- -------- -- ---------

spatial indices @xmath are raised and lowered with @xmath and its
inverse, with @xmath the symplectic matrix, @xmath symmetric and
invertible and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.185)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The modification with respect to [ 159 ] consists in the addition of the
kinetic and potential terms for the longitudinal electric and magnetic
potentials in the last line of ( 8.183 ). Defining

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.186)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we have @xmath and can write

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (8.187)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where a total derivative has been dropped.

The gauge invariances are then doubled but still of the same covariant
form as in the second order Lagrangian case,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.188)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The equations of motion for the gauge and scalar potentials are
determined by the vanishing of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.189)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first set of equations then allows one to eliminate the momenta
@xmath by their own equations of motion. When @xmath is invertible, the
second and third set of equations allow one to solve @xmath and @xmath
by their own equations of motion in the action, which yields ( 8.178 ).
It is in this sense that these variants of the double potential
formalism are equivalent, but of course not locally so. The third and
fourth set of equations can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.190)
  -- -------- -- ---------

when defining

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.191)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This definition implies that the components of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.192)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.193)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After elimination of the @xmath , the action of the theory can then also
be written as the integral of @xmath with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.194)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that the scalar sector has been enlarged to @xmath and the scalar
metric and potential are now @xmath , respectively @xmath . It is thus a
particular case of the actions of the form ( 8.6 ) studied in Section
8.1 .

#### 8.5.2 Local BRST cohomology

The master action is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.195)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with an antifield and ghost sector that is doubled as compared to the
second order covariant formulation.

We then can copy previous results:

(i) @xmath for @xmath .

(ii) @xmath is doubled: @xmath with descent equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.196)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Characteristic cohomology @xmath is then represented by the 2-forms
@xmath .

For @xmath , the discussion in terms of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath types
is the same as before with indices @xmath on vector potentials, ghosts
and their antifields, and @xmath on scalar fields.

The obstruction equation for symmetries, equation ( 8.109 ), becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.197)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### 8.5.3 Constraints on @xmath-type cohomology

When there is no explicit @xmath dependence and @xmath , putting all
derivatives of @xmath to zero, one remains with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.198)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath amounts to replacing @xmath by @xmath in ( 8.193 ).

Using @xmath , and the decomposition @xmath , where the @xmath depend on
undifferentiated scalar fields and are homogeneous of degree @xmath in
@xmath , the equation implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.199)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When taking account that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.200)
  -- -------- -- ---------

this gives an equation of the type

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.201)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.202)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.203)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath on account of ( 8.44 ). Note that there is one less term as
compared to ( 8.113 ) since the kinetic term does not depend on the
scalars and also that @xmath is not symmetric.

Now both terms have to vanish separately because they involve different
field strengths,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.204)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Setting @xmath then gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.205)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . Consider first symmetries of @xmath -type, i.e., take the
case when the @xmath ’s vanish. The first equation is then satisfied
with @xmath , while the second equation then requires @xmath to vanish.
This implies:

There are neither @xmath -type symmetries nor @xmath -type cohomology in
ghost numbers @xmath for the first order model.

As a consequence, @xmath , and the second of equation ( 8.205 ) is
equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.206)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It follows that:

The algebra @xmath is the largest sub-algebra of @xmath that can be
turned into symmetries of the full theory. All non-trivial @xmath -type
symmetries require a non-vanishing @xmath and thus involve a
Chern-Simons term in their Noether currents.

On its own, the first equation of ( 8.205 ) is solved for skew-symmetric
@xmath with vanishing @xmath . Symmetric @xmath needs a non trivial
scalar symmetry.

For @xmath -type cohomologies in higher ghost number @xmath , the @xmath
tensor has to satisfy ( 8.92 ), which becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.207)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The object @xmath is then symmetric in the first and third indices
because @xmath is symmetric, and antisymmetric in the second and third
indices on account of ( 8.207 ). It thus has to vanish,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.208)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It follows that @xmath :

There are no @xmath -type cohomology classes in ghost number @xmath .

In particular, there are no @xmath -type gaugings even though there are
@xmath -type symmetries. We thus recover the results on gaugings of [ 83
] from the current perspective.

#### 8.5.4 Remarks on @xmath transformations

The two remarks on linear changes of variables from Section 8.3.6 also
apply in the first order case. More precisely, the second remark can be
rephrased as follows.

The general discussion of the structure of the BRST cohomology of the
first order model in Sections 8.5.2 and 8.5.3 goes through unchanged for
arbitrary skew-symmetric non-degenerate @xmath and symmetric
non-degenerate @xmath . The local BRST cohomology for sets of @xmath ,
@xmath related by @xmath transformations will be isomorphic, whereas
explicit results for the local BRST cohomology do depend on the
equivalence classes. For instance for the symmetries, this is the case
when explicitly solving the obstruction equation ( 8.197 ). As concerns
@xmath , there is just one equivalence class since all such matrices are
related to a canonical @xmath , say @xmath , by a @xmath transformation.
Hence, one can restrict oneself to equivalence classes of @xmath ,
@xmath with canonical @xmath , and @xmath ’s related by @xmath changes
of variables.

The first remark of Section 8.3.6 then boils down to the statement that
the algebra @xmath is the largest sub-algebra of @xmath that can be
turned into symmetries of the full theory, in agreement with the
discussion of the previous section. In addition we have recovered there
the result that the gauge algebra remains abelian.

#### 8.5.5 Application to the bosonic sector of @xmath supergravity

For definiteness, let us again concentrate on the bosonic sector of four
dimensional supergravity, without gravity. As in Section 8.4.3 , we use
the standard second order formulation for the @xmath sigma model.
Alternatively, one could use a first order formulation in terms of
fields parametrizing @xmath , with a first class constraint eliminating
the field for the @xmath subgroup. It would provide a first order
formulation for all fields and make all global symmetries manifest.

To this scalar action, we first couple one vector field, i.e. add the
action associated to ( 8.183 ) where @xmath , the indices @xmath take
two values @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The matrix @xmath and its
inverse are given by

  -- -- -- ---------
           (8.209)
  -- -- -- ---------

and are such that @xmath transforms as @xmath under an @xmath
transformation. The model is invariant under @xmath if the other fields
transform as @xmath , @xmath , @xmath because @xmath transformations are
symplectic, @xmath .

For the @xmath -type symmetries, equation ( 8.206 ) requires @xmath to
be symmetric, so there are at most 3 linearly independent solutions.
According to the above discussion, all of these give rise to symmetries,
which need @xmath and also @xmath . The @xmath -type symmetries
constitute the @xmath electric symmetry algebra.

We now consider the coupling to six vector fields in the different
formulations of Section 8.4.3 . For the @xmath invariant model, @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , while the dual formulation corresponds to @xmath .
Finally, in the @xmath formulation @xmath .

It then follows from ( 8.205 ) that both in the @xmath invariant
formulation and in the dual formulation, the electric symmetry algebra
is @xmath , where the @xmath transformations on the vectors @xmath and
on @xmath in the dual formulation corresponds to the infinitesimal
version of the above transformations where @xmath .

Finally, in the @xmath formulation, the electric symmetry algebra is
also @xmath . This is so because the @xmath element @xmath is such that
@xmath .

## Chapter 9 Conclusions and Prospects

In Part 1 of this thesis, we discussed some aspects of timelike duality
in the context of exotic versions of maximal supergravity. We first
described the extension of Adams’ theorem, which states that the only
spheres which admit global parallelism are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , to the pseudo-Riemannian geometry. There we argued that in
three-dimensions, the pseudo-heperbolic manifold @xmath , commonly known
as AdS @xmath , and the pseudo-sphere @xmath are parallelizable. These
two manifolds are interchangeable under the metric parity ( @xmath )
which changes the sign of the curvature. For that reason, sometimes in
literature @xmath is called @xmath or AAdS @xmath . In seven-dimensions,
the manifolds @xmath and @xmath are parallelizable. Once again, we can
find one from one another by metric reversal. We discussed as well the
construction of parallelizable seven-(pseudo-)spheres in the presence of
torsion (or similarly with special holonomy) which are the non-symmetric
coset spaces @xmath and @xmath .

We discussed the @xmath manifold as it plays an important role in the
compactification of eleven-dimensional supergravity, where one can find
an @xmath gauged maximal supergravity in AdS @xmath background via
Freund-Rubin compactification on (round) @xmath or a @xmath gauged
non-supersymmetric theory in AdS @xmath background via Englert
compactification on a parallellized squashed @xmath . We discussed the
effect of timelike T-duality which propounds, beside the standard @xmath
-theory, the presence of @xmath and @xmath -theories which are dual to
the standard theory. We showed that the compactification on
parallelizable @xmath is possible if one works in the picture described
by @xmath dual theory [ 1 ] . This solution similarly to the Englert one
will result in a non-supersymmetric theory in AdS @xmath background.
Besides the known Englert solution, the compactification on
parallelizable 7-manifolds for the other supergravity theories in
eleven-dimensions (the low energy limit of standard @xmath - and @xmath
-theories) is not possible, however one can see that there are plenty of
solutions as a result of Freund-Rubin compactification of all dual
@xmath theories which results in four dimensional theories in non-AdS
backgrounds.

In Part 4.4.1 , we investigated gaugings of models inspired by the
vector sector of extended supergravities. We first explained the changes
that were brought upon by considering scalar-vector couplings of
particular non-minimal type. It enhances the electric-magnetic duality
group to a subgroup of symplectic group @xmath for a theory with @xmath
vectors coupled to scalars. Then we discussed the interplay between the
first-order and second-order Lagrangians where the electric-magnetic
duality is manifest in the former while only part of electric-magnetic
duality acts locally in the latter and is manifest. However, the
first-order formulation is more rigid; we presented a proof that there
is no Yang-Mills deformations of first-order Lagrangians in the presence
of scalars [ 2 ] . A result that in fact is true regardless of the
presence of scalars.

Given the existence of the embedding tensor formalism to construct a
gauged supergravity by minimally coupling scalars to vectors and
promoting the vector fields to non-abelian connections on the fibre
bundle (and adding the appropriate interactions to render the Lagrangian
invariant), we showed that not only the standard second-order action
with the appropriate choice of the corresponding duality frame is
equivalent with the undeformed limit of the embedding tensor Lagrangian
but also that the space of local deformations of both theories are
isomorphic. In fact, all local cohomology groups @xmath are isomorphic
in both formulations. In particular the potential anomalies (cohomology
at ghost number one) are also the same.

We then extended our analysis to examine the possibility of those
deformations that change the gauge symmetry while keeping the gauged
algebra untouched. We have systematically analyzed gaugings of
vector-scalar models through a standard deformation theoretic approach.
In the case of gauge systems, this is most naturally done in the BV-BRST
antifield formalism.

We have shown that different types of symmetries behave differently when
one tries to gauge them. The method allows one to find all the
infinitesimal gaugings and higher order cohomology classes once all
symmetries are known.

We classified the symmetries into @xmath , @xmath and @xmath -types,
where the @xmath -type corresponds to those deformations that deform the
abelian gauge algebra, @xmath -type symmetries contain the topological
gaugings of [ 160 ] and @xmath -type symmetries contain gauge invariant
couplings and admit gauge-invariant Noether currents. The Noether
currents of @xmath and @xmath -type symmetries cannot be made gauge
invariant.

For the models explicitly considered, we have found that the only
possible gaugings of @xmath and @xmath -types are the ones previously
considered in the literature, namely Yang-Mills and topological
couplings among the gauge fields, with minimal couplings of the scalars.

We have shown in Section 8.2 that given the graded structure of the
antibracket map, the leading obstruction to extend first order
deformations of @xmath -type to second order, leading to the Jacobi
identity for the structure constants, cannot be eliminated by adding
@xmath -terms. Furthermore, in some cases, for instance when one imposes
Poincaré invariance as relevant to relativistic theories, the @xmath
-type symmetries can be shown to be absent [ 174 ] . It turns out that
the effect of coupling the models to Einstein gravity justifies this
assumption [ 175 ] and simplifies the problem.

We have analyzed the problem in the second order Lagrangian and in the
first order manifestly duality invariant formulation, both of which are
non-locally related in space (but not in time). The results are very
different: whereas the former formulation allows for standard gaugings,
the latter formulation allows for more (generalized) symmetries of
@xmath -type, but none of those can be gauged.

#### Prospects

As the final remark, we list the future research directions inspired by
results of the thesis:

1) The no-go theorem which states that there is no local deformation
available in the first-order formulation is highly based on the locality
present in the formulation. The inevitable result that in all examples
presented in the thesis, one could not gauge any part of global symmetry
but the U-type one corresponding to the Yang-Mills deformations, can
also be related to the local framework of our BV-BRST analysis. In order
to go past such no-go results, one should presumably try to work in a
controlled way with deformations that are spatially non-local. This as
well may open a window to discuss the gaugings in the presence of
sources, most importantly in the presence of Dirac magnetic monopoles,
since it requires going beyond locality, see the comment under the
equation ( 5.9 ) in Chapter 5 .

2) It is interesting to extend the analysis of gauging of the bosonic
sector of supergravity to include the fermion sector as well. Even
though, one may in general expect no new constraints but it is worth to
see explicitly that the supersymmetric extension does not require any
extra constraints. There has been works along this way [ 176 ] , where
the deformation of a free theory in the presence of both bosons and
fermions were considered. It is then intriguing to consider scalar
coupling from the beginning as it enhances the electric-magnetic duality
symmetry group and to analyze the deformations of such a theory.

3) In any dimensions, the positive level generators of the very extended
Kac–Moody algebra @xmath with completely antisymmetric spacetime indices
are associated with the form fields of the corresponding maximal
supergravity. In [ 177 ] , a correspondence between the gaugings of
maximal and half-maximal supergravity and certain generators of @xmath
Kac-Moody algebra has been developed. It has been generalized in [ 178 ,
179 ] to include the gauging of local scaling symmetry (Trombone
symmetry) [ 180 ] of maximal supergravity. Later in [ 181 ] , it was
shown how it can be realized in the context of embedding tensor
formalism. Since we have established a relation between our result and
the one of embedding tensor formalism, it would be interesting to
consider how the above correspondence is realized in our framework.

4) In Chapter 4 , we considered the solutions to supergravity theories
in @xmath dimensions with a non-degenerate metric. It may be of interest
to consider a case where the eleven-dimensional metric is not of maximal
rank. See for example [ 182 ] where similar question has been addressed
in the context of standard supergravity.

5) We discussed in Chapter 4 that there are Freund-Rubin solutions for
each timelike T-dual @xmath -theories. Given the standard @xmath -theory
in @xmath dimensions, the corresponding Freund-Rubin solution is a
supergravity theory in @xmath background spacetime. There is a
superconformal field theory in three-dimensions known as ABJM theory; an
@xmath supersymmetric Chern-Simons-matter theory [ 183 ] . It was shown
that the ABJM theory can be seen as the large N limit of a stack of N
@xmath -branes sitting at the orbifold singularity @xmath such that it
can be realized as the CFT dual to maximal supergravity in the near
horizon geometry @xmath . Therefore one finds an example of AdS/CFT
correspondence among the very few existing examples.

Given the existence of Freund-Rubin solution of @xmath - and @xmath
-theories on @xmath and @xmath respectively, it would be interesting to
build the corresponding three-dimensional superconformal field theories.
This would then provide us with new examples of AdS/CFT correspondence.

## Appendix A Notation

The following notation, beside the definition of Levi-Civita tensor, is
specifically used in the Part 1 . We generally follow the notation of [
184 ] , when we discuss supergravity.

-   @xmath : Signature of a spacetime with

    -   @xmath : Number of space directions of the ambient space
        manifold

    -   @xmath : Number of time directions of the ambient space manifold
        with @xmath

-   @xmath : Number of time directions of the internal manifold with

-   @xmath : Number of time directions of spacetime “background”
    manifold

-   @xmath : the metric on the tangent space @xmath of a manifold @xmath
    , where @xmath .

-   @xmath : the metric on @xmath dimensional ambient space, @xmath .

-   @xmath : the metric on seven dimensional internal space, @xmath .

-   @xmath : the metric on four dimensional spacetime, @xmath .

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath : the eleven dimensional Levi-Civita antisymmetric covariant
    tensor density of rank eleven and weight @xmath , with @xmath .

-   @xmath : the eleven dimensional Levi-Civita antisymmetric
    contravariant tensor density of rank eleven and weight @xmath , with
    @xmath . This choice is such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is the determinant of @xmath .

-   -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-   @xmath : the group of all transformations which leaves invariant the
    bilinear form @xmath .

-   The pseudo-sphere @xmath ( @xmath ) is a manifold with induced
    metric of signature @xmath and positive curvature. In particular,
    @xmath is the standard @xmath -sphere @xmath .

-   The pseudo-hyperbolic space @xmath ( @xmath ) is a manifold with
    induced metric of signature @xmath and negative curvature. While one
    removes a spacelike direction from the ambient space to get @xmath ,
    one removes a timelike direction for @xmath (see Appendix C for an
    explicit example). In particular, @xmath is the negative curvature
    standard hyperbolic space @xmath of dimension @xmath .

The following notations are specifically used in Part 4.4.1 :

-   @xmath : BRST cohomology at ghost number @xmath in the space of
    local functional @xmath -forms.

-   @xmath : BRST cohomology at ghost number @xmath in the space of
    local functional of a top form-degree.

-   @xmath : Characteristic cohomology

-   @xmath for @xmath .

-   The Section 8.5 , has the opposite notation for Levi-Civita symbol
    compared to the rest of the thesis, i.e. @xmath .

## Appendix B Octonion and Split Octonion

In this appendix, we give a quick review of Cayley-Dickson construction
of division algebras. We discuss the algebra of octonions and split
octonions and we present the corresponding Fano planes.

### b.1 The Cayley-Dickson Construction of Divison Algebras

The Cayley-Dickson construction of the normed division algebras is a
powerful tool as it can nicely explain the reason that why each of the
normed division algebras can be obtained as a subalgebra of a larger
normed division algebra. It also gives a manifestation of why as we go
up in the dimension of division algebras, the algebras lose realness
condition, commutativity and associativity gradually.

Let’s consider @xmath , then the complex number @xmath can be thought of
as a pair @xmath . The addition and multiplication for any two complex
numbers @xmath and @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The complex conjugate of a complex number thus is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Having defined the complex numbers, we can define the quaternions in a
similar way. A quaternion can be thought of as a pair of complex
numbers. Addition is again like ( B.1 ), and the multiplication is
defined for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quaternion conjugate is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

If one repeats the same procedure once again, the algebra of octonions
is obtained. This iterative method of building up normed division
algebras is called the Cayley-Dickson construction. If one continues to
build up algebras by this construction, all algebras larger than
octonions will be normed but not division algebras [ 46 ] .

### b.2 Octonions

Let @xmath and @xmath be two quaternions, @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath etc). As we explained in the previous section, the
octonions are pairs of quaternions @xmath , where @xmath is a new
element, for which one defines the multiplication as ( B.4 ) or
explicitly as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the equation ( B.6 ), the overbar denotes quaternionic conjugation
defined in ( B.5 ), @xmath .

Considering the basis @xmath the algebra of unit octonion is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a totally antisymmetric tensor and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

One should notice that the above definition of @xmath is not unique but
fixing the unit element @xmath , then all different definitions are
isomorphic.

There is a mnemonic representation of the multiplication of octonions
which is called Fano plane and is the simplest example of the projective
plane. The Fano plane for the octonions is depicted in Figure B.1 and
one can easily find the other isomorphic tables using the symmetries of
Fano plane.

### b.3 Split Octonions

Let @xmath and @xmath be two quaternions, @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath etc). The split octonions are pairs of quaternions
@xmath , where @xmath is a new element, for which one defines the
product as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

instead of @xmath as for the standard octonions. In ( B.11 ), the
overbar denotes quaternionic conjugation, @xmath .

Setting @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , one gets the same products @xmath as for the standard
octonions, except when two @xmath ’s are involved, in which case one
gets an additional minus sign. For instance @xmath as for octonions, but
@xmath while it is @xmath for standard octonions. Similarly, @xmath
instead of @xmath .

One defines octonionic conjugation for a general split octonion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

One has

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and of course @xmath . A scalar product can then be introduced as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Explicitly, one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.17)
              @xmath   @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the flat metric with signature @xmath .

An octonion is pure imaginary if @xmath . The unit octonions @xmath are
pure imaginary. The pure imaginary condition is equivalent to @xmath .

One can rewrite the product of the unit split octonions @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the structure constants @xmath are such that the @xmath are
completely antisymmetric in @xmath . The tensor @xmath has value @xmath
for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (and
cyclic permutations) and it vanishes otherwise. Similarly to octonions,
there is a mnemonic picture of the multiplication table of split
octonions. The corresponding Fano plane has been given in Figure B.2 ,
where once again one can read off all possible multiplication tables
using the symmetries of the Fano plane. The ordering of @xmath for the
non-zero components of @xmath for the split octonions can be obtained
from its octonionic counterpart and reversing the diagonal arrows in the
Fano plane.

The squared norm @xmath of @xmath reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (B.20)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the flat metric with signature @xmath . The split
octonions form a composition algebra, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Just as the standard octonions, the split octonions do not form an
associative algebra. However, in the same way as for the standard
octonions, the associator @xmath of three split octonions @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , defined through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

is an alternating function of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

More information on the split octonions can be found in [ 57 , 62 ] .

### b.4 Proof of Theorem 2.2

Using Lemma 2.1 and writing @xmath for any @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now let @xmath be the dimension of the normed division algebra @xmath .
Let @xmath be a sub-vector space of @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Any @xmath can be uniquely rewritten as @xmath where @xmath , with
@xmath and @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , we have @xmath and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath . For the moment, let’s assume the algebra @xmath is
defined over the field of complex numbers. One can find an @xmath
dimensional orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath satisfying the
orthonormal condition [ 41 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, @xmath realizes an orthonormal basis of @xmath . Choosing
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath in ( B.27 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a Clifford algebra in @xmath dimensional vector space @xmath .
Any matrix representation of a Clifford algebra is reducible and the
dimension of irreducible representation in @xmath dimensional space is [
185 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Suppose that the @xmath matrix representation of @xmath s contains
@xmath irreducible components with its total matrix dimension of @xmath
. This must be equal to @xmath , so that we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are four solutions to this equation:

-   @xmath , @xmath ,

-   @xmath , @xmath ,

-   @xmath , @xmath ,

-   @xmath , @xmath .

This proves the theorem. Even though we assumed that the algebra was
defined on a complex field, the proof still holds for the real field [
41 ] .

## Appendix C The Pseudo-Sphere @xmath and the Split Octonions

### c.1 A Survey of @xmath as a Homogeneous Space

Let @xmath be the @xmath -dimensional real vector space endowed with the
flat metric of mixed signature @xmath ,

  -- -- -- -------
           (C.1)
  -- -- -- -------

We consider the hypersurfaces:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

These are connected. Because the signature of the embedding space is
symmetric for the exchange of the space and time directions, these
hypersurfaces are clearly isomorphic. The “pseudo-sphere” @xmath has an
induced metric with signature @xmath (three @xmath signs and four @xmath
signs), while the “pseudo-hyperbolic space” @xmath has an induced metric
with signature @xmath . One goes from one to the other by an overall
sign change of the metric.

The split group @xmath and its subgroups @xmath and @xmath , the
connected component of @xmath , act transitively on @xmath and @xmath .
Given a point on @xmath , for example the north pole given by @xmath ,
the subgroups of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath which leave the pointed
fixed are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively. This subgroups are
called the stability subgroups. Similarly, the corresponding stability
subgroups for a fixed point on @xmath are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
The groups @xmath and @xmath (as well as @xmath and @xmath , or @xmath
and @xmath ) are isomorphic, but we prefer to adopt different notations
in each case to keep track of the signature of the metric. Thus, the
pseudosphere @xmath and pseudo-hyperbolic space @xmath are the
homogeneous spaces:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The pseudo-sphere @xmath and pseudo-hyperbolic space @xmath are not only
homogeneous spaces, they are in fact maximally symmetric and hence
spaces of constant curvature,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath for the pseudo-sphere @xmath and @xmath for the
pseudo-hyperbolic space @xmath , in agreement with the observation that
under an overall change of sign of the metric, the Riemann curvature
changes sign but the product @xmath does not, so that @xmath changes
sign.

### c.2 Two Infinite Family of Parallelizations of the Pseudo-Sphere
@xmath

There exist two infinite families of parallelizations of the
pseudo-sphere @xmath . We first start by describing one of these
parallelizations.

Consider the pseudo-sphere @xmath of unit split octonions, @xmath . The
real number @xmath is the “North pole”. The tangent space at the North
pole can be identified with the seven-dimensional vector space of
imaginary split octonions. A Lorentz basis of this tangent space is
given by the @xmath ’s. Let @xmath . Right multiplication by @xmath maps
the North pole to @xmath , and the tangent space at the North pole to
the tangent space at @xmath . Indeed, the vectors @xmath at the North
pole are mapped on @xmath . One has:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first equality expresses that the seven imaginary split octonions
@xmath , viewed as vector in @xmath are orthogonal to @xmath and hence
tangent to the pseudo-sphere @xmath at @xmath . The second equality
expresses that the @xmath ’s form a Lorentz basis of that tangent space.

We have thus defined at each point of the pseudo-sphere @xmath a Lorentz
basis of the tangent space. This provides an absolute parallelism for
@xmath . The tangent vector at @xmath parallel to the tangent vector
@xmath at @xmath is the vector @xmath obtained by right multiplication
with @xmath . The corresponding parallel transport preserves the metric
of @xmath and its geodesics can be verified to coincide with those
defined by the metric. The parallelization defined by @xmath is thus
consistent with the metric.

Similarly, left multiplication also defines a parallelization of @xmath
that maps the tangent basis @xmath at @xmath on the tangent basis @xmath
at @xmath . The two parallelisms are inequivalent since the tangent
vectors @xmath and @xmath coincide only at the North pole and at the
“South pole” @xmath .

Yet other parallelizations can be defined by using a reference point on
@xmath different from unity. More precisely, let @xmath . One goes from
@xmath to @xmath by multiplying @xmath by @xmath , @xmath . One defines
the tangent vector @xmath at @xmath parallel to the tangent vector
@xmath at @xmath through right multiplication by the octonion @xmath
that connects @xmath to @xmath , @xmath . The tangent vectors @xmath and
@xmath at @xmath do not coincide because octonionic multiplication is
not associative. A similiar construction yields the parallelism @xmath .

Because the families of parallelisms given by the above construction are
consistent with the metric, the corresponding torsion tensors obey the
equations ( 4.24 )-( 4.26 ) given above [ 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 ] .

The parallelisms of @xmath are related to the split octonions in the
same way as the parallelisms of the seven-sphere are related to the
standard octonions. For that reason, the reader can find more
information on the parallelisms of @xmath in the literature on the
parallelisms of the seven-sphere. A reference that we have found useful
is [ 80 ] .

### c.3 @xmath and @xmath

The complex Lie algebra @xmath possesses two real forms, the compact one
and the split one. To the compact real form corresponds the unique
compact group @xmath . To the split real form correspond the simply
connected non compact group @xmath with center @xmath and the quotient
@xmath (“adjoint real form”) which has trivial center (and is not simply
connected). The group @xmath is the automorphism group of the split
octonions.

The group @xmath is well-known to have a transitive action on the
seven-sphere @xmath , with isotropy group @xmath . Similarly, the group
@xmath (connected component of @xmath ) has a transitive action on the
pseudo-sphere @xmath with isotropy group @xmath [ 81 ] . We can thus
also identify @xmath with the homogeneous space @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix D Derivation of Equation (8.82)

In this appendix, we derive formula ( 8.82 ) for the variation @xmath of
the two-form @xmath under a @xmath -type symmetry. This is done in two
steps:

1.  First, we show that

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (D.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    for some constants @xmath .

2.  Then, we prove that the @xmath take the form

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (D.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where the constants @xmath and @xmath are those appearing in the
    currents associated with @xmath and @xmath respectively.

The proof is given in the case where the Lagrangian (or, equivalently,
@xmath ) does not depend on the derivatives of @xmath .

##### A lemma

The proof of the above steps uses the following result on the @xmath
-type cohomology classes (with @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is proven as follows: @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some gauge invariant @xmath and some @xmath of antifield number
@xmath , where @xmath is here the Koszul-Tate differential. Now, it is
proven in [ 33 ] that @xmath must be gauge invariant; hence, it can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some gauge invariant @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Indeed,
derivatives acting on the antifields contained in @xmath are pushed to
the term @xmath by integration by parts, leaving the form ( D.5 ) where
@xmath contains only the undifferentiated antifields. Putting this back
in ( D.4 ) and using the fact that @xmath because @xmath is gauge
invariant, we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some gauge invariant @xmath . This shows that @xmath is a @xmath
-type cohomology class: we can therefore expand @xmath in the @xmath
basis as @xmath . In particular, this implies that @xmath , which proves
the lemma.

##### First step

We start from the chain of descent equations involving @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Applying @xmath to this chain, we get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which can be simplified to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

using equations ( D.7 ) again. Equation ( D.11 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some @xmath of ghost number @xmath and form degree @xmath . Because
the left-hand side is gauge invariant and @xmath is of form degree two,
@xmath must also be gauge invariant. This follows from theorems on the
invariant cohomology of @xmath in form degree @xmath [ 165 , 166 ] .
Equation ( D.12 ) implies then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some @xmath of ghost number @xmath and form degree @xmath . Again,
the left-hand side of this equation is gauge invariant: results on the
invariant cohomology of @xmath in form degree @xmath [ 165 , 166 ] now
imply that the non-gauge invariant part of @xmath can only be a linear
combination of the one-forms @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging this back in equation ( D.16 ) and using the fact that @xmath
(since @xmath is gauge invariant), we recover equation ( D.1 ). This
concludes the first step of the proof.

##### Second step

For the second step, we introduce

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operator @xmath counts the number of @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s minus
the number of @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s. Because it carries ghost number
@xmath , it commutes with the exterior derivative, @xmath . Applying
this operator to the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term is evident. The first term is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

according to the graded Jacobi identity. The counting operator @xmath
kills the @xmath term in the master action @xmath , which implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, @xmath kills the first two terms of @xmath given in ( 8.59 ),
leaving @xmath which is gauge invariant. This implies @xmath .
Therefore, we have indeed

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which proves equation ( D.20 ).

We now compute @xmath using the result of the first step. We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This looks like the @xmath -variation @xmath , but it is not because
there are Euler-Lagrange derivatives. For a top form @xmath , the
general rule is [ 164 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In our case, this becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using property ( D.1 ) and putting together the terms of the form @xmath
, we get then from ( D.20 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, it is sufficient to prove that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, this implies @xmath , which in turn gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some constants @xmath using property ( D.3 ) of the @xmath -type
cohomology classes.

##### Proof of (d.29)

We will actually prove the stronger equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the case where @xmath depends on @xmath but not on its derivatives.

To do this, we can assume that @xmath a homogeneous function of degree
@xmath in @xmath , i.e. @xmath . If it is not, we can separate it into a
sum of homogenous parts; the result then still holds because equation (
D.31 ) is linear in @xmath .

In components, equation ( D.31 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under the homogeneity assumption @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation ( D.31 ) now becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now use the fact that @xmath does not depend on derivatives of @xmath
, which implies that the higher order derivatives @xmath are not present
and that the Euler-Lagrange derivatives are only partial derivatives. We
then have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see ( 8.4 )), which proves ( D.34 ) in this case.
