The study of the long-dead early generations of massive stars is crucial
in order to obtain a complete picture of the chemical evolution of the
Universe, hence the origin of the elements. The nature of these stars
can be inferred indirectly by investigating the origin of low-mass
metal-poor stars observed in our Galaxy, some of which are almost as old
as the Universe. The peculiar extremely iron-poor Carbon-Enhanced
Metal-Poor (CEMP) stars, whose precise origin is still debated, are
thought to have formed with the material ejected by only one or very few
previous massive stars, hereafter called the source stars. In this
context, the source stars belong to the very first generations of
massiveÂ stars.

The main aim of this thesis is to explore the physics and the
nucleosynthesis of the early generations of massive stars. It is
achieved by combining stellar evolution modeling including rotation and
full nucleosynthesis with observations of CEMP stars. By fitting the
abundances of CEMP stars with the ejecta of new massive source star
models, characteristics of the massive source stars can be deduced.

The efficient rotational mixing operating in rotating source stars
triggers exchanges of material between the helium burning core and the
hydrogen burning shell, and leads to a very rich and varied
nucleosynthesis. This interplay between rotation and nucleosynthesis in
massive source stars is able to cover the abundance scatter of light
elements (carbon to silicon) of the CEMP stars with [Fe/H] @xmath . Some
remaining discrepancies between models and observations can be
alleviated if a late mixing process is included in the source star. It
operates about 200 years before the end of the source star evolution,
between the hydrogen burning shell and the helium burning shell. A
detailed investigation of the abundances of light elements of 69 CEMP
stars with [Fe/H] @xmath suggests that the best source stars are
preferentially fast rotating 20 @xmath stars which experienced the late
mixing process and an ejection of only their outer layers.

The rotation-induced mixing also boosts the weak s-process in source
stars, provided the initial metallicity is not strictly zero. The
s-elements up to barium are strongly overproduced, especially if the
initial rotation rate is high. The s-process boost induced by rotation
was found to be significant for stars with initial masses below 60
@xmath . Above this threshold, the interplay between rotation and
nucleosynthesis is weaker so that rotating and non-rotating models give
similar results. The signature of the rotation-induced s-process boost
in @xmath @xmath source stars was found to be consistent with the
abundance pattern of several CEMP stars enriched in s-elements.

The examination of the origin of CEMP stars in light of new massive
source star models suggests that rotation was a dominant effect in the
early generations of massive stars. Strong mixing events between burning
shells are also expected to be a common feature in these early massive
stars. Finally, early massive stars should have lost only their envelope
and experienced rather strong fallback.
