This thesis focuses on the experimental creation and detection of
different types of quantum correlations using nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) hardware. The idea of encoding computational problems into
physical quantum system and then harnessing the quantum evolution to
perform information processing is at the core of quantum computing.
Quantum entanglement is a striking feature exhibited by composite
quantum systems which has no classical analog. It has been shown that
quantum entanglement is a key resource to achieve computational speedup
in quantum information processing and for quantum communication related
tasks. Creation and detection of such correlations experimentally is a
major thrust area in experimental quantum computing. Main goals of the
studies undertaken in this thesis were to design experimental strategies
to detect the entanglement in a ‘state-independent’ way and with fewer
experimental resources. Experimental schemes have been devised which
enables the measurement of desired observable with high accuracy and
these schemes were utilized in all the investigations. Experimental
protocols were successfully implemented to detect the entanglement of
random two-qubit states. Further, the schemes for the experimental
detection as well as classification of generic and general three-qubit
pure states have also been devised and implemented successfully.
Detection of quantum correlations possessed by mixed separable states,
bound-entanglement for states of @xmath systems and non-local nature of
quantum systems were also investigated. In all the investigations,
results were verified by one or more alternative ways e.g. full quantum
state tomography, quantum discord, negativity and n -tangle.
Content of the thesis has been distributed in seven chapters and the
chapter-wise abstract is as follows.
