Investigations on nonclassical effects such as revivals, squeezing and
entanglement in quantum systems require, in general, knowledge of the
state of the system as it evolves in time. The state (equivalently, the
density matrix) is reconstructed from a tomogram obtained from
experiments. A tomogram is a set of histograms of appropriately chosen
observables. Reconstruction of the quantum state from a tomogram
typically involves statistical procedures that could be cumbersome and
inherently error-prone. It is therefore desirable to extract as much
information as possible about the properties of the state directly from
the tomogram. The theme of this thesis is the identification and
quantification of nonclassical effects from appropriate tomograms. We
have examined continuous-variable (CV) systems, hybrid quantum (HQ)
systems and spin systems. The program is two-fold: (a) To compute
tomograms of known states numerically at various instants during
temporal evolution under specific Hamiltonians, and to examine their
revival, squeezing and entanglement properties at these instants; (b) to
compute tomograms from available experimental data, and to investigate
their nonclassical features. The CV systems considered are primarily (i)
a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) trapped in a double-well potential, and
(ii) a radiation field interacting with a nonlinear multi-level atomic
medium. The HQ systems considered are two-level atoms interacting with
radiation fields. This allows for the possibility of examining both
optical tomograms and qubit tomograms. Several initial states have been
considered, including the standard coherent state (CS), the two-mode
squeezed state, the binomial state, and states which display
quantifiable departure from coherence, such as the photon-added coherent
state and the boson-added coherent state.

Wave packet revival phenomena including full, fractional and
super-revivals have been examined tomographically in the context of a
single-mode field system and the bipartite BEC system. Squeezing
properties such as quadrature, higher-order Hong-Mandel and Hillery-type
squeezing, and entropic squeezing have been investigated in detail in CV
systems by evaluating appropriate moments of observables, from
tomograms. A major part of the thesis is devoted to a comparison between
the performance of different entanglement indicators (computed from
tomograms) that we have proposed.

We have also obtained and examined tomograms directly related to
experiments reported in the literature. (i) We have analysed appropriate
tomograms to distinguish between two @xmath -photon states produced in
an experiment on a CV bipartite system. While photon coincidence count
measurements were used for this purpose in the experiment, our
investigation demonstrates that tomograms provide another powerful tool
for examining differences between various quantum states. (ii) We have
computed spin tomograms from data, obtained using liquid-state NMR
techniques, from an experimental group. (iii) Equivalent circuits of
multipartite HQ systems were provided by us to the IBM quantum computing
platform. Based on these circuits, tomograms were generated by the
platform by experiment as well as simulation. Corresponding tomograms
were computed by us using the HQ model. The entanglement indicators
calculated from these three sources of tomograms have been compared and
contrasted.

The thesis highlights and elaborates upon the very useful and
significant role played by tomograms in assessing nonclassical effects
displayed by quantum systems, without resorting to detailed state
reconstruction procedures.
