A golden age of interferometry is upon us, allowing observations at smaller
scales in greater detail than ever before. In few fields has this had the huge
impact as that of planet formation and the study of young stars. State of the
art high angular resolution observations provide invaluable insights into a
host of physical processed from accretion and sublimation, to disk winds and
other outflows. In this thesis, I present the wide-ranging works of my PhD,
encompassing both instrumentation and observational science. Instrumentational
activities stem from the development of new generation baseline solutions at
CHARA to the commissioning of a new observing mode on MIRC-X, allowing for the
first ever J band interferometric observations of a young stellar object ever
published. The science results find direct evidence of a dusty wind emanating
from the innermost regions of the young object SU Aurigae in addition to
exquisite image reconstruction revealing inclination induced asymmetries.
Additionally, I find evidence of viscous heating of the inner disk of
outbursting star FU Orionis as I derive the temperature gradient to
unparalleled precision. While it is difficult to draw one overall conclusion
from the varied works of this thesis, the results described here are a
testament to the uniqueness of young stellar systems and provide vital
information on some the most ubiquitous processes in astrophysics. The
instrumentational developments also open up exciting opportunities for future
science in the ever-growing field of optical interferometry.