A transition to a low-carbon electricity supply is crucial to limit the
impacts of climate change. Reducing carbon emissions could help prevent the
world from reaching a tipping point, where runaway emissions are likely.
Runaway emissions could lead to extremes in weather conditions around the world
-- especially in problematic regions unable to cope with these conditions.
However, the movement to a low-carbon energy supply can not happen
instantaneously due to the existing fossil-fuel infrastructure and the
requirement to maintain a reliable energy supply. Therefore, a low-carbon
transition is required, however, the decisions various stakeholders should make
over the coming decades to reduce these carbon emissions are not obvious. This
is due to many long-term uncertainties, such as electricity, fuel and
generation costs, human behaviour and the size of electricity demand. A well
choreographed low-carbon transition is, therefore, required between all of the
heterogenous actors in the system, as opposed to changing the behaviour of a
single, centralised actor. The objective of this thesis is to create a novel,
open-source agent-based model to better understand the manner in which the
whole electricity market reacts to different factors using state-of-the-art
machine learning and artificial intelligence methods. In contrast to other
works, this thesis looks at both the long-term and short-term impact that
different behaviours have on the electricity market by using these
state-of-the-art methods.