## Introduction

In this thesis two main topics are studied: Bourbaki-completeness and
Samuel realcompactification. The first one was born in [ 39 ] from the
primary problem of characterizing those metric spaces such that the
closure of every Bourbaki-bounded subset is compact . The second one was
first intended to be studied in the frame of metric spaces in order to
prove its strict dependence of the bornological notion of
Bourbaki-boundedness (see [ 41 , Section 7] and [ 38 ] ).

Many of the results given in this thesis come from previous publications
by the author. These results are distributed in the three parts of this
thesis along the following way.

In the first part, we find the results from [ 39 ] and [ 40 ] on
Bourbaki-complete and cofinal Bourbaki-complete metric spaces and
uniform spaces. However, in order to organize all these results we have
chosen to start in the frame of uniform spaces and then move on to
metric spaces as a particular case. Moreover, many proofs, as well as
many results, are new since we have considered as a main character the
star-finite modification of a uniformity , which did not appear in our
publications until [ 42 ] .

In the second part, we have tried to condensate the main results of [ 51
] . But, instead of following the approach of said paper, which studies
a kind of Čech-complete property , we have started with several results
on embeddings of Bourbaki-complete spaces inspired by publication [ 8 ]
. On the other hand, we must notice that our embeddings also take under
consideration the uniform side, since we will need it in the last part
of the thesis.

Finally, in the third part of the thesis we include the results from [
42 ] on the Samuel realcompactification of a uniform space. These are
the extension of the results in [ 41 ] on the Samuel
realcompactification of a metric space. The proofs given here depend on
the embedding results of the second part of the thesis and hence, these
are different from the proofs appearing in the papers.

Since we have reunified all the above works under a common approach, new
unpublished results have arisen. These have been also included here.

Next, we expose the main concepts and results obtained, as well as their
background.

#### Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces

Bourbaki-bounded subsets were introduced in the frame of uniform spaces
by Hejcman in [ 47 ] , in order to extend the notion of bounded subset
of a metric space. We define these using the following notation.

Given a set @xmath , a cover @xmath of @xmath and @xmath , let us write:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath , @xmath

###### Definition.

A subset @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset
of @xmath if for every uniform cover @xmath there exist @xmath and
finitely many @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded space if it is a
Bourbaki-bounded subset of itself.

Bourbaki-bounded subsets have their origin in locally convex topological
vector spaces (LCTVS over the real or complex field). Recall that von
Neumann introduced a notion of bounded subset for LCTVS in order to
generalize the notion of boundedness of the normed vector spaces, which
is invariant by equivalence of norms [ 47 , Remark 1.6] . Precisely, the
Bourbaki-bounded subsets of a LCTVS, endowed with the uniformity induced
by its structure as a topological group, are exactly the von Neumann’s
bounded subsets. Note that, whenever we are dealing with normed spaces,
Bourbaki-bounded subsets coincide with the bounded subsets by the norm.

In the same way that bounded subsets of normed spaces are invariant
under equivalence of norms, Bourbaki-bounded subsets are invariant under
uniform equivalence, which is an advantage over the bounded subsets of
metric spaces since they are not necessarily invariant for uniformly
equivalent metrics. Indeed, think on the bounded subsets of @xmath ,
where @xmath is the usual euclidean metric on @xmath , and @xmath ,
where @xmath is the bounded metric defined by @xmath .

On the other hand, it is easily seen that every totally bounded subset
of a uniform space is always a Bourbaki-bounded subset . Moreover,
recall that it is a classical result that a metric space is complete if
and only if the closure of every totally bounded subset is compact .
Therefore, it is quite natural to try to characterize those metric
spaces satisfying that the closure of every Bourbaki-bounded subset is
compact.

Since totally bounded subsets of metric spaces are characterized trough
Cauchy sequences and Cauchy sequences lead to completeness of the metric
spaces (by definition a metric space is complete if every Cauchy
sequence converges ), our way to proceed in [ 39 ] was to give a
sequence characterization of Bourbaki-bounded subsets of a metric space
(Theorem 1.3.3 ), and then asking for the clustering of this family of
sequences, called Bourbaki-Cauchy sequences . In this way we obtained
the property of Bourbaki-completeness of metric spaces which is
equivalent to the above stated question about the closure of
Bourbaki-bounded sets (Theorem 1.3.8 ).

Next, it is also natural to extend the notion of Bourbaki-completeness
to the frame of uniform spaces trough Bourbaki-Cauchy nets as we do in [
40 ] or, equivalently, trough Bourbaki-Cauchy filters as in [ 51 ] and [
42 ] . Recall that completeness of uniform spaces is defined by means of
Cauchy nets ( [ 97 ] ) or Cauchy filters ( [ 19 ] ). In this way, we
obtain Bourbaki-completeness in uniform spaces.

###### Definition.

A filter @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath
if for every uniform cover @xmath there is some @xmath and @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition.

A uniform space is Bourbaki-complete if every Bourbaki-Cauchy filter
clusters.

It is clear that every compact uniform space is Bourbaki-complete and
that every Bourbaki-complete uniform space is complete . The main result
relating all these properties is the following theorem (see Theorem
1.2.13 ).

###### Theorem.

For a uniform space @xmath the following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is compact;

2.  @xmath is complete and totally bounded;

3.  @xmath is Bourbaki-complete and Bourbaki-bounded.

Observe that a Bourbaki-complete uniform space always satisfies that the
closure of every Bourbaki-bounded subset is compact. A first example of
complete space which is not Bourbaki-complete is any
infinite-dimensional Banach space. Indeed, the closed unit ball of such
spaces is a Bourbaki-bounded subset (and subspace) that is not compact.

However, the reverse question, that is, if every uniform space
satisfying that the closure of every Bourbaki-bounded subset is compact
must be Bourbaki-complete, is false as it is expected (see Example
1.3.11 ), contrarily to what happens for metric spaces (Theorem 1.3.8 ).
We must notice now that LCTVS satisfying that the closure of every
Bourbaki-bounded subset is compact has been also traditionally
considered. These spaces are called semi-Montel , and, whenever the
LCVTS is barrelled , these are exactly the Montel spaces (see [ 60 ] ).
For instance, if we endow a LCVTS with the “weak topology” (induced by a
family of continuous functionals), then it is always a semi-Montel
space.

As for the non-metrizable uniform spaces, the (semi-)Montel spaces are
not necessarily complete as it is shown in the difficult example by
Kömura [ 64 , Section 5] . However, by Theorem 1.3.8 every semi-Montel
Frechet space (that is, metrizable LCTVS) space is Bourbaki-complete .
In spite of this precedent in the frame of LCTVS, we must make clear now
that we will not talk of LCTVS anymore.

At first, in the papers [ 39 ] and [ 40 ] , we treated
Bourbaki-completeness as a property stronger than usual completeness (
every Cauchy filter is a Bourbaki-Cauchy filter ) but not necessarily
“linked” to completeness. It was not until [ 42 ] that we realized that
Bourbaki-completeness of a uniform space @xmath is equivalent to
completeness of the star-finite modification of the uniform space @xmath
(Theorem 1.2.11 ). By a modification of a uniform space @xmath we mean a
uniformity @xmath compatible with the topology of @xmath having as a
base or subbase of the uniformity a subfamily of covers from the
uniformity @xmath .

###### Definition.

A cover @xmath of a set @xmath is star-finite if for every @xmath there
are at most finitely many @xmath such that @xmath meets @xmath .

That the family of all the star-finite covers from @xmath is a base for
an admissible uniformity is well-known (see [ 59 ] ). In addition, from
an old result by Njåstad in [ 78 ] , it can be deduced that a subset of
a uniform space @xmath is Bourbaki-bounded if and only if it is totally
bounded in @xmath (Theorem 1.2.5 ). Moreover, we also prove the
following results.

###### Lemma.

(Theorem 1.2.10 ) For a uniform space @xmath the following statements
are equivalent:

1.   every Cauchy filter of the uniform space @xmath is a
    Bourbaki-Cauchy filter of @xmath ;

2.   every Bourbaki-Cauchy ultrafilter of @xmath is a Cauchy ultrafilter
    of the uniform space @xmath .

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 1.2.11 )A uniform space @xmath is Bourbaki-complete if and only
if @xmath is complete.

In spite of the above equivalence, Bourbaki-Cauchy filters of a uniform
space @xmath are revealed as a useful tool, and this is because they
are, in many situations, more tangible and easy to work with than Cauchy
filters of the star-finite modification @xmath . In order to support the
tangibility and the strength of Bourbaki-completeness and the
Bourbaki-Cauchy filters, we study the following interesting problem.

Consider the point-finite modification @xmath of the uniform space
@xmath , that is, the admissible uniformity on @xmath having as base all
the point-finite covers from @xmath ( [ 59 ] ).

###### Definition.

A cover @xmath of a set @xmath is point-finite if for every @xmath there
exists at most finitely many @xmath such that @xmath .

It is difficult to show that not every complete metric space @xmath
satisfies that @xmath is complete (where @xmath denotes the metric
uniformity). It was proved by Pelant in [ 82 ] that the Banach space
@xmath of all the bounded real-valued functions @xmath over a set having
as a cardinal the first uncountable ordinal @xmath , endowed with the
norm of the supremum, is such a space. On the other hand, it is clear
that @xmath so every Bourbaki-complete uniform space @xmath satisfies
that @xmath is complete but the reverse implication is not true. Indeed,
any separable infinite-dimensional Banach space, as @xmath , is a
counterexample, as every separable uniform space @xmath has a
point-finite base for its uniformity, that is @xmath (see [ 95 ] ).

By all the foregoing, we ask if we can proceed backwards as we have done
with Bourbaki-completeness in order to prove that @xmath is complete if
and only if the closure of every totally bounded set in @xmath is
compact. However this does not work as we will see in Theorem 1.3.18 : a
subset @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is totally bounded if and only
if every point-finite uniform cover of @xmath contains a finite subcover
of @xmath . Therefore, we cannot characterize the completeness of @xmath
trough its totally bounded subsets. This is different to what happens to
the completeness of @xmath , since, as we have previously said, the
totally bounded sets of @xmath are exactly the Bourbaki-bounded subsets
of @xmath (see Theorem 1.2.5 , Theorem 1.3.8 and Theorem 1.2.11 ).

In addition, we will study subspaces, products and hyperspaces of
Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces (Subsection 1.2.4),
Bourbaki-completeness of the fine uniform space @xmath (Subsection
1.2.3), sequential Bourbaki-completeness and Bourbaki-complete metric
spaces (Subsection 1.3.1), as well as, we will give many examples and
counterexamples regarding the behavior of the star-finite modification
and the point-finite modification (Subsections 1.3.1 and 1.3.1). Other
classical problems, as finding families of real-valued functions
characterizing Bourbaki-completeness (see [ 10 ] ), and metrization by a
Bourbaki-complete metric, are considered, respectively, in Part 3 and
Part 2 of the thesis. We must notice here that different versions of the
Cantor’s theorem for Bourbaki-complete metric spaces can be found in [
39 ] . We have not included here these results by practical reasons.
Moreover, unexpected results relating Bourbaki-complete metric spaces
and metric spaces satisfying that the family of all the real-valued
uniformly continuous functions is a ring, are published in [ 15 ] . We
have not included these results either because they are somehow out of
the topic.

#### Cofinally Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces

In parallel, we study another completeness like-property called
cofinally Bourbaki-completeness . The reason to study this property was
motivated by Beer’s paper [ 10 ] were a long-standing property of metric
and uniform spaces, called cofinal completeness , is studied in the
frame of metric spaces.

###### Definition.

A filter @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is a cofinally Cauchy filter
if for every @xmath there is some @xmath such that @xmath , for every
@xmath

###### Definition.

A uniform space @xmath is cofinal complete if every cofinal Cauchy
filter clusters.

Cofinal completeness is a property stronger than usual completeness (
every Cauchy filter is cofinal Cauchy ) and was first implicitly
considered by Corson in 1958 in [ 24 ] , in order to express the
property of paracompactness for uniform spaces. Precisely, he proved
that a a Tychonoff space is paracompact if and only if the space @xmath
endowed with the fine uniformity @xmath is cofinally complete. Moreover,
he gave these cofinal Cauchy filters the name of weakly Cauchy . On the
other hand, the term “cofinal completeness” appeared in 1971 in Howes’s
paper [ 52 ] , where it is defined, equivalently, by nets.

Independently, in 1978, Rice ( [ 86 ] ) introduced the property of
uniform paracompactness which is one of the possible extension of
paracompactness to the frame of uniform spaces.

###### Definition.

A uniform space @xmath is uniformly paracompact is every open cover
@xmath has an open refinement @xmath which is uniformly locally finite ,
that is, there exists some @xmath such that every @xmath meets at most
finitely many @xmath .

The reviewer of Rice’s paper (see [ 92 ] ) observed the following
important equivalence (see also [ 53 ] ).

###### Theorem.

A uniform space @xmath is cofinally complete if and only if it is
uniformly paracompact.

Then, it is clear that the previous result by Corson can be obtained as
a corollary of the above result.

The basic bibliography on cofinal completeness is Howes’s book [ 53 ]
and Beer’s paper [ 10 ] . Other possible uniform extensions of
paracompactness which are weaker than Rice’s definition can be found in
[ 74 ] . However, here we will only consider Rice’s notion.

###### Definition.

A filter @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy
in @xmath if for every uniform cover @xmath there is some @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition.

A uniform space @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete if every cofinally
Bourbaki-Cauchy filter clusters.

Since every Bourbaki-Cauchy filter is cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy and
every cofinally Cauchy filter is also cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy then
every cofinally Bourbaki-complete uniform space is Bourbaki-complete and
cofinally complete (see Subsection 2.2.2 in order to see that cofinal
completeness together with Bourbaki-completeness does not implies
cofinal Bourbaki-completeness .)

Cofinal completeness and cofinal Bourbaki-completeness have the
characteristic of transforming local properties of uniform spaces into
uniform local properties. More precisely we have the next result.

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 1.2.19 ) For a uniform space @xmath the following properties
are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is uniformly locally compact;

2.  @xmath is cofinally complete and locally totally bounded;

3.  @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete and locally Bourbaki-bounded.

Observe that the equivalence between @xmath and @xmath was noticed in [
86 ] and fully proved in [ 28 ] .

As cofinal completeness is equivalent to uniform paracompactness, as we
have previously said, we wonder if cofinal Bourbaki-completeness is
equivalent to some kind of uniform paracompactness property. The answer
will be done by means of the so called strong paracompactness .

###### Definition.

A Tychonoff space is strongly paracompact if every open cover has an
open star-finite refinement.

It is clear that every strongly paracompact space is paracompact . To
give an example of a paracompact space which is not strongly paracompact
we can take into account the result of Morita [ 71 ] that states that a
connected paracompact space @xmath is strongly paracompact if and only
if it is Lindelöf .

The property of strong paracompactness was extended to a uniform
property by Hohti [ 49 , 6.1] . He called it uniform hypocompactness .

###### Definition.

A uniform space @xmath is uniformly strongly paracompact if every open
cover @xmath has a uniformly star-finite open refinement, where a cover
@xmath is uniformly star-finite if there exists @xmath such that for
every @xmath , @xmath meets at most finitely many @xmath .

It turns out that, uniform strong paracompactness of a uniform space is
equivalent to cofinal Bourbaki-completeness (Theorem 1.2.28 ). This is
mainly proved in [ 39 ] and [ 40 ] for metric spaces and uniform spaces
(using nets), respectively. However, here we prove it considering again
the star-finite modification of a uniform space. This can be summarized
by the following two results.

###### Lemma.

(Theorem 1.2.10 ) Let @xmath be a uniform space. Then @xmath is a
cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy filter of @xmath if and only if it is a
cofinally Cauchy filter of @xmath .

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 1.2.28 ) Let @xmath be a uniform space. The following
statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete;

2.  @xmath is cofinally complete and @xmath ;

3.  @xmath is uniformly paracompact and @xmath ;

4.  @xmath is uniformly strongly paracompact.

As corollary we have a result parallel to Corson’s one. Namely, a
Tychonoff space @xmath is strongly paracompact if and only if @xmath is
cofinally Bourbaki-complete (Theoreom 1.2.30 )

Moreover, the above theorem give us the additional information that
every uniformly strongly paracompact uniform space has a base of
star-finite uniform covers, that is, @xmath . This is not necessarily
satisfied by Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces (see Example 1.3.19 .)

Similarly to Bourbaki-completeness, we will study subspaces, products,
hyperspaces of confinally Bourbaki-uniform spaces (Subsection 1.2.4),
sequential cofinal Bourbaki-completeness and cofinally Bourbaki-complete
metric spaces (Subsection 1.3.3). For additional characterizations of
cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric spaces in terms of functionals see [
39 , Theorem 28] or [ 1 ] . In addition, we will also give several
examples and counterexamples (Subsections 1.2.2 and 2.2.2). The problem
of metrization by a cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric will be studied
later, in Part 2.

#### Embeddings of Bourbaki-complete spaces and metrization results

To find a suitable embedding @xmath of any Bourbaki-complete space into
some “universal” Bourbaki-complete space is of great help. In fact, this
is done in [ 51 ] in order to characterize those spaces which are
metrizable by a Bourbaki-complete metric. Precisely, it is proved that a
metrizable space is metrizable by a Bourbaki-complete metric if and only
if it is homeomorphic to a closed subspace of @xmath for some discrete
space @xmath .

From this result we can deduce that not every completely metrizable
space , that is, a space metrizable by a complete metric, is metrizable
by a Bourbaki-complete metric. Indeed, recall the following class of
spaces and its characterization.

###### Definition.

A Tychonoff space is strongly metrizable if it has a base of the
topology which consists of the members from countably many star-finite
open covers.

###### Theorem.

(see [ 80 , Proposition 3.23 and notes p. 110] ) A Tychonoff space is
strongly metrizable if and only if it is homeomorphic to a subspace of
@xmath for some discrete space @xmath .

By the above result it is clear that every Bourbaki-complete metric
space is strongly metrizable . Moreover, there is a result by Wiscamb [
98 ] that states that a connected Tychonoff space is strongly metrizable
if and only if it is Lindelöf . Therefore, not every metrizable space is
strongly metrizable and hence, not every completely metrizable space is
Bourbaki-completely metrizable . Thus, complete metrizability and
Bourbaki-complete metrizability are not equivalent topological
properties.

The following result summarizes some of the characterizations of
Bourbaki-completely metrizable spaces that can be found in Theorem 2.2.8
(see also [ 51 , Theorem 3.6, Theorem 4.6 and Corollary 4.7] ).

###### Theorem.

For a metrizable space @xmath the following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is metrizable by a Bourbaki-complete metric;

2.  @xmath is metrizable by complete metric such that the induced metric
    uniformity has a star-finite base;

3.  @xmath is completely metrizable and strongly metrizable;

4.  @xmath is homeomorphic to a closed subspace of @xmath for some
    discrete space @xmath ;

5.  @xmath is homeomorphic to a closed subspace of a countable product
    of locally compact metric spaces.

From the previous theorem we will provide a new characterization of the
strongly metrizable spaces (see Theorem 2.2.10 and [ 8 ] for additional
characterizations).

###### Theorem.

A metrizable space @xmath is strongly metrizable if and only if it is
metrizable by a metric @xmath satisfying that every Bourbaki-bounded
subset of @xmath is totally bounded.

The way to prove the above results in [ 51 ] was trough a Čech-complete
like property called strong Čech-completeness . This was motivated by [
39 , Theorem 23] . Moreover, in [ 51 ] Bourbaki-complete metrizable
spaces are characterized as those spaces which are metrizable by a
complete star-finite metric . By a star-finite metric we mean a metric
satisfying that for every @xmath the family of open balls @xmath is
star-finite (see [ 8 ] ). In [ 51 , Theorem 4.3] an easy contruction of
such a metric, compatible with the euclidean topology, is given for the
real line @xmath .

Here, instead of following [ 51 ] , we proceed by defining an embedding
@xmath for any Bourbaki-complete metric space, with the additional
property that @xmath must be uniformly continuous. More precisely, the
following theorem will be proved.

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 2.1.13 ) Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-complete metric space. Then,
there exists an embedding

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where each @xmath is a cardinal endowed with the uniformly discrete
metric, @xmath denotes the usual product metric, @xmath is uniformly
continuous and @xmath is a closed subspace of @xmath

We require the uniform continuity in the above theorem since we will
need it for several results of Part 3. On the other hand, it is
certainly stronger than the topological results in [ 51 ] . In fact, in
order to prove it, we need first an embedding result for complete metric
spaces having a star-finite base for the metric uniformity (Theorem
2.1.2 ). And then that there is an admissible metric @xmath on @xmath
such that @xmath is complete, the metric uniformity @xmath has a
star-finite base and the identity map @xmath is uniformly continuous
(see Theorem 2.1.12 ), even if not every Bourbaki-complete metric space
@xmath has a star-finite base for its uniformity.

We will also similarly prove an embedding theorem for Bourbaki-complete
uniform spaces (see, in addition, Theorem 2.1.4 ).

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 2.1.5 ) Let @xmath be Bourbaki-complete uniform space. Then
there exist an embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each @xmath is a cardinal endowed with the uniformly discrete
metric, @xmath denotes the usual product uniformity, @xmath , @xmath is
uniformly continuous and @xmath is a closed subspace of @xmath

From the above result we can characterize the class of all the Tychonoff
spaces that are uniformizable by a Bourbaki-complete uniformity (Theorem
2.2.13 ). This coincides exactly with the @xmath - complete spaces of
García-Máynez [ 30 ] , that is, those Tychonoff spaces @xmath satisfying
that @xmath is complete where @xmath denotes the star-finite
modification of the fine uniformity @xmath .

#### Metrization by a cofinally complete and Bourbaki-complete metric or
by a cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric.

After having studied the metrization of a space by a Bourbaki-complete
metric, we consider the problem of metrization by a cofinally
Bourbaki-complete metric. This problem, of course is strictly related to
the problem of metrization by a cofinally complete metric that was
solved by Romaguera in [ 87 ] .

###### Theorem.

A metrizable space @xmath is metrizable by a cofinally complete metric
if and only if @xmath is a compact subset, where @xmath denotes the
subset of @xmath of all the points of non local compactness, that is,
those points no having a locally compact neighborhood in @xmath .

In [ 39 ] (see Theorem 2.2.23 , see also [ 39 , Theorem 34] for
additional characterizations and [ 62 ] for further considerations) we
characterize those metric spaces that are metrizable by a cofinally
Bourbaki-complete metric, applying the above result of Romaguera.

###### Theorem.

A space @xmath is metrizable by a cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric if
and only if it is strongly paracompact and @xmath is compact.

Related to this problem, we ask which spaces are those being metrizable
by a metric which is Bourbaki-complete metric and cofinally complete at
the same time. At first, one can think that it is the same than being
metrizable by a metric which is cofinally Bourbaki-complete. However, it
is topologically weaker. Indeed, we prove the following result (Theorem
2.2.22 ).

###### Theorem.

A metrizable space @xmath is metrizable by a metric @xmath which is at
the same time Bourbaki-complete and cofinally complete if and only if
@xmath is strongly metrizable and @xmath is compact.

Moreover, by the help of these results, we are capable of giving an
example of a metric space cofinally complete and Bourbaki-complete at
the same time which is not metrizable by a cofinally Bourbaki-complete
metric. (Example 2.2.24 ).

The above problem is also related to the uniform problem that we explain
next.

Recall that, Zarelua in [ 100 , Lemma 5] proved that a metrizable is
strongly metrizable if and only if it is completely paracompact , where
completely paracompact is defined as follows.

###### Definition.

A Tychonoff space @xmath is completely paracompact if every open cover
@xmath has an open refinement @xmath which is a subcollection of a
family of sets @xmath where each @xmath is an open star-finite cover of
@xmath .

It is known that every strongly paracompact space is completely
paracompact , that every completely paracompact space is paracompact ,
and that all these three topological properties are different (see, for
instance, [ 80 ] ). Therefore, complete paracompactness is a property
that lies between strong paracompactness and paracompactness, so it is
natural to ask if there exists a uniform version of complete
paracompactness lying between uniform strong paracompactness and uniform
paracompactness, that satisfies in addition a Corson’s like-theorem: a
Tychonoff space @xmath is completely paracompact if and only if @xmath
is uniformly completely paracompact (Theorem 2.2.17 ). Therefore, we
propose the next definition of uniform complete paracompactness.

###### Definition.

A uniform space @xmath is uniformly completely paracompact if it is
cofinally complete (equivalently uniformly paracompact) and every open
uniform cover has a @xmath -star-finite uniform open refinement, where
by @xmath -star-finite open cover we mean a cover @xmath which is a
subcollection of a family of sets @xmath where each @xmath is an open
star-finite cover of @xmath .

Observe that the above definition is not stated only in terms of covers,
distinctly to uniform paracompactness or uniform strong paracompactness.
Therefore, it is open the question of giving such a kind of definition.
However, we think that the above definition is not so bad, since a
uniform space is uniformly strongly paracompact if and only if it is
cofinally complete and every uniform open cover has a star-finite
uniform (open) refinement, equivalently the uniformity, has a
star-finite base (Theorem 1.2.28 ). The difference is that we do not
know if the family of all the uniform @xmath -star-finite open covers
from a uniform space is a base for some compatible uniformity on the
space. However, we know that in the particular case of completely
paracompact fine spaces (Theorem 2.2.17 ) or uniform spaces having a
countable base for its uniformity (Theorem 2.2.18 ), the family of all
the uniform @xmath -star-finite open covers from a uniform space is a
base for a compatible uniformity on theses spaces.

It turns out that a metrizable space @xmath is metrizable by a metric
whose uniformity is uniformly completely paracompact if and only if
@xmath is strongly metrizable and @xmath is compact, that is, if and
only if @xmath is metrizable by a metric which is cofinally complete and
Bourbaki-complete at the same time (see Theorem 2.2.22 ). However, even
if the two problems studied in this result are topologically equivalent,
we know that they are not uniformly equivalent. Indeed, Example 2.2.24
shows a uniformly completely paracompact metric space which is not
Bourbaki-complete nor cofinally complete.

#### Samuel realcompact spaces and Katětov-Shirota-type Theorem

One of the main results of this part of the thesis is the
characterization of those uniform spaces @xmath which are complete when
they are endowed with the weak uniformity @xmath induced by all the
real-valued uniformly continuous functions @xmath on @xmath ( [ 58 ] ).

Recall the following definitions.

###### Definition.

A Tychonoff space @xmath is realcompact if it is homeomorphic to a
closed subspace of a product of real-lines @xmath . A
realcompactification of a Tychonoff space @xmath is a realcompact space
@xmath in which @xmath is densely embedded.

We will call the completion of @xmath , the Samuel realcompactification
of @xmath (Theorem 3.1.2 ).

The name of Samuel comes by several resemblances with the Samuel
compactification @xmath of @xmath . Recall that the Samuel
compactification is defined as the completion of @xmath , where @xmath
denotes the weak uniformity on @xmath induced by all the bounded
real-valued uniformly continuous functions @xmath .

Precisely, as well as the Samuel compactification is the smallest
realcompactification and compactification of @xmath , in the natural
order of realcompactifiactions ( [ 26 ] ), such that every bounded
real-valeud uniformly continuous function on @xmath can be continuously
extended to it, the Samuel realcompactification is the smallest
realcompactification of @xmath such that every real-valued uniformly
continuous function on @xmath can be continuously extended to it.

Moreover, as well as every compactification of a Tychonoff space @xmath
is the Samuel compatification for some compatible uniformity on @xmath ,
the same works for realcompactifications, that is, every
realcompactification of @xmath is the Samuel realcompactification for
some compatible uniformity on @xmath (Theorem 3.1.9 ). For instance, the
well-known Hewitt realcompactification @xmath of a Tychonoff space
@xmath , induced by the family of real-valued continuous functions
@xmath , is the Samuel realcompactification of @xmath , since for the
fine unifomity @xmath , @xmath .

We will denote by @xmath the Samuel realcompactification because it is
exactly the set of all the real unital lattice homomorphisms on @xmath .

###### Definition.

A uniform space @xmath is Samuel realcompact if @xmath is complete.

Our result characterizing Samuel realcompact spaces is very near to the
classical Katětov-Shirota Theorem, which relates realcompactness to
topological completeness. Recall that a Tychonoff space is topologically
complete if and only if @xmath is complete.

###### Theorem.

( Katětov-Shirota Theorem , [ 89 ] , [ 63 ] ) Let @xmath be a Tychonoff
space, then @xmath is realcompact if and only it is topologically
complete and there is no closed discrete subspace of Ulam-measurable
cardinal.

The importance of the Katětov-Shirota Theorem lies on the fact that the
class of topological complete spaces satisfying that there is no closed
discrete subspace having Ulam-measurable cardinal is “wide enough”. This
“wideness” is given by the “huge size” of Ulam-measurable cardinals and
by the fact that the existence of Ulam-measurable cardinals is not
provable in ZFC (equivalently, assuming that ZFC is consistent, ZFC+“
there is no Ulam-measurable cardinal” is consistent). Indeed, there is
an old result by Tarski and Ulam ( [ 94 ] ) saying that the least
Ulam-measurable cardinal is strongly inaccessible . This implies that
starting from @xmath , any cardinal that we can obtain by usual
arithmetic of cardinals, that is, by addition, multiplication,
exponentiation, formation of suprema, and by the passage from one of
these cardinals obtained to its immediate successor or to any smaller
cardinal will be always smaller than the least Ulam-measurable cardinal
( [ 43 ] ).

###### Definition.

A filter @xmath on a set @xmath satisfies the countable intersection
property if for every countable family @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition.

An infinite cardinal @xmath is Ulam-measurable if in any set of cardinal
@xmath there is a free (non-principal) ultrafilter satisfying the
countable intersection property.

The above definition of Ulam-measurable cardinal is not the original one
( [ 43 ] ). In fact, the concept of Ulam-measurable cardinal was
motivated by the measure problem (as its name tell us) of knowing it
there exist certain non-trivial measures on any set ( [ 61 ] ). In
particular, what is telling the above definition is that a discrete
space is realcompact if and only if it does not have Ulam-measurable
cardinal . This result was not evident at first and it was proved by
Mackey in [ 68 ] (see also [ 43 ] ).

The following result is our characterization of the Samuel realcompact
spaces. This is parallel to the classical Katětov-Shirota result, but
the roll of topological completeness is now played by
Bourbaki-completeness and, instead of closed discrete subspaces, we
consider uniform partitions, that is, partitions of the space that are
refined by some uniform cover.

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 3.1.23 , Katětov-Shirota-type Theorem ) A uniform space @xmath
is Samuel realcompact if and only if it is Bourbaki-complete and there
is no uniform partition having Ulam-measurable cardinal.

The above theorem was originally proved in [ 41 ] , [ 42 ] and [ 56 ] .
However, the proof that we present here is different and it strongly
depends on the embeddings of the previous part of the thesis.

Next, if we apply our Katětov-Shirota-type Theorem to the fine
uniformity @xmath on a space @xmath then we get a characterization of
realcompactness in terms of the property of @xmath -completeness, which
is stronger than topological completeness.

###### Corollary.

(Theorem 3.1.26 ) A Tychonoff space @xmath is realcompact if and only if
@xmath is @xmath -complete and there is no open partition of @xmath
having Ulam-measurable cardinal.

We must notice here that there is a characterization of Samuel
realcompact uniform space due to Rice and Reynolds [ 85 ] . More
precisely, their result is the following.

###### Theorem.

( [ 85 , Corollary 2.5] ) Let @xmath be a uniform space. Then the space
@xmath is complete if and only if @xmath is complete and there is no
uniform cover in @xmath of Ulam-measurable cardinal.

Since we already know that completeness of @xmath is equivalent to Bour-
baki-completeness of @xmath , one can think that our result
characterizing Samuel realcompactness can be derived from the above
result of Rice and Reynolds. However, the proofs that we gave in [ 41 ]
and [ 42 ] strongly depend on Bourbaki-Cauchy filters, while the proof
of Rice and Reynolds strongly depends on a previous result [ 85 ,
Theorem 1.1] regarding uniform covers with a point-finite uniform
refinement.

Moreover, we prove our Katětov-Shirota-type Theorem after having proved
Theorem 3.1.22 (see next result) that characterizes exactly those
uniform spaces having no uniform partition of Ulam-measurable cardinal.
This family of spaces do not coincide in general with the family of
uniform spaces having no uniform cover of Ulam-measurable cardinal.
However, for uniform spaces having a star-finite base for the
uniformity, it is equivalent to have no uniform partition of
Ulam-measurable cardinal than to have no uniform cover of
Ulam-measurable cardinal.

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 3.1.22 ) Let @xmath be a uniform space. The following
statements are equivalent:

1.   every uniform partition of @xmath has no Ulam-measurable cardinal;

2.   the completion of @xmath is realcompact;

3.   every uniform cover of @xmath ha no Ulam-measurable cardinal;

4.   every uniform partition of @xmath has no Ulam-measurable cardinal;

Finally, as an application of the previous result, we characterize the
Samuel realcompactification of a uniform space @xmath , and the Samuel
realcompact uniform spaces, using the modification @xmath and @xmath
(see Theorem 3.1.27 and Theorem 3.1.28 ).

#### Relating the Samuel and the Hewitt realcompactification

The results of the last section of the thesis are motivated by the
following problem: to characterize those uniform spaces such that their
Samuel realcompactification and their Hewitt realcompactification are
equivalent, independently of the cardinality of their uniform partitions
.

Therefore, the first problem that we study is (Theorem 3.2.2 ) if every
metric space @xmath satisfying that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
realcompactifications is Bourbaki-complete. Observe that this question
is clearly false is the frame of uniform spaces. Indeed, the ordinal
space of all the countable ordinals @xmath is a counterexample.

In order to solve this problem we characterize Bourbaki-completeness of
a metric space @xmath by means of the subalgebra of all the
Cauchy-continuous functions @xmath over @xmath . More precisely, we have
the following result.

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 3.2.1 ) A metric space @xmath is Bourbaki-complete if and only
if @xmath .

Finally, from the above theorem we get the desired result.

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 3.2.2 ) Let @xmath be a metric space. If @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent realcompactifications, then @xmath is Bourbaki-complete.

The next problem that we consider, is the converse to the previous one,
that is if every Bourbaki-complete metric space or Bourbaki-complete
uniform space satisfies that its Samuel realcompactification and its
Hewitt realcompactification are equivalent. One can argue that, since
Ulam-measurable cardinals are “wide enough”, as we have previously
explained, by the Katětov-Shirota Type Theorem 3.1.23 , it is enough to
consider the Samuel realcompact spaces. Indeed, it is clear that Samuel
realcompact spaces satisfies that both realcompactifications are
equivalent as they are homeomorphic to the original space. However, we
believe that it is not enough to stop at the level of non
Ulam-measurable cardinals, mainly by the following fact: every UC space
(in particular, every uniformly discrete space), independently of its
cardinal, satisfies that the Samuel realcompactification and the Hewitt
realcompactifications are equivalent . Indeed, recall that the UC spaces
are exactly those uniform spaces satisfying that every continuous
real-valued function is uniformly continuous function and the in the
frame of metric spaces every UC space is Bourbaki-complete (see [ 39 ]
). However, there are UC spaces which are not necessarily complete as,
again, the ordinal space of all countable ordinals @xmath .

By all the foregoing, in Theorem 3.2.12 , we have characterized a class
of Bourbaki-complete metric spaces (non necessarily being UC spaces),
having uniform partitions with Ulam-measurable cardinal and satisfying
that both realcompactifications are equivalent. The result is as
follows.

Given @xmath , we can choose representative points @xmath , @xmath such
that there is a partition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath where for each @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is a
uniform partition of @xmath as the cover @xmath refines it. The family
@xmath is called the family of the chainable components induced by
@xmath .

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 3.2.12 ) Let @xmath be a Bourbaki metric space and @xmath be
the family of all the chainable components induced by the cover of open
balls @xmath . Suppose that for some @xmath , for every @xmath and for
every @xmath , the subfamily of chainable components @xmath does not
have Ulam-measurable cardinal. Then @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
realcompactifications.

Observe that in order to prove the above theorem we have applied the
results on embeddings of the previous part of the thesis and we have
also proved the following two results on products and subspaces.

###### Theorem.

(Corollary 3.2.7 ) If @xmath is a Samuel realcompact metric space and
@xmath is a uniformly discrete metric space, then the Samuel
realcompactification of @xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath .

###### Lemma.

(Lemma 3.2.10 ) Let @xmath be a metric space satisfying that @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent realcompactifications. Let @xmath be a metric
space such that there exists an embedding @xmath satisfying that @xmath
is uniformly continuous and @xmath is a closed subspace of @xmath . Then
@xmath and @xmath are also equivalent realcompactifications. In
particular, that @xmath and @xmath are homeomorphic
realcompactifications is a property inherited by closed subspaces.

We would like to know if the above results can be extended to uniform
spaces. However, it is not very difficult to find an example of
Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces satisfying not so “bad conditions” in
the cardinality of its uniform partitions and such that its Samuel
realcompactification and its Hewitt realcompactification are not
equivalent. It is exactly, the product space @xmath where @xmath is a
uniformly discrete space of Ulam-measurable cardinal (see Example 3.2.13
). The reason is that to compare the Samuel realcompactification of the
uniform space with its Hewitt realcompactification, is too restrictive.
We should consider the @xmath -closure of the space in its Samuel
compactification, instead of the Hewitt realcompactification.

The @xmath -closure of a uniform space in its Samuel compactification is
a realcompactification of the space. It is exactly the smallest
realcompactifiation @xmath of @xmath such that not only every the
real-valued uniformly continuous functions, but also all the inverse
functions @xmath where @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath , can be
continuously extended. Therefore, for a uniform space @xmath the
following two facts are equivalent:

1.  @xmath and @xmath are equivalent realcompacitifcations;

2.   given a uniformly continuous function @xmath which is in addition
    non-vanishing, its inverse @xmath can be continuously extended to
    the Samuel realcompactification @xmath of @xmath .

Observe that for any metric space @xmath coincides with @xmath (see
Theorem 3.2.19 ) so in the case of metric spaces we do not have a new
problem.

On the other hand, we think that the above question could help to know
which functions belong to the subalgebras @xmath of all the real-valued
that can be continuously extended to the Samuel realcompactification of
@xmath . In fact, we would like to know if, in the frame of
Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces, the inverse function @xmath of every
non-vanishing real-valued uniformly continuous can be continuously
extended to its Samuel realcompactification.

Observe that we do know much about the subalgebra @xmath . Just that it
is the subalgebra of all the Cauchy-continuous functions any of the two
modifications @xmath and @xmath (see Theorem 3.1.5 and Theorem 3.1.27 ).
Besides, this kind of characterization does not clarify very much our
questions above.

Finally, with the help of the following two theorems we prove that the
above counterexample @xmath , satisfies that @xmath is equivalent to
@xmath .

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 3.2.5 ) Let @xmath be a Samuel realcompact space and @xmath any
uniform space. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem.

(Theorem 3.2.22 ) Let @xmath be a Samuel realcompact space and @xmath
any uniform space. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, we still do not have a counterexample of Bourbaki-complete
uniform or metric space satisfying that the considered
realcompactifications are not equivalent. This counterexample would be
very useful in order to clarify the problem. A candidate is the
uniformly 0-dimensional space @xmath where @xmath is a uniformly
discrete space having the cardinal not only Ulam-measurable, but also
@xmath -strongly compact .

## Chapter 1 Bourbaki-complete spaces and related properties

### 1.1 Preliminaries on uniformities and boundedness in uniform spaces

#### 1.1.1 Completeness and different modifications of a uniform space

Even though, at first, this thesis was intended to live in the framework
of metric spaces, it is clear by its subject, that we need to work in
the more general setting of uniform spaces. Here we always consider
Hausdorff uniform spaces , defined by means of families of covers of a
set, instead of entourages or pseudometrics. Thus, we are working with
Tychonoff spaces since these are the uniformizable ones [ 97 ] . From
now on, by “space” we mean always “Tychonoff space”.

For instance, any metric space @xmath is a uniform space. In fact a base
for the uniformity is given by the covers of the open balls for a fixed
radius @xmath , that is, @xmath . We will denote by @xmath the
uniformity induced by the metric @xmath .

Moreover, the following notation will be used along the whole thesis.
Given a set @xmath , @xmath a cover of @xmath and @xmath , we write:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath

-   @xmath , @xmath

-   @xmath

Every cover @xmath of a set @xmath induces a partition of @xmath in the
following way. We can choose representative points @xmath , @xmath of
@xmath such that @xmath is a cover of @xmath and @xmath whenever @xmath
. The family of sets @xmath is called the family of all the chainable
components of @xmath induced by @xmath .

The main subjects of this thesis deal with completeness-like properties
of uniform spaces. By this reason we assume that the theory about
complete uniform spaces is known. Nevertheless, we will recall some
facts about it along the discourse. The main references on uniform
spaces that we follow are [ 97 ] , [ 53 ] , [ 19 ] , [ 59 ] , and [ 44 ]
.

###### Definition 1.1.1.

A filter @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is a Cauchy filter if for
every @xmath there is @xmath such that @xmath for some @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.2.

A uniform space @xmath is complete if every Cauchy filter clusters
(equivalently, converges).

Moreover, we recommend the references [ 10 ] , [ 52 ] and [ 53 ] to
learn about cofinally complete uniform spaces.

###### Definition 1.1.3.

A filter @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is a cofinally Cauchy filter
if for every @xmath there is some @xmath such that @xmath for every
@xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.4.

A uniform space @xmath is cofinally complete if every cofinal Cauchy
filter clusters.

In particular, the following implications are clear:

compact

@xmath

cofinally complete

@xmath

complete

Later, we will see counterexamples of the reverses of the above
implications.

We say that a uniformity @xmath on a Tychonoff space @xmath is
compatible whenever @xmath induces the same topology than the topology
of @xmath . Given two compatible uniformities @xmath and @xmath on a
space @xmath we will write @xmath whenever the identity map @xmath is
uniformly continuous, or equivalently, if @xmath . Moreover @xmath if
and only if @xmath and @xmath .

Next, observe that for two compatible uniformities @xmath and @xmath on
a Tychonoff space @xmath , their respective completions @xmath and
@xmath can be topologically homeomorphic even if @xmath and @xmath are
not equivalent uniformities. More precisely recall the following
definition ( [ 18 ] ).

###### Definition 1.1.5.

A map @xmath between two uniform spaces is Cauchy-continuous if it sends
Cauchy filters of @xmath to Cauchy filters of @xmath .

It is clear that every uniformly continuous map is Cauchy-continuous and
that every Cauchy-continuous map is continuous ( [ 25 ] ). In
particular, we will use frequently the following fact:

Let @xmath and @xmath , be the identity maps. Then, if both maps are
Cauchy-continuous then the completions @xmath and @xmath are
topologically homeomorphic. Observe that the converse is also true, that
is, if there exists an homeomorphic map @xmath , leaving @xmath
point-wise fixed, then the restriction map @xmath is an homeomorphism
satisfying that @xmath and its inverse @xmath are Cauchy-continuous.

In the family @xmath of all the compatible uniformities over @xmath the
above relation @xmath is a partial order, and there exists a supremum of
@xmath . This is exactly the finest uniformity compatible with the
topology of @xmath . We call it the fine uniformity and we denote it by
@xmath . It is exactly the uniformity over @xmath having as a subbase
the family of covers belonging to @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.6.

A sequence of open covers @xmath of a space @xmath is a normal sequence
if for every @xmath , @xmath refines @xmath . An open cover @xmath of a
space @xmath is a normal cover if there is a normal sequence such that
@xmath . (Thus every cover in a normal sequence is a normal cover)

By the axioms of uniformity it is clear that the fine uniformity u on a
space @xmath is exactly the uniformity having as a base the open normal
covers of @xmath ( [ 97 ] ).

Moreover, it is very useful to known that a base for the fine uniformity
@xmath is given by all the locally finite cozero covers from @xmath [ 86
] . A cozero is a set @xmath such that for some real-valued continuous
function @xmath , @xmath . On the other hand, locally finite covers are
defined as follows.

###### Definition 1.1.7.

A cover @xmath of a topological space @xmath is locally finite ( locally
countable ) if for every @xmath there exists a neighborhood @xmath of
@xmath such that @xmath meets only finitely (countably) many elements of
@xmath .

Recall that locally finite covers characterize the property of
paracompactness.

###### Definition 1.1.8.

A space @xmath is paracompact if every open cover has a locally finite
open refinement.

In particular, the fine uniformity u on a paracompact space @xmath has
as a base the family of all the open covers of the space by the
following well-known result.

###### Lemma 1.1.9.

( [ 72 ] ) Let @xmath be an open cover of a paracompact space @xmath .
Then, there exists a cover @xmath of @xmath such that, for each @xmath ,
the set @xmath is a cozero set contained in @xmath .

Recall that for the fine uniformity @xmath , paracompactness and the
above defined property of cofinal completeness are related by the
following result of Corson.

###### Theorem 1.1.10.

( [ 24 ] ) A space @xmath is paracompact if and only if @xmath is
cofinally complete.

###### Definition 1.1.11.

A uniform space @xmath is fine if @xmath .

A nice characterization of fine spaces in terms of maps is given by the
following result.

###### Theorem 1.1.12.

( [ 25 ] ) A uniform space @xmath is fine if and only if every
continuous map @xmath is uniformly continuous for every uniform space
@xmath .

Examples of fine uniform spaces are compact spaces and, in general,
spaces that are uniformizable by a unique uniformity as the the space of
all the countable ordinals @xmath . Moreover, every uniformly discrete
metric space is fine. By a uniformly discrete space we mean a set @xmath
endowed with the metric @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that by modification of a uniform space @xmath we mean a
uniformity @xmath compatible with the topology of @xmath having as a
base or subbase a subfamily of covers from the uniformity @xmath . Next,
we are going to consider the following modifications of a uniformity
@xmath : the finite modification @xmath , the countable modification
@xmath , the point-finite modification @xmath and the star-finite
modification @xmath . By [ 44 , Theorem 1.1] and [ 59 , Proposition 28,
Chapter IV] , these modifications have as a base, respectively, the
family of all the finite, countable, point-finite and star-finite open
covers from @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.13.

A cover @xmath of a set @xmath is point-finite ( point-countable ) if
every point of @xmath lies only on finitely (countably) many elements of
the cover.

###### Definition 1.1.14.

A cover @xmath of a set @xmath is star-finite ( star-countable ) if
every @xmath meets at most finitely (countably) many elements of @xmath
.

If @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , then we will say that the
uniformity @xmath has a finite, countable, point-finite or star-finite
base respectively. Other modifications are possible and we will
introduce later some of them (see again [ 44 ] and [ 59 ] ). Next, we
recall some useful facts about the above modifications.

@xmath The finite modification. The finite modification of a uniformity
@xmath is very important because of the Samuel compactification. Recall
that the Samuel compactification @xmath of @xmath is, topologically, the
completion of @xmath .

We will come back to the Samuel compactification in the second part on
the thesis. However, we include now several results that we will need
soon (see [ 44 ] , [ 59 ] and [ 88 ] ).

###### Lemma 1.1.15.

Let @xmath be a uniform space and @xmath denotes its completion. Then,
the Samuel compactification @xmath is exactly @xmath .

The above result states that the completion @xmath of @xmath is in
particular a topological subspace of @xmath .

It is known, that the completion of @xmath is exactly the Stone-Čech
compactification @xmath of @xmath . However, if @xmath is any uniform
space then its completion @xmath is not necessarily a (topological)
subspace of @xmath . For instance, @xmath is not a subspace of @xmath [
27 ] .

###### Lemma 1.1.16.

Let @xmath be a uniform space and @xmath a uniformity of @xmath
satisfying that @xmath then the Samuel compactification @xmath is
exactly @xmath .

###### Lemma 1.1.17.

Let @xmath be a uniform space and @xmath . Then the Samuel
compactification of @xmath is exactly the closure of @xmath in @xmath ,
that is, @xmath .

###### Lemma 1.1.18.

Let @xmath be a uniform space and @xmath subsets. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath .

@xmath The countable modification. The countable modification @xmath
will be of relevance in Part 3 of this thesis. Just observe that every
Lindelöf uniform space @xmath satisfies trivially that @xmath . Other
family of uniform spaces having a countable base for its uniformity are
uniformities induced by families of real-valued functions, as we will
see later.

@xmath The point-finite modification. Now consider the point-finite
modification @xmath . It is well-known that every countable uniform
cover has a countable uniform point-finite refinement ( [ 91 ] ).
Therefore, in general, @xmath , where by @xmath we denote the
point-finite modification of @xmath . Moreover, by a result in also, the
point-finite modification @xmath is equivalent to the uniformity having
as a base all the locally finite uniform covers from @xmath . Then, it
is clear that, for the fine uniformity, @xmath .

Recall that in 1960 Stone [ 93 ] asked if every uniform space, in
particular every metric space, has a locally finite, equivalently,
point-finite base for its uniformity. His question was motivated by the
fact that every metric space is paracompact and hence every open cover
has a locally finite refinement, and from the additional fact that
@xmath . So he wanted to extended this problem from the topological
level to the uniform level. This was answered negatively by E. Ščepin
and J. Pelant in 1975 (see [ 3 , p. 596] , [ 81 ] and see [ 4 ] and [ 5
] for additional information). We will consider later Pelant’s
couterexample @xmath .

@xmath The star-finite modification. Finally, let us take into account
the star-finite modification. In particular, we study the star-finite
modification @xmath of the fine uniformity u , since the modifications
of the fine uniformity will be of special interest.

It is easy to see that, since a base of @xmath is given by the locally
finite cozero covers of @xmath , then a base for the finite modification
@xmath and for the countable modification @xmath is given, respectively,
by the finite and countable cozero covers of @xmath (see also [ 32 ] ).
However, the proof of the same fact but for the star-finite modification
@xmath is not immediate.

###### Lemma 1.1.19.

( [ 71 ] , or [ 27 , Lemma 5.2.4] ) Every countable cozero cover of a
space @xmath has a countable star-finite cozero refinement.

###### Theorem 1.1.20.

The family of all the star-finite cozero covers of a space @xmath is a
base for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Observe that in [ 32 ] it is proved that the star-finite cozero covers
of @xmath are normal covers. On the other hand, let @xmath a star-finite
open cover belonging to @xmath . If @xmath is the family of chainable
components generated by @xmath then, for every @xmath , @xmath contains
at most countably many elements @xmath (see [ 27 ] ). Now, for every
@xmath the cover

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a countable open cover belonging to @xmath as @xmath refines @xmath .
As we have previously noticed, we can take a cozero refinement @xmath of
@xmath which is countable. More precisely, we can take @xmath being
countable and star-finite by the result of Morita, Lemma 1.1.19 .

Next, consider the cover

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, it is clear that @xmath is the desired cozero star-finite
refinement of @xmath . ∎

By Lemma 1.1.19 and the above result the next corollary is clear.

###### Corollary 1.1.21.

Let @xmath be a space and @xmath the fine uniformity on it. Then @xmath
.

###### Remark 1.1.22.

Similarly to Theorem 1.1.20 one can prove that the uniformity @xmath ,
has also a base given by all the star-countable cozero covers of @xmath
. Nevertheless, in general, for a uniform space @xmath , if we consider
the family of all the star-countable uniform covers of @xmath , then
this family is not necessarily a base for a uniformity but just for a
quasi-uniformity @xmath [ 85 , p. 368] . On the other hand, for uniform
spaces satisfying that @xmath it is clear that @xmath is a uniformity
since @xmath .

The following lemma relates the star-finite modification @xmath with the
countable modification @xmath of a connected space. We assume that this
result is known, implicitly at least, in the papers of Morita [ 71 ] and
Wiscamb [ 98 ] . We will need it several times in this thesis.

###### Lemma 1.1.23.

Let @xmath be a connected space. Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 1.1.19 it is clear that @xmath . So, conversely, let us take
@xmath a star-finite cozero cover of @xmath . We are going to show that
it is countable. Let @xmath be the family of chainable components
generated by @xmath , then, since @xmath is star-finite, for every
@xmath , @xmath contains at most countably many elements @xmath .
Moreover, it is clear that each chainable component @xmath is an open
subset of @xmath . But as @xmath is connected, we must have that @xmath
for every @xmath . But this equivalent to have that @xmath for every
@xmath , that is, there is only one chainable component in @xmath
induced by @xmath . Therefore, @xmath is a countable cover and then
@xmath . ∎

@xmath Weak uniformities. Examples of uniformities having a base of
star-finite covers can be found in [ 58 ] . For instance, we are
interested, mainly in Part 3, in the uniformities called weak
uniformities . By weak uniformity we mean a uniformity generated by a
family of real-valued functions. More precisely, given a family @xmath
of real-valued continuous functions over a space @xmath ( @xmath is
always endowed with the euclidean topology), then the covers of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are a subbase for a uniformity @xmath on @xmath which is compatible with
the topology of @xmath if and only if the family @xmath separates points
from closed sets of @xmath , that is, for every @xmath and every @xmath
closed subset such that @xmath there exists some @xmath such that @xmath
. Observe that a weak uniformity, generated by a family of continuous
real-valued functions @xmath , has a star-finite and countable base
composed by finite intersections of covers of the form @xmath for @xmath
and @xmath . In general, the countable covers @xmath of a set @xmath
satisfying that @xmath whenever @xmath are called linear covers in [ 58
] and 2- finite covers in [ 33 ] .

In the particular case of the weak uniformity @xmath , generated by the
family @xmath of all the real-valued uniformly continuous functions on
the uniform space @xmath , we have that a base of @xmath is given by
finite intersections of open linear covers from the uniformity @xmath
(see [ 58 , 1.6] ). That is, @xmath can be considered also a
modification of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.1.24.

The uniformity @xmath over the real-line @xmath induced by the usual
euclidean metric @xmath is exactly the weak uniformity @xmath . Moreover
the product uniformity @xmath over any product @xmath coincides also
with the weak uniformity @xmath .

###### Proof.

The indentity function @xmath is a uniformly continuous real-valued
function. Since for every @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath .

Now, recall that the product uniformity @xmath on @xmath is exactly the
weak uniformity generated by all the projection maps each coordinate
@xmath , @xmath . Thus, @xmath is the smallest uniformity making the
projections @xmath uniformly continuous, that is @xmath . But, by
definition of the weak uniformity @xmath satisfies that @xmath and then
@xmath . ∎

We finish this section relating all the modifications appeared until
now. For a uniform space @xmath the following relations are satisfied:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, whenever we consider the weak uniformity @xmath ,
generated by the family @xmath of all the real-valued continuous
functions over the space @xmath , then it has as a subbase all the
linear cozero covers of @xmath [ 33 ] . Precisely @xmath as @xmath
(Theorem 1.1.12 ). In particular, @xmath . However, @xmath (see [ 27 ,
Exercise 8.1.I b)] ).

Therefore, the linear covers are determinant for weak uniformities.

Next, let @xmath the family of all bounded real-valued uniformly
continuous functions on a uniform space @xmath . It is well-known that
@xmath [ 59 ] . Similarly, let @xmath denote the family of all the
bounded real-valued continuous functions over a space @xmath , then
@xmath .

#### 1.1.2 Bourbaki-bounded subsets and other bornologies

The initial project of this thesis started by studying the next notion
of Bourbaki-boundedness. This can be defined in the frame of uniform
spaces and in the particular frame of metric spaces, as a generalization
of metric boundedness.

###### Definition 1.1.25.

A subset @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset
in @xmath if for every uniform cover @xmath there exist @xmath and
finitely many @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded space if it is a
Bourbaki-bounded subset in itself.

For the definition in metric spaces we need the following notation. Let
@xmath and @xmath , then we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that, for @xmath , if @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath , then
we can choose a “chain” of points @xmath , @xmath , of “lenght” @xmath ,
such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.26.

A subset @xmath of a metric space @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset in
@xmath if for every @xmath there exist a natural number @xmath and
finitely many points @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded space if it is a
Bourbaki-bounded subset in itself.

We will denote by @xmath and @xmath the family of all the
Bourbaki-bounded subsets of a metric space @xmath and of a uniform space
@xmath , respectively. Moreover, we will denote by @xmath the family of
all the bounded subsets of a metric space, that is, those subsets @xmath
such that for some @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

It is clear that every Bourbaki-bounded subset of a metric space @xmath
is bounded by the metric @xmath , that is, @xmath , since @xmath .
Moreover, we have the following result

###### Theorem 1.1.27.

In a normed space @xmath , where @xmath is the metric induced by the
norm, every bounded subset is Bourbaki-bounded in @xmath .

###### Proof.

We need to prove only one inclusion. For every @xmath and every @xmath ,
if we take some @xmath , @xmath then @xmath . Since for every @xmath
there exists some @xmath such that @xmath , the result follows.

∎

However, Bourbaki-boundedness is invariant under uniform transformations
while metric boundedness is not. Indeed, given and unbounded metric
space @xmath the metric @xmath is bounded and uniformly equivalent to
@xmath , but not every bounded subset of @xmath is bounded in @xmath .
Therefore, @xmath and @xmath .

###### Remark 1.1.28.

Hejcman called the Bourbaki-bounded subsets of a uniform space, just
bounded . In fact, it was Hejcman the first that studied deeply
boundedness in uniform spaces in his paper [ 47 ] of 1959. This paper is
always cited as the main reference on the subject. In the same year
Atsuji [ 2 ] considered also the Bourbaki-bounded metric spaces that he
called finitely-chainable . The name of Bourbaki-bounded comes from the
book of Bourbaki where in an exercise [ 19 , II Exercise 4.7] some
properties of them are listed. Observe that Bourbaki also called these
subsets simply bounded ( borneé in the French edition). Moreover, these
subsets where already called bounded in the sense of Bourbaki in [ 96 ]

Now, recall the following definition.

###### Definition 1.1.29.

Let @xmath be a (uniform) space and @xmath a pseudometric on @xmath . We
say that @xmath is a (uniformly) continuous pseudometric of X if @xmath
is (uniformly) continuous as a mapping from the product space @xmath to
@xmath .

The following result of Hejcman is an interesting characterization of
the Bourbaki-bounded subsets.

###### Theorem 1.1.30.

( [ 47 ] ) . Let @xmath be a uniform space and @xmath a subset of @xmath
. The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset in @xmath ;

2.  @xmath is a bounded subset of @xmath for every real-valued uniformly
    continuous function @xmath ;

3.  @xmath is a bounded subset of @xmath for every uniformly continuous
    pseudometric @xmath on @xmath .

###### Corollary 1.1.31.

Let @xmath be a metric space and @xmath a subset of @xmath . The
following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset in @xmath , that is, @xmath ;

2.  @xmath is a bounded subset of @xmath , that is, @xmath for every
    uniformly equivalent metric @xmath .

Now, observe that Bourbaki-bounded subsets are a generalization of the
totally-bounded subsets .

###### Definition 1.1.32.

A subset @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is totally bounded if for
every @xmath there exist finitely many @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will denote by @xmath and @xmath , respectively, the family of all
the totally bounded subsets of a uniform space @xmath and of a metric
space @xmath . Thus, @xmath . More precisely, if @xmath is a
Bourbaki-bounded subset of @xmath such that there exists some @xmath
satisfying that for every @xmath the value @xmath (from the definition
of Bourbaki-bounded subset), depending of @xmath , is always bounded by
@xmath , then @xmath is a totally bounded subset.

However, in general, not every Bourbaki-bounded subset is totally
bounded and, even though total boundedness is invariant under uniform
homeomorphisms, it is too restrictive to be chosen as the uniform notion
of boundedness. In fact, if @xmath is an infinite-dimensional Banach
space then the closed unit ball of @xmath is not totally bounded because
otherwise it would be compact by completeness of @xmath . But this is a
contradiction of infinite-dimensionality.

There is another big difference between total boundedness and
Bourbaki-boundedness. The definition of Bourbaki-bounded subset depends
on the space of ambience. For instance, it is clear that the canonical
base @xmath of the Hilbert space of square summable sequences of real
numbers @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset of @xmath but it is not a
Bourbaki-bounded space in itself. However, if a subset @xmath is totally
bounded in some uniform space @xmath then it will be always totally
bounded in any uniform space @xmath in which @xmath is uniformly
embedded.

The above families of bounded subsets, metric bounded subsets,
Bourbaki-bounded subsets and totally bounded subsets, have in common
that all of them form different closed bornologies , that is, they are
covers of @xmath , stable under finite unions, subsets and closure [ 47
] .

There is another closed bornology that will be relevant along this
thesis. It is the bornology @xmath of all the subsets @xmath of a
topological space @xmath such that the closure of @xmath is compact,
that is, the relatively compact subsets . The relevance of this last
bornology is in the following well-known result.

###### Theorem 1.1.33.

A metric space @xmath is complete if and only if @xmath

For a uniform space @xmath and for a metric space @xmath , all the above
bornologies are related, respectively, as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, we give an example of a metric space such that all the above
bornologies are different. To that purpose, we take into account that
all these bornologies are finitely productive .

###### Example 1.1.34.

There exists a metric space @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Consider the product @xmath endowed with the product metric given by the
sum @xmath of the metric @xmath induced by the norm @xmath of @xmath and
the bounded metric @xmath where @xmath denoted the usual euclidean
metric restricted over the interval @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, by productivity, we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

\Denarius \Denarius \Denarius

### 1.2 Bourbaki-complete and cofinally Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces

#### 1.2.1 Bourbaki-boundedness by means of filters and star-finite
modification of a uniformity

Totally bounded subsets of a uniform space can be characterized by means
of Cauchy filters and cofinally Cauchy filters imitating the well-known
characterization of totally bounded subsets by Cauchy sequences and
cofinally Cauchy sequences in the metric context that we will recall
later. Indeed, the following result is satisfied.

###### Theorem 1.2.1.

Let @xmath a subset of a uniform space @xmath . The following statements
are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is totally bounded;

2.   every filter @xmath in @xmath is cofinally Cauchy;

3.   every ultrafilter @xmath in @xmath is Cauchy;

4.   every filter @xmath in @xmath is contained in some Cauchy filter
    @xmath in @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof of the equivalence of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be found
in [ 79 , Theorem 5.4] . The statement @xmath is a little bit unusual
but it comes from metric spaces (see [ 10 , Proposition 3.13] ).

@xmath . If @xmath is totally bounded and @xmath is a filter in @xmath ,
then for every @xmath there exists finitely many @xmath such that @xmath
. In particular, there is some @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath
. Assume by the contrary that for every @xmath we can take some @xmath
such that @xmath . Then @xmath . Since @xmath then @xmath which is a
contradiction as @xmath is an element of the filter @xmath .

@xmath This implication follows from the easy fact that every cofinally
Cauchy ultrafilter is a Cauchy ultrafilter by maximality. ∎

Next, we want to characterize also Bourbaki-boundedness by means of
filters. This characterization will lead us to the property of
Bourbaki-complete- ness and cofinally Bourbaki-completeness. The idea is
to imitate the characterization of total boundedness.

###### Definition 1.2.2.

A filter @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath
if for every uniform cover @xmath there is some @xmath and @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 1.2.3.

A filter @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy
in @xmath if for every uniform cover @xmath there is some @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

More precisely, we want to prove the next result.

###### Theorem 1.2.4.

Let @xmath a subset of a uniform space @xmath . The following statements
are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is Bourbaki-bounded in @xmath ;

2.   every filter @xmath in @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy in
    @xmath ;

3.   every ultrafilter @xmath in @xmath is Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath ;

4.   every filter @xmath in @xmath is contained in some filter @xmath in
    @xmath which is Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath .

In order to prove the above result, we first show that
Bourbaki-boundedness in @xmath is just total boundedness for
uniformities having a star-finite base, generalizing an old result of
Njåstad.

###### Theorem 1.2.5.

( [ 78 , Theorem 1] [ 96 , Lemma 7] ) Let @xmath a subset of a uniform
space @xmath . The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset in @xmath ;

2.  @xmath is a totally bounded subset in @xmath ;

3.   for every uniformity @xmath on @xmath such that @xmath then @xmath
    is a totally bounded subset in @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath Let @xmath being star-finite. Then, by Bourbaki-boundedness there
exist finitely many elements @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath . Since
@xmath is star-finite then, for every @xmath , there are only finitely
many @xmath such that @xmath . Therefore @xmath is totally bounded in
@xmath .

@xmath This is trivial.

@xmath Let us take @xmath . Since @xmath is totally bounded in @xmath ,
in particular it is Bourbaki-bounded. Moreover, the family of
real-valued uniformly continuous functions on @xmath is exactly @xmath ,
then @xmath is Bourbaki-bounded in @xmath by Theorem 1.1.30 . ∎

Next, we introduce a couple of lemmas that we need for the proof of
Theorem 1.2.4 and that we will use several times along this thesis.

###### Lemma 1.2.6.

Let @xmath be a uniform cover of a uniform space @xmath . Then by @xmath
we denote the cover generated by @xmath in the following way. Let @xmath
@xmath be the family of all the chainable components induced by @xmath .
For every @xmath , write @xmath , and for every @xmath , @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Put @xmath . Then @xmath is a uniform cover satisfying that @xmath if
@xmath and @xmath if @xmath . In particular, @xmath refines @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Proof.

It is clear. ∎

###### Lemma 1.2.7.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. The following statements are satisfied:

1.   A Cauchy filter of @xmath is a Bourbaki-Cauchy filter in @xmath .

2.   A Bourbaki-Cauchy ultrafilter of @xmath is a Cauchy ultrafilter in
    @xmath .

3.  @xmath is a cofinal Cauchy filter of @xmath if and only if @xmath is
    a cofinal Bourbaki-Cauchy filter of @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath Let @xmath be a Cauchy filter of @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath
the cover from Lemma 1.2.6 induced by @xmath . Since @xmath , by
hypothesis there exists some @xmath such that @xmath . But @xmath by
construction. Hence, @xmath and then @xmath for some @xmath . Thus, we
can deduce that @xmath is in fact a Bourbaki-Cauchy filter of @xmath .

@xmath Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-Cauchy ultrafilter of @xmath . Then it
is clear that @xmath is also a Bourbaki-Cauchy ultrafilter of @xmath .
Let @xmath and @xmath a star-finite uniform refinement. Then, for some
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath . But @xmath is star-finite, therefore we can
choose finitely many @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath is
an ultrafilter then for some @xmath , @xmath . Finally, since @xmath is
a refinement of @xmath , there is some @xmath such that @xmath . Then
@xmath is Cauchy in @xmath .

@xmath The proof that every cofinal Cauchy filter of @xmath is a cofinal
Bourbaki-Cauchy filter of @xmath is exactly similar to @xmath .

Next, let @xmath be a cofinal Bourbaki-Cauchy filter of @xmath . We want
to prove that it is cofinal Cauchy in @xmath . The proof is also similar
to @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath a star-finite uniform refinement.
Then, for some @xmath and @xmath , @xmath for every @xmath . But @xmath
is star-finite, therefore we can choose finitely many @xmath , @xmath
such that @xmath . In particular, for some @xmath , @xmath for every
@xmath . Otherwise, for every @xmath there is some @xmath such that
@xmath . But then @xmath is an element of the filter @xmath such that
@xmath , which is a contradiction. Hence @xmath is a cofinally Cauchy
filter of @xmath . ∎

Finally, it is clear that applying Theorem 1.2.1 , and Theorem 1.2.5 and
Lemma 1.2.7 , the proof of Theorem 1.2.4 follows at once.

On the other hand, observe that, as well as the definition of
Bourbaki-bounded subset depends on the space of ambience, the same
happens to the definition of Bourbaki-Cauchy filter. This not happens to
Cauchy filters. Note that, if we restrict the uniformity @xmath to a
subset @xmath of @xmath , then it can be strictly weaker than the
star-finite modification of the restriction of @xmath over @xmath .

#### 1.2.2 Between compactness and completeness

If we ask the clustering of the Bourbaki-Cauchy or cofinally
Bourbaki-Cauchy filters we have the following two properties.

###### Definition 1.2.8.

A uniform space @xmath is Bourbaki-complete whenever every
Bourbaki-Cauchy filter clusters.

###### Definition 1.2.9.

A uniform space @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete if every cofinally
Bourbaki-Cauchy filter clusters.

Observe that every Cauchy filter is Bourbaki-Cauchy , every cofinally
Cauchy filter is cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy and every Bourbaki-Cauchy
filter is cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy . Thus, we get the following
implications:

cofinally Bourbaki-complete

@xmath

Bourbaki-complete

@xmath

complete

and

cofinally Bourbaki-complete

@xmath

cofinally complete

@xmath

complete

In addition, compactness trivially implies all the above properties. By
this reason we talk of properties lying between compactness and
completeness (see [ 10 ] , [ 12 ] for similar ideas). The reverses of
the above implications are in general not true as we will see in future
examples.

Next, we are going to consider Bourbaki-completeness and cofinal
Bourbaki-completeness for the star-finite modification of a uniformity.

###### Theorem 1.2.10.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. The following statements are satisfied:

1.   Let @xmath be the subspace of @xmath of all the clusters points of
    the Bourbaki-Cauchy filters of @xmath . Then @xmath is topologically
    homeomorphic to the completion of @xmath .

2.   Let @xmath and @xmath be the subspaces of @xmath of all the
    clusters points of the cofinally Cauchy filters of @xmath and of all
    the cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy filters of @xmath , respectively. Then
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath Let @xmath denote the completion of @xmath . Recall that, by
Lemma 1.1.15 and Lemma 1.1.16 , @xmath is a subspace of @xmath .
Therefore, we are going to prove that @xmath . By Lemma 1.2.7 it is
clear that @xmath . Conversely, let @xmath be a Bourbaki-Cauchy filter
in @xmath and @xmath a cluster point of @xmath . Consider an ultrafilter
@xmath in X containing the family @xmath V is a neighborhood of @xmath
in @xmath . Again, by Lemma 1.2.7 , @xmath is Cauchy in @xmath because
it is Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath as it contains @xmath . Since @xmath is
the only cluster point of it, @xmath must be a point in @xmath .

@xmath This follows at once by Lemma 1.2.7 . ∎

###### Theorem 1.2.11.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. The following statements are satisfied:

1.  @xmath is Bourbaki-complete if and only if @xmath is complete.

2.  @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete if and only if @xmath is
    cofinally complete.

In particular, every uniform space with a base of star-finite covers for
the uniformity satisfies that it is (cofinally) complete if and only if
it is (cofinally) Bourbaki-complete.

Next, recall the following classical result.

###### Theorem 1.2.12.

A uniform space @xmath is compact if and only if it is totally bounded
and complete

In parallel we have the next theorem which follows easily by Theorem
1.2.5 and Theorem 1.2.11 .

###### Theorem 1.2.13.

The following statements are equivalent for a uniform space @xmath :

1.  @xmath is compact;

2.  @xmath is Bourbaki-bounded and Bourbaki-complete;

3.  @xmath is totally bounded and complete;

4.  @xmath is Bourbaki-bounded and Bourbaki-complete;

5.  @xmath is totally bounded and complete.

In the next example we show that in general

complete @xmath Bourbaki-complete

cofinally complete @xmath Bourbaki-complete.

###### Example 1.2.14.

There exists a Bourbaki-bounded cofinally complete metric space which is
not totally bounded and not Bourbaki-complete: the metric hedgehog.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a set of cardinal @xmath . The metric hedgehog @xmath of
@xmath spininess is defined as follows ( [ 27 ] ). Let @xmath and
consider the product @xmath . Next take the equivalence relation @xmath
on @xmath defined as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the quotient @xmath is the set of points of @xmath and we endowed
this set with the following metric @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to prove that the metric space @xmath is cofinally complete
(and then complete). For that, recall the metric characterization of
cofinally completeness in [ 49 , Theorem 2.1.1] and in [ 10 , Theorem
3.2] (we will see it later).

Moreover, @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded space since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath , where, by abuse of notation, @xmath denotes also the
point @xmath . But @xmath is not compact because it contains a uniformly
discrete subspace of infinite cardinality @xmath , precisely the set of
points @xmath . Then it cannot be totally bounded, nor
Bourbaki-complete, by Theorem 1.2.13 . ∎

The next example, which is a particular case of the previous one, shows
that for a uniform space @xmath

completeness of @xmath @xmath completeness of @xmath

completeness of @xmath @xmath completeness of @xmath ,

even if the star-countable modification @xmath is a compatible
uniformity.

###### Example 1.2.15.

There exists a separable complete metric space @xmath which is not
Bourbaki-complete. In particular @xmath and @xmath are complete.

###### Proof.

Consider a separable complete metric space which is not
Bourbaki-complete, like the separable metric hedgehog @xmath . Then the
uniformity @xmath generated by the metric has a base of countable covers
by the Lindelöf property, that is, @xmath . It is clear then that @xmath
. By completeness of @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are also complete.
However, @xmath is not complete since the space is not
Bourbaki-complete. ∎

It is clear that in Theorem 1.2.13 one can change Bourbaki-complete by
cofinally Bourbaki-complete or complete by cofinally complete. Now, we
are going to refine this result since“cofinal complete-like properties”
have the characteristic of transforming local properties to uniformly
local properties.

###### Definition 1.2.16.

Let @xmath denote the property of being a compact, a totally bounded or
a Bourbaki-bounded subset in a uniform space @xmath . A uniform space
@xmath is locally P if for every @xmath there exists a neighborhood
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath satisfies the property @xmath . It is
said uniformly locally P if there exists some @xmath such that every
@xmath satisfies @xmath .

From now on, recall that the the notation @xmath means that the cover
@xmath refines the cover @xmath . In addition, whenever @xmath is a
cover of a set @xmath , we will denote by @xmath the cover @xmath .

Next, a family of sets @xmath is directed provided that, for all @xmath
, there exists @xmath such that @xmath . Note that for every cover
@xmath of @xmath , the family @xmath is a directed cover. Observe that
for a directed cover @xmath , satisfying that @xmath , the family of
sets @xmath is a filter base. Conversely, if @xmath is a filter base
then the family of sets @xmath is a directed cover ( [ 53 ] ).

###### Theorem 1.2.17.

( [ 86 ] ) A uniform space @xmath is uniformly locally compact if and
only if it is cofinally complete and locally totally bounded (locally
compact).

###### Proof.

@xmath We just need to prove cofinal completeness. Let @xmath be a
cofinally Cauchy filter and fix @xmath such that @xmath is compact for
every @xmath . Then for some @xmath , @xmath for every @xmath . Let
@xmath be an ultrafilter containing @xmath . Then, by compactness of
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is, @xmath converges and in particular @xmath clusters.

@xmath Let @xmath be cofinally complete and locally compact. Without
loss of generality we can assume that @xmath is not compact. By local
compactness, for every @xmath there exists an open neighborhood @xmath
of @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is compact. Put @xmath and consider
the directed open cover @xmath given by all the finite unions of
elements from @xmath . Then, the family of sets @xmath is a filter base
for a filter @xmath in @xmath which does not cluster. Therefore, @xmath
cannot be cofinally Cauchy, that is, there exists some @xmath such that
for every @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath . But this is equivalent to
say that @xmath . Now, for every @xmath fix @xmath such that @xmath .
Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath is compact for every @xmath , that is, @xmath is uniformly
locally compact.

∎

###### Lemma 1.2.18.

( [ 47 , Lemma 1.17] ) Let @xmath be a uniformly locally compact space.
Then there exists @xmath such that @xmath is compact for every @xmath
and every @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath such that for every @xmath , @xmath is compact. Let @xmath
open cover such that @xmath . Then, @xmath is compact for every @xmath ,
because @xmath . Next, take @xmath a compact subset, then there exists a
finite subfamily @xmath such that @xmath . Thus, @xmath and then @xmath
is also compact. In particular, by induction, @xmath is compact for
every @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 1.2.19.

For a uniform space @xmath the following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is uniformly locally compact;

2.  @xmath is locally Bourbaki-bounded in @xmath and cofinally
    Bourbaki-complete;

3.  @xmath is locally totally bounded and cofinally complete;

4.  @xmath is uniformly locally compact;

5.  @xmath is locally Bourbaki-bounded in @xmath and cofinally
    Bourbaki-complete;

6.  @xmath is locally totally bounded and cofinally complete.

###### Proof.

The equivalences @xmath and @xmath follows from Theorem 1.2.17 . Next,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are equivalent by Theorem 1.2.5 and Theorem
1.2.11 . The implication @xmath is trivial.

Finally, we prove @xmath . We just need to check cofinal
Bourbaki-completeness. Applying Lemma 1.2.18 , let @xmath such that
@xmath is compact for every @xmath and every @xmath . Now, let @xmath be
a cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy filter. Then for some @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath for every @xmath . Let @xmath be an ultrafilter containing @xmath
. Then, by compactness of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is, @xmath converges and in particular @xmath clusters.

∎

###### Remark 1.2.20.

In the previous result it is implicit in the proof that every
Bourbaki-complete uniform space satisfies that every closed
Bourbaki-bounded subsets of it is compact . We will come back later to
this subject. Moreover, it is easy to check that Bourbaki-completeness
and cofinal Bourbaki-completeness are properties inherited by closed
subspaces .

The next example shows us that in general

completeness @xmath cofinal completeness

Bourbaki-completeness @xmath cofinal completeness

Bourbaki-completeness @xmath cofinal Bourbaki-completeness .

###### Example 1.2.21.

( [ 39 , Example 15] ) There exists a discrete countable metric space,
hence separable and locally compact, which is Bourbaki-complete and not
uniformly locally compact, nor cofinally Bourbaki-complete, nor
cofinally complete.

###### Construction..

This will be a subspace of the Banach space @xmath of all the bounded
sequences of @xmath with the supremum norm. Indeed, let @xmath the
canonical base of @xmath and put @xmath where @xmath . Consider on
@xmath the metric @xmath inherited from @xmath . Then @xmath is
Bourbaki-complete since for every Bourbaki-Cauchy filter there is a
singleton belonging to it, but it is not uniformly locally compact since
for every @xmath the closed ball of radius @xmath and center @xmath is
infinite and discrete, and hence not compact. ∎

We close this section with an example of a complete discrete metric
space which is not Bourbaki-complete. Observe that, in general, every
uniformly discrete metric space is Bourbaki-complete, since they are
uniformly locally compact. Therefore, the next example cannot be
uniformly discrete.

###### Example 1.2.22.

( [ 51 , Example 4.1] ) There exists a countable discrete metric space,
hence separable and locally compact, which is complete, Bourbaki-bounded
and not Bourbaki-complete, nor uniformly locally compact, nor cofinally
Bourbaki-complete, nor cofinally complete .

###### Construction.

As in the previous example, this space will be a subspace of the space
@xmath . Let again @xmath be the canonical basis of @xmath and @xmath
the metric on @xmath generated by the norm. Then @xmath for every @xmath
, @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath . For every @xmath , @xmath , set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that @xmath and @xmath and hence the points @xmath form a chain
@xmath , @xmath . Note that @xmath for each @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Informally, @xmath consists on the points @xmath and some of the points
in the segments connecting @xmath , and @xmath , for every @xmath ,
@xmath . More precisely, we have let out some points @xmath so that now
in our chain from @xmath to @xmath , there is a first “jump” of length
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath , and after that, the distance between two
consecutive points of the chain is @xmath . Let us endowed @xmath with
the metric @xmath inherited from @xmath . It is easy to see that @xmath
is closed in @xmath . As a consequence @xmath is complete. Moreover, it
is also a discrete space because @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

Now, we prove that @xmath is Bourbaki-bounded and hence it cannot be
Bourbaki-complete because otherwise, it would be compact by Theorem
1.2.13 . Let @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath . Put @xmath . Then
@xmath is finite and @xmath . Let @xmath . We will prove that @xmath by
showing that @xmath . Let @xmath . then we have that @xmath . The chain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

joins @xmath to @xmath , and for every @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To find a similar chain joining @xmath to @xmath , let @xmath such that
@xmath . Then, the chain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

joins @xmath to @xmath and consecutive terms of this chain have distance
at most @xmath . The two chains constructed above verify that @xmath and
@xmath . It follows that @xmath as we advanced. ∎

#### 1.2.3 Uniform strong paracompactness and related topological
properties

In the introduction we have talked about the following uniform version
of paracompactness due to Rice [ 86 ] .

###### Definition 1.2.23.

A uniform space @xmath is uniformly paracompact is every open cover
@xmath has an open refinement @xmath which is uniformly locally finite ,
that is, there exists some @xmath such that every @xmath meets at most
finitely many @xmath .

The main result about uniform paracompactness is its equivalence to
cofinal completeness.

###### Theorem 1.2.24.

( [ 53 ] ) A uniform space @xmath is cofinally complete if and only if
it is uniformly paracompact.

As a corollary we have Corson’s Theorem 1.1.10 : A space @xmath is
paracompact if and only if @xmath is uniformly paracompact, or
equivalently, @xmath is cofinally complete .

Resembling the above result, in [ 39 ] and [ 40 ] it is proved that
cofinal Bourbaki-completeness is equivalent to uniform strong
paracompactness , a uniform property introduced by Hohti in [ 49 ] . It
is a uniform extension of the topological property of strong
paracompactness .

###### Definition 1.2.25.

A space is strongly paracompact if every open cover has an open
star-finite refinement.

###### Definition 1.2.26.

( [ 49 ] ) A uniform space @xmath is uniformly strongly paracompact if
every open cover @xmath has a uniformly star-finite open refinement,
where a cover @xmath is uniformly star-finite if there exists @xmath
such that for every @xmath , @xmath meets at most finitely many @xmath .

Observe that in the definition of strong paracompactness we can change
star-finite by star-countable. Indeed, we have previously noticed in
Remark 1.1.22 that every star-countable cozero cover has a star-finite
cozero refinement, and then applying Lemma 1.1.9 the fact follows.

Here we change the proofs from [ 39 ] and [ 40 ] and we start by giving
a technical theorem which provide us of a characterization of
uniformitites with a star-finite base. This is a more tangible way to
express it as (cofinal) Bourbaki-Cauchy filters of a uniform space
@xmath is more tangible than (cofinal) Cauchy filters of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.27.

A uniform space @xmath has a star-finite base for its uniformity, that
is, @xmath , if and only if it satisfies the following property:

@xmath for every @xmath there is some @xmath satisfying that for every
@xmath and every @xmath there exist finitely many @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

@xmath Let @xmath and @xmath star-finite such that @xmath . By the
star-finite property, for every @xmath and every @xmath there exist at
most finitely many @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath is a
refinement of @xmath the @xmath -property follows.

@xmath Conversely, let @xmath and select @xmath such that @xmath . By
hypothesis there is some @xmath such that for every @xmath and every
@xmath there exists finitely many @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath .
Without loss of generality we can take @xmath refining @xmath . Let
@xmath from Lemma 1.2.6 induced by @xmath . Clearly @xmath . By
hypothesis, for every @xmath and every @xmath we can fix a finite family
@xmath such that @xmath where @xmath is some set such that @xmath .
Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath , and it is easy to check that @xmath is also star-finite. ∎

###### Theorem 1.2.28.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is uniformly strongly paracompact.

2.  @xmath uniformly paracompact and @xmath .

3.  @xmath is cofinally complete and @xmath .

4.  @xmath cofinally Bourbaki-complete.

###### Proof.

@xmath That uniform strong paracompactness implies uniform
paracompactness is clear from the definitions. In order to see that
@xmath we are going to prove that @xmath satisfies the @xmath -property
from Theorem 1.2.27 .

Take @xmath and @xmath an open cover such that @xmath . By uniform
strong paracompactness there exists an open refinement @xmath of @xmath
and there exists @xmath such that for every @xmath , @xmath meets at
most finitely many @xmath . By induction it is not difficult to see that
for every @xmath and every @xmath , @xmath is covered by finitely many
elements from @xmath . Indeed, let @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath .
Then @xmath and there exists finitely many @xmath such that @xmath .
Suppose that for some @xmath , @xmath is covered by finitely @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since each set @xmath is covered by finitely many elements from @xmath
the result follows. Moreover, as @xmath is a refinement of @xmath and
@xmath is a refinement of @xmath the @xmath -property follows.

@xmath Suppose that @xmath and that @xmath is uniformly paracompact. Let
@xmath be an open cover of @xmath and @xmath a uniformly locally finite
open refinement of @xmath . Then there exists some @xmath such that
every @xmath meets at most finitely many @xmath . Let @xmath being
star-finite such that @xmath . Observe that we can take @xmath being
open. Next, define @xmath . Then @xmath and it is an open cover.
Moreover, for every @xmath , @xmath meets only fintely many @xmath .
Indeed, @xmath is star-finite and each @xmath meets at most finitely
many @xmath as @xmath .

@xmath This equivalence follows from the equivalence of cofinal
completeness and strong paracompactness (Theorem 1.2.24 ).

@xmath This implication follows from Theorem 1.2.11 .

@xmath Since @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete then it is cofinally
complete. On the other hand, suppose by contradiction that it does not
satisfies the @xmath -property (Theorem 1.2.27 ). Then there exists some
@xmath , that we can take open, such that for every @xmath there exists
@xmath and @xmath for which there is no finite subfamily in @xmath
covering @xmath . Let @xmath the cover obtained by taking finite unions
of elements of @xmath . Then @xmath is a directed open cover of @xmath
and @xmath is a filter base of a filter @xmath in @xmath (note that
@xmath ). In particular, @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy since for
every @xmath there exists @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath .
Therefore, @xmath clusters contradicting that @xmath is a cover. ∎

The above theorem states that every uniformly strongly paracompact
uniform space (equivalently, cofinally Bourbaki-complete uniform space)
has a star-finite base for its uniformity. Observe that similarly, Hohti
[ 49 , pp. 31-32] proved that every cofinally complete uniform space has
a point-finite base.

###### Theorem 1.2.29.

( [ 49 ] ) If a uniform space @xmath is cofinally complete, then @xmath
. In particular, @xmath is cofinally complete if and only if @xmath is
cofinally complete.

Next, we apply Theorem 1.2.28 to the fine uniformity @xmath obtaining a
result in the line of Corson’s Theorem 1.1.10 .

###### Corollary 1.2.30.

For a space @xmath the following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is strongly paracompact;

2.  @xmath is paracompact and @xmath

3.  @xmath is uniformly paracompact (equivalently, cofinally complete)
    and @xmath

4.  @xmath is uniformly strongly paracompact (equivalently, cofinally
    Bourbaki-complete).

By the above result cofinal Bourbaki-completeness of @xmath is just
strong paracompactness of the topological space @xmath . Thus, cofinal
completeness of @xmath , that is, paracompactness of @xmath , is a
weaker property. We ask now, if Bourbaki-completeness of @xmath is also
stronger than completeness of @xmath . To that purpose recall the
following facts.

###### Definition 1.2.31.

A space @xmath is topological complete if it is uniformizable by a
uniformity @xmath such that @xmath is complete.

The following result is immediate [ 27 ] .

###### Theorem 1.2.32.

A space @xmath is topologically complete if and only if @xmath is
complete.

###### Definition 1.2.33.

( [ 30 ] ) A space @xmath is @xmath - complete if @xmath is complete.

###### Theorem 1.2.34.

( [ 39 ] ) Let @xmath be a space. The following statements are
equivalent:

1.  @xmath is @xmath -complete, that is, @xmath is complete

2.  @xmath is Bourbaki-complete;

3.  @xmath is Bourbaki-complete.

###### Proof.

The proof follows from Theorem 1.2.11 . ∎

Now, we apply the above results to the countable modification @xmath .
But first, we recall the definition of realcompact space.

###### Definition 1.2.35.

A space @xmath is realcompact if and only if @xmath is homeomorphic to a
closed subspace of a product of real-lines.

We will come back to realcompactness in the next part of thesis.
Nevertheless we will recall now Shirota’s Theorem which is well-known.

###### Theorem 1.2.36.

( [ 89 ] ) A space @xmath is realcompact if and only if @xmath is
complete.

###### Corollary 1.2.37.

A space @xmath is realcompact if and only if @xmath is
Bourbaki-complete.

###### Proof.

By Corollary 1.1.21 , @xmath . Therefore the proof is immediate from
Theorem 1.2.11 . ∎

It is clear that every realcompact space is @xmath -complete because
@xmath (Lemma 1.1.19 ). However, not every @xmath -complete space is
realcompact as it is show in the next example.

###### Example 1.2.38.

There exists a uniform space which is @xmath -complete but not
realcompact.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a uniformly discrete metric space of Ulam-measurable
cardinal. As we have said in the introduction, this is equivalent to
have @xmath failing realcompactness, that is, @xmath is not complete.
However, @xmath is Bourbaki-complete as every Bourbaki-bounded subset in
@xmath is a finite set. Since @xmath , @xmath is complete, that is,
@xmath is @xmath -complete. ∎

On the other hand, it is immediate that every @xmath -complete space is
topologically complete . However, to give a counterexample that the
reverse implication is not true, is not so clear. Observe that by Lemma
1.1.23 the following result is immediate.

###### Theorem 1.2.39.

A connected space is realcompact if and only if it is @xmath -complete.

Therefore, by the previous result, a connected topological complete
space which is not realcompact is an example of topological complete
space space which is not @xmath -complete.

###### Example 1.2.40.

( [ 31 ] , [ 23 ] ) There exists a topological complete space which is
not @xmath -complete.

###### Proof.

The metric hedgehog @xmath (Example 1.2.14 ) where @xmath is an
Ulam-measurable cardinal is a complete metric space and hence it is
topological complete. That @xmath is not realcompact follows from the
fact that realcompactness is inherited by closed subspaces.
Nevertheless, observe that the uniformly discrete subspace @xmath is not
realcompact as its cardinality is exactly @xmath . By Theorem 1.2.39 ,
it is not @xmath -complete either. ∎

Finally, recall that in [ 52 ] Howes proved the following result.

###### Theorem 1.2.41.

A space @xmath is Lindelöf if and only if @xmath is cofinally complete.

In particular, similarly to Corollary 1.2.37 , we have the next result.

###### Corollary 1.2.42.

A space @xmath is Lindelöf if and only if @xmath is cofinally
Bourbaki-complete.

Recall that every Lindelöf space is strongly paracompact as @xmath
(Lemma 1.1.19 ). In particular, from Lemma 1.1.23 we can deduce the
following result of Morita (see [ 71 ] ).

###### Theorem 1.2.43.

A connected space is strongly paracompact if and only if it is Lindelöf.

Not every paracompact space is strongly paracompact and not every
strongly paracompact space is Lindelöf as we show in the next examples.

###### Example 1.2.44.

There exists a paracompact space which is not strongly paracompact.

###### Proof.

By theorem 1.2.43 , the metric hedgehog @xmath (Example 1.2.14 ) is not
strongly paracompact because it is not Lindelöf. However it is
paracompact because it is a metric space. ∎

###### Example 1.2.45.

There exists a strongly paracompact space which is not Lindelöf.

###### Proof.

Every strongly-zero dimensional is strongly paracompact since every open
cover has an open refinement which is a clopen partition of @xmath (see
[ 27 ] ). Therefore any strongly zero-dimensional which is not Lindelöf
is an example: for instance the countable product @xmath where @xmath is
a discrete space of uncountable cardinal. ∎

We close this section with the next example that shows that, in general,
for a uniform space @xmath

@xmath -complete @xmath Bourbaki-complete

strongly paracompact @xmath cofinally Bourbaki-complete

as it was expected.

###### Example 1.2.46.

There exists a strongly paracompact, in particular @xmath -complete,
metric space which is not cofinally Bourbaki-complete, nor
Bourbaki-complete, for the metric uniformity.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a separable non-complete metric spaces, for instance, the
open interval @xmath endowed with the euclidean metric. Then @xmath is
strongly paracompact. However it is not Bourbaki-complete for the metric
uniformity, nor cofinally Bourbaki-complete ∎

#### 1.2.4 Products and hyperspaces

First we consider products of Bourbaki-complete and cofinally
Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces.

###### Theorem 1.2.47.

Any nonempty product of uniform spaces is Bourbaki-complete if and only
if each factor is Bourbaki-complete.

###### Proof.

@xmath Suppose @xmath is Bourbaki-complete. Since each factor @xmath is
uniformly homeomorphic to a closed subspace of this product, then it
must be Bourbaki-complete, as Bourbaki-completeness is inherited by
closed subspaces.

@xmath Conversely, suppose that @xmath is Bourbaki-complete for every
@xmath and let @xmath be a Bourbaki-Cauchy filter in the product. Take
@xmath an ultrafilter containing @xmath . Clearly, @xmath is also
Bourbaki-Cauchy and then its projection into @xmath will be a
Bourbaki-Cauchy ultrafilter, for every @xmath (by uniform continuity of
the projections). Now, from the Bourbaki-completeness of every factor,
this projection must converges to a point in @xmath . Therefore, @xmath
also converges to a point in the product, and this means, in particular,
that the initial filter @xmath clusters, as we wanted. ∎

###### Remark 1.2.48.

Consider the euclidean real-line @xmath and a uniformly discrete space
@xmath . Both metric spaces are Bourbaki-complete by uniform local
compactness. Then, any closed subspace of @xmath , where @xmath denotes
the product uniformity and @xmath is any cardinal, is a
Bourbaki-complete space. We will see soon how the above space can be
considered universal for all the Bourbaki-complete spaces. On the other
hand, it is well-known that a space is @xmath -complete if and only if
it is homeomorphic to a closed subspace of @xmath for some discrete
space @xmath and some cardinal @xmath (see [ 31 ] ). Thus, by Theorem
1.2.34 , the space @xmath is universal for the spaces which are
Bourbaki-complete when they are endowed with the fine uniformity u .

Products of cofinally Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces do not have such
a good behavior as product of Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces. In fact,
products of cofinally complete uniform spaces are not good either.

###### Theorem 1.2.49.

( [ 49 ] ) Let @xmath and @xmath be cofinally complete metric spaces.
Then @xmath is cofinally complete if and only if @xmath and @xmath are
(uniformly) locally compact or at least one of them is compact.

###### Theorem 1.2.50.

( [ 69 ] ) Let @xmath and @xmath be cofinally complete uniform spaces.
Then if both are (uniformly) locally compact or at least one of them is
compact then @xmath is cofinally complete.

###### Theorem 1.2.51.

( [ 49 ] ) If @xmath is an infinite family of uniform spaces such that
their product @xmath is uniformly paracompact (cofinally complete) then
all but at most finitely many factors are compact.

###### Remark 1.2.52.

From Theorem 1.2.28 and Theorem 1.2.19 we get that the above results are
also satisfied when we change cofinal completeness by cofinal
Bourbaki-completeness. Indeed, uniform local compactness implies
cofinally Bourbaki-completeness and cofinal Bourbaki-completeness
implies cofinally completeness (see Theorem 1.2.19 )

Next, we give an example of the bad behavior of products of cofinally
Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces. In it, and from now on, we endow
@xmath , the product of countably many copies of a discrete space @xmath
, with the “ first difference metric ” @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This metric is compatible with the product uniformity on it.

###### Example 1.2.53.

There is a countable product of cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric
spaces which is not strongly paracompact, nor cofinally Bourbaki-com-
plete.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a discrete space of cardinality @xmath . Then the
countable product @xmath , is Bourbaki-complete by Theorem 1.2.47 as
each factor is uniformly locally compact. However, it is not strongly
paracompact. Indeed, Nagata proved in [ 76 , Remark p. 169] (see also [
80 ] ) that the space @xmath is not strongly paracompact whenever @xmath
is an uncountable discrete space. Since @xmath and @xmath are
homeomorphic, the result follows. In particular @xmath cannot be
cofinally Bourbaki-complete because every cofinally Bourbaki-complete
uniform space is strongly paracompact as @xmath . ∎

Now, we proceed with the hyperspaces. The results obtained here are,
however, partial.

Let @xmath and @xmath the set of all the non-empty closed, respectively
compact, subsets of a topological space @xmath . For subsets @xmath of
@xmath we denote by @xmath the family of elements @xmath in @xmath ,
respectively @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath .
Whenever we deal with uniform spaces @xmath we can endowed the
hyperspaces @xmath and @xmath with the respective uniformity @xmath
generated by the family of covers @xmath , @xmath , where the elements
of @xmath are the sets of the form @xmath for @xmath (see for instance [
50 ] for bibliography and more information). If @xmath is metrizable
then the unifomity @xmath is metrizable by the Hausdorff metric @xmath
defined as follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that the metric @xmath of @xmath is finite only when @xmath is a
bounded metric space.

Next, recall the following result.

###### Theorem 1.2.54.

( [ 50 , Proposition 3.1] ) If @xmath is a uniform space such that
@xmath then the uniformity @xmath of @xmath has also a star-finite base.
Moreover, for any uniform space @xmath the uniformities @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent.

###### Proof.

We just prove the second statement. That @xmath is satisfied follows
from Hohti’s result. Conversely, let @xmath being star-finite and
suppose by contradiction that for some @xmath , @xmath meets infinitely
many distinct elements @xmath in @xmath . But then @xmath for every
@xmath which is a contradiction since @xmath is star-finite. ∎

However, the above statement is not in general true for @xmath as it was
shown by Hohti in [ 50 ] .

In [ 73 , Theorem 1.5] , Morita proved that @xmath is complete if and
only if @xmath is also complete (see also [ 21 , Theorem 3.5] ). We
prove now the same for Bourbaki-completeness. Observe that this fact was
partially proved in [ 51 , Proposition 3.3] for metric spaces.

###### Theorem 1.2.55.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. Then @xmath is Bourba-ki-complete if and
only if @xmath is Bourbaki-complete.

###### Proof.

The results follows at once by Theorem 1.2.54 , Theorem 1.2.11 and the
above result of Morita.

∎

Recall that for a metric space @xmath , @xmath is complete if and only
if @xmath is complete ( [ 9 , Theorem 3.2.4] ). However, this is not
always true in the frame of uniform spaces ( [ 59 , Chapter II, 46 and
Theorem 48] . On the other hand, for a Bourbaki-complete metric space,
@xmath is not necessarily Bourbaki-complete, as it is shown in the next
example.

###### Example 1.2.56.

[ 51 , Example 3.4] There exists a Bourbaki-complete metric space @xmath
such that the hyperspace @xmath is not Bourbaki- complete.

###### Proof.

We are going to prove that the hyperspace @xmath of the real-line @xmath
, where @xmath , is not Bourbaki-complete since it contains a closed
isometric copy of the metric hedgehog @xmath having continuum-many
spines. Thus, @xmath cannot be Bourbaki-complete because @xmath is a
complete metric space, in particular, a closed subspace of @xmath , but
it is not Bourbaki-complete.

Denote by @xmath the set of all functions @xmath . For each @xmath , let
@xmath . Let @xmath . For every @xmath , we set @xmath . The set @xmath
is a “line segment” in @xmath joining the “endpoint” @xmath to the
“origin” @xmath where @xmath . Note the that for all @xmath and @xmath ,
we have that @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath . Consider the subset
@xmath of @xmath endowed with metric @xmath restricted on it. By all the
foregoing @xmath is the isometric copy of @xmath . ∎

Finally, we study cofinal Bourbaki-completeness of @xmath and @xmath .
As happens to products, the work is already done for cofinal
completeness, at least for metric spaces.

###### Theorem 1.2.57.

Let @xmath be a metric space. The following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is uniformly locally compact;

2.  @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete;

3.  @xmath is cofinally complete;

4.  @xmath is uniformly locally compact.

###### Proof.

The proof follows at once applying [ 50 , Corollary 4.2] , Theorem
1.2.19 and Theorem 1.2.28 . ∎

###### Theorem 1.2.58.

Let @xmath be a metric space. The following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is uniformly locally compact;

2.  @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete;

3.  @xmath is cofinally complete;

4.  @xmath is a point of local compactness of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Again, the proof follows at once applying [ 20 ] , [ 11 , Theorem 3.9] ,
Theorem 1.2.19 and Theorem 1.2.28 . ∎

We don’t know whether or not the above result are true in the frame of
uniform spaces. On the other hand, Burdick proved in [ 20 ] that the
hyperspace @xmath (Example 1.2.56 ) is not cofinally complete in spite
of the fact that @xmath is uniformly locally compact.

\Denarius \Denarius \Denarius

### 1.3 The particular case of metric spaces

#### 1.3.1 Bourbaki-complete metric spaces

Before studying Bourbaki-completeness of metric spaces, we first show
that Bourbaki-Cauchy sequences and cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy sequences
determine Bourbaki-boundedness in the frame of metric spaces.

###### Definition 1.3.1.

A sequence @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath
if for every @xmath there exist @xmath such that for some @xmath ,
@xmath for every @xmath .

If @xmath is a Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence of a metric space @xmath , then
for every @xmath there exist, @xmath such that for every @xmath we can
join the points @xmath and @xmath by a chain of points @xmath in @xmath
, where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Definition 1.3.2.

A sequence @xmath of a uniform space @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy
in @xmath if for every @xmath there exists @xmath such that for some
@xmath and for every @xmath there exists @xmath such that @xmath .

Similarly, we have that, if @xmath is a cofinal Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence
of a metric space @xmath , then for every @xmath there exist, @xmath and
an infinite set @xmath such that for every @xmath we can join the points
@xmath and with some fixed @xmath , @xmath by a chain of points in
@xmath , satisfying the same properties than above.

###### Theorem 1.3.3.

( [ 39 ] ) Let @xmath be a metric space and @xmath a subset of @xmath .
The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset of @xmath ;

2.   every countable subset of @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset of
    @xmath ;

3.   every sequence in @xmath has a Bourbaki-Cauchy subsequence in
    @xmath ;

4.   every sequence in @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath This implication is clear since every subset of a
Bourbaki-bounded subset in @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset in @xmath
.

@xmath Let @xmath be a sequence in @xmath . By hypothesis, the set
@xmath is Bourbaki-bounded in @xmath , and then for @xmath there exist
@xmath and finitely many points @xmath such that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the family @xmath is finite, some @xmath contains infinite terms
of the sequence. Therefore, there exists a subsequence @xmath of @xmath
inside @xmath .

By induction, we have that, for every @xmath and @xmath , there exist
some @xmath and finitely many points @xmath such that, @xmath is a
finite cover of the set @xmath . Then there exists some @xmath
containing some subsequence @xmath of @xmath .

Finally, choosing the standard diagonal subsequence @xmath we can easily
check that it is the required Bourbaki-Cauchy subsequence of @xmath .

@xmath It is clear.

@xmath Assume that @xmath is not a Bourbaki-bounded subset of @xmath .
Then there exists some @xmath such that, for every @xmath , the family
@xmath does not contain any finite subcover of @xmath . Fix @xmath and
for every @xmath choose @xmath such that @xmath , for every @xmath .
Then, the sequence @xmath constructed in this way is not cofinally
Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath . Otherwise, for this @xmath there must exists
@xmath and an infinite subset @xmath such that for some @xmath we have
that @xmath for every @xmath . Then taking @xmath , we have that there
are infinitely many terms of the sequence @xmath in @xmath , which is a
contradiction. ∎

Observe that, in the proof of the above result, we have not use the
following result that characterizes total-boundedness by sequences, as
we have use Theorem 1.2.1 to prove Theorem 1.2.4 .

###### Theorem 1.3.4.

( [ 10 ] ) Let @xmath be a metric space and @xmath a subset of @xmath .
The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is a totally-bounded subset;

2.   every sequence of @xmath has a Cauchy subsequence in @xmath ;

3.   every sequence of @xmath is cofinally Cauchy in @xmath .

In fact, for a metric space @xmath the star-finite modification @xmath
is not necessarily metrizable and the Cauchy sequences of @xmath are not
enough to characterize Bourbaki-boundedness as we will see in Example
1.3.17 .

Next, recall the following facts.

###### Definition 1.3.5.

A uniform space @xmath is sequentially complete if every Cauchy sequence
clusters (equivalently, converges).

###### Theorem 1.3.6 ([97]).

A metric space @xmath is complete if and only if it is sequentially
complete.

###### Definition 1.3.7.

A uniform space @xmath is sequentially Bourbaki-complete if every
Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence clusters.

In the following result we check that, for a metric space,
Bourbaki-comple- teness and sequentially Bourbaki-completeness coincide,
as it happens to usual completeness. Moreover, we also give a
characterization by means of bornologies similarly to Theorem 1.1.33 .
Nevertheless, we will see that these results are not evident.

###### Theorem 1.3.8.

( [ 39 ] ) Let @xmath be a metric space. The following statements are
equivalent:

1.  @xmath is Bourbaki-complete;

2.  @xmath is sequentially Bourbaki-complete;

3.   the closure of every @xmath is compact, that is, @xmath

4.  @xmath is complete and @xmath

###### Proof.

@xmath This implication is easy. In fact, the family of sets @xmath is a
filter base which is Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath whenever @xmath is
Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath .

@xmath Let @xmath be a metric space being sequentially Bourbaki-complete
and let @xmath be a Bourbaki-Cauchy filter in @xmath . Suppose by
contradiction that @xmath does not cluster, then for every @xmath there
is an open neighborhood @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath for some
@xmath . By paracompactness of @xmath the open cover @xmath has a
locally finite open refinement @xmath , which is, in particular,
point-finite. We are going to construct inductively a Bourbaki-Cauchy
sequence @xmath which does not have any cluster point.

First, for every @xmath , we can fix @xmath , and @xmath such that
@xmath because @xmath is Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath . Next, fix @xmath an
arbitrary point. As @xmath is point-finite, there are only finitely many
@xmath such that @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath denote the finite
subfamily of @xmath consisting of all @xmath , @xmath . For each @xmath
, there is some @xmath such that @xmath , so @xmath . Then we can take
some

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, take the finite subfamily @xmath . Similarly to the previous step,
there are finitely many @xmath , @xmath such that we can take some
@xmath satisfying that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In general, for every @xmath , there are finitely many @xmath , @xmath
such that we can take some @xmath satisfying that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a finite subfamily of @xmath . Note that the sequence
@xmath obtained in this way is Bourbaki–Cauchy. However, @xmath does not
have a cluster point. Indeed, for any @xmath , there is some @xmath such
that @xmath . Since @xmath is open then it is a neighborhood of @xmath
and by the construction of the sequence, if @xmath implies @xmath , for
all @xmath .

@xmath Let @xmath and @xmath a sequence in its closure @xmath . As
@xmath , then, by Theorem 1.3.3 @xmath has a Bourbaki-Cauchy subsequence
which clusters in @xmath by hypothesis. Thus, @xmath clusters too.

@xmath It is not difficult see that every Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence is a
Bourbaki-bounded subset of @xmath . Hence, the result follows.

@xmath Finally, the equivalence of @xmath and @xmath is immediate since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by Theorem 1.1.33 a metric space is complete if and only if @xmath .

∎

###### Corollary 1.3.9.

A Banach space @xmath is Bourbaki-complete if and only if it is finite
dimensional.

###### Proof.

The proof follows at once from Theorem 1.3.8 , Theorem 1.1.27 and the
well-known fact that a Banach space is finite-dimensional if and only if
it satisfies the Heine-Borel property , that is, @xmath .

∎

Now, observe that for a uniform space @xmath , the following
implications which are a uniform extension of the partial implications
of Theorem 1.3.8 , are true.

@xmath is Bourbaki-complete

@xmath

@xmath is complete and @xmath

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath is sequentially Bourbaki-complete

The first and the second implications follows are clear from the
definitions and the third one from the fact that every Bourbaki-Cauchy
sequence is a Bourbaki-bounded subset. However, the reverse implications
are not true as it is expected. Indeed, next we give the counterexamples
to these.

###### Example 1.3.10.

There exists a complete uniform space @xmath such that @xmath but which
is not Bourbaki-complete.

###### Proof.

To give such an example we are going to use Ulam-measurable cardinals.
Let us consider the metric hedgehog of @xmath spines where @xmath is an
Ulam-measurable cardinal (see Example 1.2.40 ), endowed with the fine
uniformity @xmath . Recall that @xmath is not complete. Then, by Theorem
1.2.34 , @xmath is not Bourbaki-complete. However, @xmath is complete
because, as a metric space, @xmath is complete. Moreover, @xmath
satisfies that @xmath . Indeed, recall that the family of all the
real-valued continuous functions on a fine space is exactly @xmath (see
Theorem 1.1.12 ). Therefore, by Theorem 1.1.30 , @xmath if and only if
@xmath is relatively pseudocompact in @xmath , where by a relatively
pseudocompact subset of a space @xmath we mean a subset @xmath that
satisfies that @xmath is a bounded subset of @xmath for every @xmath .
Hence, by normality, @xmath is a pseudocompact subspace of @xmath , and
by metrizabitity, it is, in particular, a compact subspace. Thus @xmath
. ∎

###### Example 1.3.11.

There exists a uniform space @xmath such that @xmath but which is not
Bourbaki-complete, nor complete .

###### Proof.

In this example we are going to use again realcompactness. Let @xmath be
a uniformly discrete metric of Ulam-measurable cardinal. Then @xmath is
not realcompact, that is, the uniform space @xmath is not complete (see
Example 1.2.38 ). In particular, as @xmath , because @xmath is a fine
space, then @xmath is not complete either. However every closed and
Bourbaki-bounded subset in @xmath is compact. Indeed, the two
uniformities @xmath and @xmath share Bourbaki-bounded subsets as @xmath
(see Theorem 1.1.30 ). Therefore, since every Bourbaki-bounded subset of
@xmath is a finite set, then every closed and Bourbaki-bounded subset of
@xmath is compact. ∎

###### Example 1.3.12.

There exists a uniform space @xmath which is sequentially
Bourbaki-complete, Bourbaki-bounded and not compact. In particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Construction..

Consider the metric hedgehog (Example 1.2.14 ) of uncountable many
spines @xmath . Then, @xmath is Bourbaki-bounded and not
Bourbaki-complete. In particular, by Theorem 1.2.5 , @xmath and hence,
the completion of @xmath is exactly the Samuel compactification @xmath .
Next, let @xmath be the subspace of @xmath given by all the cluster
points of the Bourbaki-Cauchy sequences of @xmath . We are going to
check that the space @xmath , endowed with the uniformity inherited from
@xmath , is sequentially Bourbaki-complete.

Take @xmath a Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence in @xmath and @xmath cluster
point of it in @xmath . We have to prove that @xmath . For every @xmath
, let @xmath be a Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence of @xmath such that @xmath is
a cluster point of it. Let @xmath any bijection and define the sequence
@xmath , where @xmath for every @xmath . Then, @xmath is a
Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence of @xmath since for every @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is any natural number bigger than @xmath

Moreover, @xmath is a cluster point of it. Indeed, since @xmath is a
cluster point of @xmath then for every neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in
@xmath , there exists an infinite set @xmath such that @xmath for every
@xmath . In addition, for every @xmath lying in @xmath there exists an
open neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath . Thus,
fixed @xmath , since @xmath is a cluster point of @xmath , there exists
some infinite set @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, @xmath is an infinite subset of @xmath , so @xmath is also an
infinite subset of @xmath because @xmath is bijective. Hence @xmath is a
cluster point of @xmath and @xmath .

Finally observe that @xmath is a totally bounded subspace of @xmath and
hence it is also Bourbaki-bounded space (in itself). However, it is not
compact. Indeed, consider the filter @xmath of @xmath generated by the
family of sets @xmath where @xmath . Let @xmath a cluster point of
@xmath . We are going to prove that @xmath by showing that there is no
Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is a cluster
point of @xmath .

Suppose by contradiction that there exists a Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath clusters to @xmath . Then, it is clear
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and then @xmath by Lemma 1.1.18 . This implies that there exists a
countable subfamily @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is also a cluster
point of the sequence @xmath . But this is a contradiction. Indeed,
since the cofinality of @xmath is exactly @xmath , then there is some
@xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath . Put @xmath , then @xmath .
Since @xmath , by Lemma 1.1.18 , @xmath cannot belong to the closure in
@xmath of both sets, contradicting the fact that @xmath is a cluster
point of @xmath and of @xmath . ∎

In spite of the above results we have the following theorem.

###### Theorem 1.3.13.

For a metric space @xmath the following statements are equivalent:

1.   The completion of @xmath is Bourbaki-complete;

2.  @xmath ;

3.   every Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence of @xmath has a Cauchy subsequence.

###### Proof.

@xmath Let @xmath be a metric space such that its completion @xmath is
Bourbaki-complete and let @xmath a Bourbaki-bounded subset of @xmath .
Then @xmath is also a Bourbaki-bounded subset of @xmath since @xmath is
isometrically embedded in its completion. Then @xmath is a totally
Bounded subset of @xmath because its closure in @xmath is compact. But
@xmath so it is a totally bounded subsets of @xmath .

@xmath We are going to prove that every Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence in the
completion @xmath , clusters.

Take @xmath a Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence in @xmath , then for every @xmath
there exists @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath . Next,
for every @xmath let @xmath . Then, for every @xmath , by density of
@xmath in @xmath , we can take some @xmath , such that @xmath . We are
going to prove that the set @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset in
@xmath . In order to show that this statement is true we prove first the
next claim.

CLAIM. Let @xmath a metric space and let @xmath denote its completion.
Then for every @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof of the claim.

By density of @xmath in @xmath , we can take some @xmath . Then, we can
fix some chain of points @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , for every @xmath . Again, by density of @xmath in @xmath , we
can take @xmath such that @xmath , for every @xmath . Put @xmath . In
particular,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for every @xmath . Therefore, @xmath and the claim follows.

∎

Next, observe that for every @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, by the above claim, for every @xmath , there exists finitely
many points @xmath , @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the set @xmath is finite, it follows that @xmath is
Bourbaki-bounded in @xmath . More precisely, by the hypothesis @xmath is
a totally bounded subset of @xmath .

Finally, notice that, by the choose of the points of @xmath , @xmath .
Moreover, by total boundedness of @xmath , the closure @xmath is a
totally bounded subset of the completion @xmath . Therefore, by
completeness, @xmath is compact and the the sequence @xmath clusters in
@xmath , that is, @xmath is Bourbaki-complete.

@xmath Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence of @xmath . Then @xmath
is a Bourbaki-bounded subset of @xmath , and by hypothesis it is a
totally bounded subset. Then, by Theorem 1.3.4 the result follows.

@xmath Conversely, let @xmath a Bourbaki-bounded subset in @xmath . By
Theorem 1.3.3 @xmath , every sequence contained in @xmath has a
Bourbaki-Cauchy subsequence in @xmath . Therefore, by hypothesis, it
contains also a Cauchy subsequence. Finally, by Theorem 1.3.4 the result
follows.

∎

#### 1.3.2 Further considerations

By Theorem 1.2.1 and Theorem 1.2.5 , Bourbaki-boundedness in a uniform
space can be characterized by Cauchy filters of its star-finite
modification. More precisely, a subset @xmath of a uniform space @xmath
is Bourbaki-bounded in @xmath if and only if every filter @xmath in
@xmath is contained in some Cauchy filter @xmath of @xmath in @xmath .
Moreover, Theorem 1.2.11 states that Bourbaki-completeness of a uniform
space is equivalent to completeness of its star-finite modification.

However, we next show that, for a metric space @xmath , Cauchy sequences
of @xmath are not strong enough to characterize Bourbaki-completeness,
nor Bourbaki-boundedness of @xmath (see Example 1.3.17 ). Hence, we show
in this way that the robustness of Bourbaki-Cauchy sequences is
necessary.

###### Lemma 1.3.14.

(Efremovič’s Lemma [ 77 ] ) Let @xmath and @xmath and @xmath two
sequences of a uniform space @xmath satisfying that for every @xmath
there are @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then, there
exist subsequences @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, and some @xmath , @xmath , such that for every @xmath
there are @xmath satisfying that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for every
@xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3.15.

Let @xmath be a uniform space and @xmath a uniformity on @xmath such
that @xmath . If @xmath is sequentially complete then @xmath is also
sequentially complete.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a Cauchy sequence in @xmath . If @xmath is Cauchy in
@xmath there is nothing to prove. Otherwise, @xmath does not converge in
@xmath . More precisely, it does not cluster either, because it is a
Cauchy sequence.

Therefore the sequence @xmath has a subsequence @xmath satisfying that
for some @xmath , for every @xmath there is some @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath for every @xmath , @xmath . Indeed, since @xmath is not
Cauchy in @xmath there exists some @xmath such that for every @xmath we
can take some @xmath for which @xmath , where @xmath . Applying Lemma
1.3.14 to the sequences @xmath and @xmath we obtain the subsequence
@xmath . By all the foregoing, the subspace @xmath of @xmath is
uniformly homeomorphic to the uniformly discrete space @xmath . Then,
@xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath . In fact, since @xmath is uniformly
discrete then it is a fine space and @xmath , that is, @xmath is
homeomorphic to @xmath .

Now, as @xmath is Cauchy in @xmath , then @xmath is also Cauchy in
@xmath and in particular, it is Cauchy in @xmath . So @xmath converges
to some @xmath in the Samuel compactification @xmath . In particular
@xmath and, by Lemma 1.1.17 , @xmath . But this is a contradiction,
since @xmath is homeomorphic to @xmath and it is well-known that @xmath
does not have non-trivial converging sequences [ 27 ] .

∎

###### Corollary 1.3.16.

If @xmath is a complete metric space then @xmath is sequentially
complete.

###### Example 1.3.17.

There exists a non-compact Bourbaki-bounded space @xmath such that
@xmath is sequentially complete and not every sequence of @xmath has a
Cauchy subsequence in @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is enough to take any complete metric space which is in addition
Bourbaki-bounded and not Bourbaki-complete. For instance, take the
metric hedgehog @xmath (Example 1.2.14 ). Then, by Theorem 1.3.15 ,
@xmath is also sequentially complete. Next suppose that every sequence
of @xmath has a Cauchy subsequence of @xmath . Then every sequence of
@xmath clusters by sequential completeness of @xmath . But this is not
possible since @xmath is not compact.

∎

Next, we study a problem that shows the strength of Bourbaki-bounded
subsets against totally bounded subsets. Recall that by Theorem 1.2.5 ,
Theorem 1.2.11 and Theorem 1.3.8 , for a metric space @xmath , the space
@xmath is complete if and only if @xmath . Now we ask if the same is
possible for the point-finite modification of a metric space, that is,
if @xmath is complete if and only if @xmath . The answer is no as we
will see with the help of the next result.

###### Theorem 1.3.18.

( [ 65 , Theorem 3.5] for metric spaces) Let @xmath a subset of a
uniform space @xmath . The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is totally bounded in @xmath ;

2.   for every point-finite cover @xmath there exists a finite subfamily
    @xmath which covers @xmath ;

3.   for every point-countable cover @xmath there exists a finite
    subfamily @xmath which covers @xmath ;

4.   for every locally finite cover @xmath there exists a finite
    subfamily @xmath which covers @xmath ;

5.   for every locally-countable cover @xmath there exists a finite
    subfamily @xmath which covers @xmath ;

6.   for every star-countable cover @xmath there exists a finite
    subfamily @xmath which covers @xmath ;

7.   for every countable cover @xmath there exists a finite subfamily
    @xmath which covers @xmath ;

###### Proof.

That @xmath implies all the other statements is trivial. We proof now
@xmath , for every @xmath , at once.

Assume that @xmath is not totally bounded. Then it is not difficult to
find some open @xmath for which there exist infinitely many @xmath ,
@xmath , such that @xmath whenever @xmath . Write @xmath . Consider the
cover @xmath . Then @xmath is uniform as @xmath and we have to prove
that it is locally finite (in particular locally countable,
star-countable, countable, point-finite and point-countable). Let @xmath
, if @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath . Otherwise @xmath . Moreover,
@xmath intersects only finitely many members of @xmath . Thus, @xmath is
a countable and locally finite. But @xmath has no finite subfamily
covering @xmath which contradicts the hypothesis. ∎

Now, recall Pelant’s result in [ 82 ] stating that the point-finite
modification of the Banach space @xmath is not complete. Therefore not
every complete metric space @xmath satisfies that @xmath is complete.
This fact and the above Theorem 1.3.18 answer negatively our question.
Indeed, we wanted to know if for a metric space @xmath , the
point-finite modification @xmath is complete if and only if @xmath .
However, by Theorem 1.3.18 @xmath , and since there exists complete
metric spaces such that its point-finite modification @xmath is not
complete, it follows that the bornology @xmath is too weak to
characterize the completeness of @xmath (recall Theorem 1.1.33 ).

Finally we give an example of a Bourbaki-complete metric space which
does not have a point-finite base. This example is motivated by the fact
that every cofinally Bourbaki-complete uniform space has a star-finite
base for its uniformity (see Theorem 1.2.28 ). Thus, we show in this way
that, differently to cofinally Bourbaki-complete spaces, not every
Bourbaki-complete uniform space has a star-finite base.

###### Example 1.3.19.

There exists a Bourbaki-complete metric space which does not have a
point-finite base for its uniformity. Therefore, the uniformity does not
have a star-finite base either.

For every @xmath , let @xmath be the set of all bounded real-valued
functions over a set of cardinality @xmath , endowed with the metric

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is Bourbaki-complete and has a point-finite base for its
uniformity since it is a uniformly discrete metric space.

Now, let @xmath the set given by the disjoint union of the above spaces,
and let us endowed @xmath with the metric

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a Bourbaki-complete metric space because it is a disjoint
union of uniformly separated Bourbaki-complete metric spaces. However,
@xmath fails to have a point-finite base for its uniformity as we are
going to prove next.

Let @xmath the usual metric on @xmath . By Pelant’s result [ 82 ] @xmath
does not have a point-finite base for its uniformity, so we can choose
some @xmath such that every uniform refinement, for the metric
uniformity induced by @xmath , of the cover @xmath fails to be
point-finite. In particular, the same is true for the space @xmath ,
where @xmath , by uniform equivalence of the metrics @xmath and @xmath .

Now, observe that for every @xmath and every @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, for every @xmath , @xmath and every @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Take the uniform cover @xmath of @xmath . Then, it is clear that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath . We are going to prove that every uniform refinement @xmath
of @xmath fails to be point-finite. Indeed, since @xmath is uniform we
can choose some @xmath , @xmath such that the cover @xmath refines
@xmath . Thus, we can write also that @xmath where each @xmath is a
uniform cover of @xmath that refines @xmath . Therefore, whenever @xmath
, @xmath is a uniform cover of @xmath by @xmath , and it refines @xmath
by @xmath . Then @xmath fails to be point-finite for every @xmath which
meas that @xmath is not point-finite. Finally, we can conclude that
@xmath does not have a point-finite base.

∎

###### Remark 1.3.20.

Since every star-finite cover is point-finite, then for every
Bourbaki-complete uniform space @xmath , @xmath is complete. On the
other hand, by [ 83 , Corollary 2.4] a metric space has a point-finite
base if and only if it can be uniformly embedded into @xmath where
@xmath is the density of @xmath . Recall that @xmath denotes the Banach
space of function @xmath such that the cardinality of the support @xmath
of @xmath is at most countable and converges to @xmath . Then, by
Corollary 1.3.9 , @xmath , @xmath , is a example of non-Lindelöf
complete non-Bourbaki-complete space having a point-finite base.

#### 1.3.3 Cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric spaces

In spite of having proved that Cauchy sequences of @xmath are not enough
to characterize Bourbaki-boundedness of a subset of a metric space
@xmath , we have that cofinally Cauchy sequences of @xmath are so. The
reason is clear. Indeed, by Lemma 1.2.7 it is easy to see that cofinally
Cauchy sequences of @xmath and cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy sequences of
@xmath are the same thing. Thus, applying Theorem 1.3.3 we get next
result.

###### Theorem 1.3.21.

Let @xmath be a metric space. The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is a Bourbaki-bounded subset in @xmath ;

2.   every sequence @xmath of @xmath is a cofinal Cauchy sequence of
    @xmath .

Next, we recall some facts about cofinal completeness of metric spaces.
Let @xmath be the subset of @xmath of all the points which does not have
a compact neighborhood and @xmath for @xmath . Clearly a space is
locally compact if and only if @xmath . In [ 49 ] Hohti studied
uniformly paracompactness in the frame of metric spaces and gave the
next precise metric characterization by means of the set @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3.22.

( [ 49 , Theorem 2.1.1] ) A metric space is uniformly paracompact
(cofinally complete) if and only if it is either uniformly locally
compact, or either @xmath is a non-empty compact set such that for every
@xmath , the space @xmath is a uniformly locally compact.

In [ 10 ] Beer studied also cofinal completeness in the frame of metric
spaces, precisely, what we call sequentially cofinal completeness.

###### Definition 1.3.23.

A uniform space is sequentially cofinally complete if every cofinal
Cauchy sequence clusters.

###### Theorem 1.3.24.

( [ 10 , Theorem 3.2] ) A metric space @xmath is cofinally complete if
and only if it is sequentially cofinally complete.

Now, we prove that sequential cofinal Bourbaki-completeness, defined
below, and cofinal Bourbaki-completeness of a metric space are also
equivalent. The proof is not trivial and it needs the @xmath -property
of Theorem 1.2.27 together with the above Beer’s result.

###### Definition 1.3.25.

A uniform space is sequentially cofinally Bourbaki-complete if every
cofinal Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence clusters.

The following result is a metric generalization of the Efremovich’s
lemma 1.3.14 for the infinite countable case. We don’t know if it is a
known result, but it has been privately communicated by A. Hohti and H.
Junnila.

###### Lemma 1.3.26.

Let @xmath and @xmath a countable family of infinite @xmath -discrete
subsets of @xmath . Then there are infinite subsets @xmath such that
@xmath is @xmath -discrete.

###### Proof.

We will construct the subsets @xmath by induction. Choose any @xmath and
write @xmath . If @xmath for every @xmath , then @xmath for any two
@xmath , which would be impossible. Hence, we can find an @xmath such
that @xmath . In the same way, we can choose a point @xmath such that
@xmath is @xmath -discrete.

In general, suppose that we have chosen a finite set @xmath of points of
the sets @xmath satisfying:

1.  @xmath is @xmath -discrete;

2.  @xmath for all @xmath .

We construct @xmath as follows. We claim that there is @xmath such that
@xmath is @xmath -discrete. If not, then for all @xmath we have @xmath .
As @xmath is infinite and @xmath is finite, there are @xmath , @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath . Then @xmath , which would
be a contradiction. Repeating this process @xmath times for @xmath and
for the finite @xmath -discrete set @xmath together with the infinite
set @xmath , we obtain the desired @xmath -discrete set @xmath .

Since clearly @xmath is @xmath -discrete, we finish taking @xmath . ∎

Next we give the correct proof of a result that can be found in [ 39 ,
Theorem 28] . This proof needs the previous lemma which wasn’t set in [
39 ] .

###### Theorem 1.3.27.

Let @xmath be a metric space. The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete;

2.  @xmath is sequentially cofinally Bourbaki-complete;

3.  @xmath is (sequentially) cofinally complete and satisfies the @xmath
    -property.

4.   either @xmath is uniformly locally compact or @xmath is a non-empty
    compact set such that for every @xmath , @xmath is a uniformly
    locally compact space and there exists @xmath satisfying that for
    every @xmath , and every @xmath there exist finitely many @xmath
    satisfying that @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath This implication is trivial.

@xmath If @xmath is sequentially cofinally Bourbaki-complete then it is
sequentially cofinally complete. By Theorem 1.3.24 , @xmath is cofinally
complete.

Next, assume that there exists @xmath satisfying that for every @xmath
there exist some @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath cannot be covered by
finitely many balls @xmath . Take @xmath , @xmath . Then for every
@xmath we can choose an infinite set @xmath which is @xmath -discrete.

By Lemma 1.3.26 , there exists an infinite set @xmath such that @xmath
is @xmath -discrete. Now, consider a partition of @xmath , in a
countable family of infinite subsets @xmath . Finally, if we enumerate
every set @xmath , and we define the sequence @xmath , if @xmath , then
@xmath is a cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy sequence which does not cluster.

@xmath This follows from Theorem 1.2.27 and Theorem 1.2.28 .

@xmath This implication follows from Theorem 1.3.24 and the fact that
@xmath satisfies the @xmath -property.

@xmath If @xmath is uniformly locally compact in particular it is
cofinally complete. More precisely, it is cofinally Bourbaki-complete
and by Theorem 1.2.27 and Theorem 1.2.28 , the result follows.
Otherwise, @xmath must be cofinally complete by [ 10 , Theorem 3.2] and
we just need to prove the @xmath -property. So fix @xmath , let @xmath
from the hypothesis and take @xmath . If @xmath for some @xmath and
@xmath then, by hypothesis, @xmath is covered by finitely many balls of
the radius @xmath , for every @xmath . Otherwise, suppose that @xmath .
Then @xmath for every @xmath . Since @xmath is uniformly locally compact
in its relative metric, there exists @xmath such that @xmath is compact
for every @xmath . Let @xmath . Then using Lemma 1.2.18 , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is also compact for every @xmath . By compactness, for every @xmath
there exists finitely many balls @xmath covering @xmath .

∎

Observe that statement @xmath in the previous result give us a good
metric characterization of the cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric
spaces. In particular, we can see that,

cofinally Bourbaki-complete @xmath uniformly locally compact

as it is shown in the next example.

###### Example 1.3.28.

There exists a cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric space which is not
uniformly locally compact.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the following subspace of the metric hedgehog @xmath
(Example 1.2.14 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, @xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete by statement @xmath in
Theorem 1.3.27 . However, @xmath is not uniformly locally compact as the
point @xmath has no compact neighborhood. ∎

###### Corollary 1.3.29.

Let @xmath be a metric space. Then @xmath is cofinally complete if and
only if @xmath is sequentially cofinally complete.

###### Proof.

One implication is clear. So let us suppose that @xmath is sequentially
cofinally complete. Similarly to Lemma 1.2.7 (3), one can prove that a
sequence @xmath is cofinally Cauchy in @xmath if and only if it is
cofinally Bourbaki-Cauchy in @xmath . Therefore the result follows from
Theorem 1.2.28 and Theorem 1.3.27 . ∎

Theorem 1.3.27 contrasts with the fact that sequential completeness of
@xmath is weaker than Bourbaki-completeness of @xmath . The reason is
that cofinal completeness of @xmath implies that @xmath , that is, the
uniformity @xmath is metrizable.

###### Example 1.3.30.

There is a uniform space which is sequentially cofinally
Bourbaki-complete, totally bounded but not complete, nor cofinally
complete.

###### Proof.

The space @xmath of all the countable ordinals is totally bounded and
sequentially compact , that is, every infinite sequence clusters [ 27 ]
. Therefore it is sequentially cofinally Bourbaki-complete in its unique
uniformity. However it is not compact and then not complete, nor
Bourbaki-complete.

∎

\Denarius \Denarius \Denarius

## Chapter 2 Embedding Bourbaki-complete spaces and Bourbaki-completely
metrizable spaces

### 2.1 Embedding’s results

#### 2.1.1 “Universal space” for Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces

The main result of this second part of the thesis is the identification
of a “universal space” for Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces. Now, we
start solving the particular case of embedding complete metric spaces
and complete uniform spaces having a base for their uniformity by means
of star-finite open covers, that is, satisfying that @xmath . Observe
that, in this case, we can take a base of uniform star-finite open
covers for @xmath (see [ 59 , Proposition 28, Chapter IV] ).

We recall that along this thesis the real line @xmath is endowed with
the euclidean metric @xmath and any discrete space @xmath is endowed
with the uniformly discrete metric

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a countable product of discrete spaces @xmath , @xmath denotes the
“first difference metric” , that is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is compatible with the product uniformity on it. Finally, by
@xmath we will denote the product metric on @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by @xmath we will denote the product uniformity over any product of
uniform spaces.

###### Definition 2.1.1.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. A uniform partition of @xmath is a
partition @xmath of the space @xmath such that @xmath for some @xmath
(that is, @xmath ).

Observe that, whenever @xmath , the family of all the chainable
components @xmath induced by @xmath is a uniform partition of @xmath .
In particular, if @xmath for some uniform partition @xmath of @xmath
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, let @xmath be a uniform space and let @xmath the family of all the
uniform partitions of @xmath . We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a connected uniform space, or in general, for a uniformly connected
uniform space @xmath , we have that @xmath . Recall that a uniformly
connected space (or well-chained space) is a uniform space @xmath such
that for every @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath .

In the next theorem we apply techniques that can be found in [ 8 ] and
in [ 37 ] .

###### Theorem 2.1.2.

Let @xmath be a complete metric space such that @xmath . Then there
exists an embedding

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where each @xmath is a cardinal endowed with the uniformly discrete
metric @xmath , @xmath is uniformly continuous and @xmath is a closed
subspace of @xmath Moreover, @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let us take @xmath a family of star-finite open covers being a base for
the metric uniformity @xmath and such that @xmath for every @xmath .
Without loss of generality assume that for every @xmath , @xmath refines
@xmath . Next, for every @xmath , let @xmath be the family of all the
chainable components of @xmath induced by @xmath . Notice that @xmath
for every @xmath . Take the cardinal @xmath and order the elements of
the partition @xmath by writing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, for every @xmath let @xmath and @xmath . Next, put @xmath . In
particular, it is clear that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, let us order each @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, suppose that for @xmath we have that the families of sets @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath , are defined and let @xmath .
And also, suppose that we have ordered each family @xmath , as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, by induction, we put @xmath and @xmath . Finally we order each
family of sets @xmath as before:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In addition, for every @xmath we put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Observe that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, as @xmath is a base for the uniformity @xmath , @xmath .

Next, notice that for every @xmath there exists a unique @xmath such
that @xmath . Besides, @xmath extends @xmath , so there exists a unique
@xmath such that the restriction @xmath of @xmath over the first @xmath
’s coordinates is exactly @xmath . Let us denote by @xmath the map that
sends @xmath to @xmath . Recall, that for every @xmath and every @xmath
there exists a unique @xmath such that @xmath .

Now, for every @xmath let @xmath the open cover from Lemma 1.2.6 induced
by @xmath , and define the sets @xmath , @xmath . Then the cover @xmath
is uniform and linear. Take @xmath such that @xmath . Applying the same
techniques than in [ 33 , Lemma 1.2] there exists a uniformly continuous
function @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath . Moreover, the
following is always satisfied (see [ 33 , Lemma 1.2] ):

if @xmath we have that @xmath

Next, recall that we can write @xmath where @xmath if @xmath as the
covers @xmath are star-finite and every chainable component @xmath ,
@xmath , contains at most countable many @xmath .

Now, since for every @xmath and for every @xmath , there exists a unique
@xmath such that @xmath , we define the map

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

@xmath The map @xmath is injective. Let @xmath , @xmath . Then we can
take some @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath is a base for the
uniformity inducing the topology on @xmath , for some @xmath we can
choose @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . Therefore
@xmath and @xmath is an injective map.

@xmath The map @xmath is uniformly continuous. We check that the map
@xmath is uniformly continuous by showing that it is uniformly
continuous when we compose it with the projections. First, it is easy to
see that @xmath is a uniformly continuous map since whenever @xmath then
@xmath for a unique @xmath . Therefore, @xmath and then @xmath . Next,
let @xmath again, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath The map @xmath is closed. Before proving that @xmath is closed,
we need to prove the following claim.

CLAIM. Let @xmath and @xmath a Cauchy filter of the subspace @xmath .
Then @xmath is a Bourbaki-Cauchy filter of @xmath .

###### Proof of the claim.

Let @xmath be Cauchy filter of @xmath . Then, fixed @xmath , since
@xmath is Cauchy, there is some @xmath , @xmath , where, for some @xmath
and some @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath for every
@xmath .

As the fixed @xmath such that @xmath is unique, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the construction of @xmath there is some @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we have proved that @xmath is a Bourbaki-Cauchy filter in @xmath . ∎

Now we follow with the proof that @xmath is a closed map. Let @xmath a
closed subset and let @xmath be an ultrafilter in @xmath which converges
to some @xmath . Then @xmath is a Cauchy ultrafilter of the subspace
@xmath . By maximality of @xmath and the above claim, @xmath is a
Bourbaki-Cauchy ultrafilter of @xmath . Then, @xmath converges in @xmath
because, by Theorem 1.2.11 , @xmath is in particular Bourbaki-complete.
By continuity of @xmath , @xmath converges in @xmath . Since @xmath , by
maximality, @xmath converges in @xmath , that is, @xmath . Thus, @xmath
is a closed subspace of @xmath .

@xmath The image @xmath is a closed subspace of @xmath Since @xmath is a
closed map, this is clear.

Finally, observe that, by the results in Bourbaki [ 19 , II.2.3 Prop 5
p. 177, p.180] , the spaces @xmath and @xmath are uniformly equivalent,
and this complete the proof.

∎

Now we solve the analogous problem for uniform space having a base of
star-finite covers for the uniformity.

###### Lemma 2.1.3.

( [ 97 ] ) Let @xmath be a normal sequence of open (uniform) covers of a
(uniform) space @xmath . Then there exists a (uniformly) continuous
pseudometric @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 2.1.4.

Let @xmath be a complete uniform space such that @xmath . Then there
exists an embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each @xmath is a cardinal endowed with the uniformly discrete
metric @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is uniformly continuous and @xmath is a
closed subspace of @xmath Moreover, @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a uniform space having a base of star-finite open covers
for the uniformity, and let @xmath be a base for @xmath . Then, for
every @xmath , @xmath there is a normal sequence @xmath of star-finite
uniform open covers such that @xmath . This can be obtained applying the
axioms of uniformity and [ 59 , Proposition 8, Chapter IV] .

For every @xmath , let @xmath be the pseudometric on @xmath from Lemma
2.1.3 generated by the normal sequence @xmath . Then, the family of
covers @xmath is a base of star-finite open covers of the space @xmath .

Let @xmath be the metric space obtained by doing the usual metric
identification @xmath on @xmath :

@xmath if and only if @xmath

If @xmath denotes the quotient map induced by @xmath , then @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Hence, the family of covers @xmath is a base of
star-finite covers for the metric uniformity on @xmath induced by @xmath
. In addition, the map @xmath preserves the uniform partitions induced
by the covers @xmath , @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the completion of @xmath and @xmath denote the
extension to @xmath of the covers @xmath . Then @xmath is a base of
star-finite open covers for the metric uniformity of @xmath ( [ 85 ,
Lemma p. 370] ).

By [ 97 , Theorems 39.11 and 39.12] @xmath is uniformly homeomorphic to
subspace of the product @xmath . In particular it is closed by
completeness. Denote by @xmath the embedding of @xmath into @xmath from
Theorem 2.1.2 , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the product map @xmath . Then, the restriction of @xmath over the
uniform homeomorphic image of @xmath in @xmath is the desired map.
Indeed, notice that @xmath is closed in @xmath . Moreover, by [ 19 ,
II.2.3 Prop 5 p.177, p.180] , the spaces @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
are uniformly equivalent when they are endowed with their respective
product uniformities. Finally, by Theorem 2.1.2 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the quotient map @xmath and the operation of completion preserve
uniform partitions. ∎

Next, recall that by Theorem 1.2.11 , @xmath is complete if and only if
@xmath is Bourbaki-complete. Therefore, if we compose the embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from Theorem 2.1.4 , with the identity map @xmath we have that the
following result, characterizing a universal space for Bourbaki-complete
uniform spaces, is immediate.

###### Theorem 2.1.5.

Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-complete uniform space. Then there exists an
embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each @xmath is a cardinal endowed with the uniformly discrete
metric @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is uniformly continuous and @xmath is a
closed subspace of @xmath Moreover, @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.6.

As we have said at the beginning of this section, whenever @xmath is a
connected or uniformly connected space then every uniform partition has
cardinal 1 and hence, in the above embeddings, the discourse on the
chainable components is clearly not needed, and we can straightly embed
our Bourbaki-complete uniform space in a product of real-lines.

On the other hand, we have a class of uniform spaces which represents
the opposite situation. Recall that a uniform space is uniformly
0-dimensional if the uniformity has a base composed of partitions.
Observe that from Theorem 2.1.4 any complete uniformly 0-dimensional
space can be uniformly embedded, as closed subspace, in a product of
uniformly discrete spaces. Indeed, the embedding is given by the map
@xmath in Theorem 2.1.4 . We just need to see that the inverse map
@xmath from Theorem 2.1.2 is uniformly continuous. Observe that, since
@xmath is uniformly 0-dimensional the family of all the chainable
components @xmath is a base for the uniformity of @xmath . Fix @xmath ,
suppose that for @xmath , @xmath . Then @xmath and this implies that
@xmath belong to the same chainable component of @xmath for every @xmath
. Therefore we can conclude that @xmath is uniformly continuous.
Finally, the general case for uniformly 0-dimensional uniform spaces
proceeds like in Theorem 2.1.4 and taking into the account that the
product map of uniformly continuous functions is uniformly continuous.

#### 2.1.2 Embedding Bourbaki-complete metric spaces

By Theorem 2.1.5 , it is clear that a universal space for
Bourbaki-complete metric spaces is also determined. However, in the
metrizable case, by future technical reasons, we need that this
universal space is also metrizable. Indeed, observe that for a
Bourbaki-complete metric space @xmath , the star-finite modification
@xmath is not metrizable in general and therefore the universal space
obtained from Theorem 2.1.5 is not metric. In particular we have the
following result.

###### Theorem 2.1.7.

Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-complete metric space. Then the uniform space
@xmath is metrizable if and only if @xmath .

###### Proof.

One implication is clear, so let @xmath be a metric on @xmath such that
@xmath . In particular @xmath is complete. By Lemma 1.1.16 , the Samuel
compactification @xmath coincides with the Samuel compactification
@xmath . Therefore, by [ 34 , Corollary 3] , it is known that @xmath and
@xmath are uniformly homeomorphic. Hence, @xmath . ∎

In order to find a universal metric space for Bourbaki-complete metric
spaces we will need first some technical results.

###### Definition 2.1.8.

( [ 27 ] ) A sequence @xmath of open covers of a topological space
@xmath is a complete sequence of covers if, for every filter @xmath of
@xmath satisfying that @xmath for every @xmath , then @xmath has a
cluster point.

###### Definition 2.1.9.

A sequence of covers @xmath of a set @xmath is a decreasing sequence of
covers if for every @xmath , @xmath and for each @xmath , we have that
@xmath .

For (open) covers @xmath of a (space) set @xmath , we denote by @xmath
the (open) cover @xmath . In particular @xmath refines @xmath for each
@xmath . More precisely, if @xmath is a sequence of covers of @xmath and
for every @xmath , we define @xmath then, @xmath is a decreasing
sequence of covers.

###### Lemma 2.1.10.

( [ 51 , Lemma 2.8] ) Let @xmath be a decreasing complete sequence of a
topological space @xmath . Then the family @xmath contains a refinement
of every directed open cover of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a directed open cover of @xmath . We show that the family
@xmath covers @xmath . Assume on the contrary that there exists a point
@xmath in the set @xmath . Since @xmath is a decreasing sequence of
covers of @xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath
. Since @xmath none of the sets @xmath is contained in any member of
@xmath . It follows that the family @xmath is a filter base. Let @xmath
be the filter of @xmath generated by @xmath . We have @xmath for every
@xmath and it follows, since @xmath is a complete sequence, that @xmath
has a cluster point @xmath . This, however, is impossible: there exists
@xmath with @xmath and now we have @xmath but @xmath . This
contradiction shows that @xmath covers @xmath . As a consequence, @xmath
is a refinement of @xmath contained in @xmath . ∎

Observe that the next result is a metric and uniform extension of [ 51 ,
Theorem 2.16] .

###### Theorem 2.1.11.

Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-complete metric space. Then there exists a
complete sequence @xmath of uniform star-finite open covers of @xmath
such that @xmath is a base of the topology of @xmath .

###### Proof.

For every @xmath , let @xmath the cover from Lemma 1.2.6 induced by the
cover of open balls @xmath .

Next, define @xmath , @xmath . It is clear that @xmath is a decreasing
sequence of star-finite uniform open covers of @xmath since finite
intersection of star-finite uniform open covers is again star-finite,
open and uniform. We prove now that @xmath is a complete sequence. Let
@xmath be a filter in @xmath such that for every @xmath there exists
some @xmath such that @xmath for some @xmath . In particular, @xmath is
a Bourbaki-Cauchy filter. Indeed, if @xmath for some @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, @xmath clusters in @xmath and
@xmath is a complete sequence.

Next, let @xmath be an open cover of @xmath and @xmath the directed open
cover given by finite unions of elements of @xmath . By all the
foregoing and by Lemma 2.1.10 , there exists a cover @xmath such that
@xmath . Now, for every @xmath fix @xmath a finite subfamily of @xmath
such that @xmath . Note that for each @xmath , the family @xmath is a
star-finite open cover of @xmath . Moreover, it is also uniform since
@xmath . Therefore, the cover @xmath has a refinement which is contained
in @xmath .

Finally, let @xmath be any bijection, and, for every @xmath , define the
covers @xmath . We check now that @xmath is a base for the topology of
@xmath . Indeed, let @xmath be an open set of @xmath and @xmath . Then
we can choose some @xmath such that @xmath . Consider the open cover of
balls @xmath . By all the foregoing, @xmath has a refinement contained
in @xmath . Choose @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath
. Since @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, we conclude that @xmath is a base for the topology of @xmath .

∎

###### Theorem 2.1.12.

Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-complete metric space. Then there exists a
complete metric @xmath on @xmath which is compatible with the topology
of @xmath such that the metric uniformity @xmath has a base of
star-finite covers and @xmath . Moreover, @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Theorem 2.1.11 , there exists a complete sequence @xmath of uniform
star-finite open covers of @xmath such that @xmath is a base of the
topology of @xmath . Observe that we can take a complete normal sequence
@xmath of open covers from @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath and
@xmath is a base for the topology of @xmath . Indeed, take @xmath . By [
59 , Proposition 8, Chapter IV] , we can take an open cover @xmath such
that @xmath . Put @xmath . Then @xmath , @xmath and clearly, @xmath is a
uniform star-finite open cover. Again, by [ 59 , Proposition 8, Chapter
IV] , we can take an open cover @xmath such that @xmath . Put @xmath .
Thus, proceeding by induction we obtain such a normal sequence.

By Lemma 2.1.3 , there exists a uniformly continuous pseudometric @xmath
on @xmath such that @xmath has a base of star-finite open covers for the
pseudometric uniformity. Moreover, @xmath is complete because the
sequence @xmath is complete. Since @xmath is a base for the topology of
@xmath , then @xmath is compatible with the topology of @xmath . More
precisely, since @xmath is Hausdorff, then @xmath is a metric. Finally,
@xmath since @xmath for every @xmath .

Next, we check that @xmath . Since @xmath then @xmath . Therefore, we
just need to prove that @xmath . To that purpose, let us denote by
@xmath , @xmath , the families of all the chainable components induced
by the covers @xmath , and by @xmath , @xmath , the family of all the
chainable components induced by the above covers @xmath . Observe that,
if we want to prove that @xmath , it is enough to see that for every
@xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath , that is, @xmath .

Fix @xmath and consider @xmath . Looking into the end of the proof of
Theorem 2.1.11 , there exists some @xmath such that the cover @xmath ,
from the beginning of this proof, induces the same chainable components
than the cover @xmath , @xmath , that is, precisely the family @xmath .
Since @xmath . Then, it is clear that @xmath as we claimed. ∎

###### Theorem 2.1.13.

Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-complete metric space. Then, there exists an
embedding

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where each @xmath is a cardinal endowed with the uniformly discrete
metric @xmath , @xmath is uniformly continuous and @xmath is a closed
subspace of @xmath Moreover, @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Theorem 2.1.12 there exists a compatible metric @xmath on @xmath such
that @xmath is complete, the metric uniformity @xmath has a star-finite
base, the identity map @xmath is uniformly continuous and @xmath . On
the other hand, consider the embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

form Theorem 2.1.2 . Then the composition @xmath is the desired
embedding. Finally, as @xmath , by Theorem 2.1.2 it follows that @xmath
.

∎

###### Remark 2.1.14.

Next, we would like to know if the above embedding @xmath of @xmath into
@xmath could be stronger. More precisely, we want to know if @xmath
preserves “proximities”, that is, if the Samuel compactification @xmath
of @xmath is homeomorphic to the Samuel compactification of its image in
@xmath . However, this requirement is too strong. Indeed, recall that
the metric space @xmath has a star-finite base for its uniformity as
@xmath is uniformly @xmath -dimensional, that is, it has a base of
partitions for its uniformity, and the uniformity on @xmath induced by
@xmath is exactly the weak uniformity @xmath , which is of course
star-finite (see Theorem 1.1.24 ). Therefore, @xmath has a star-finite
base for its uniformity. By [ 34 , Corollary 3] , if the Samuel
compactification of @xmath is homeomorphic to the Samuel
compactification of @xmath , then @xmath is uniformly homeomorphic to
@xmath , and in particular it has a star-finite base for its uniformity
too. But this is not true for every Bourbaki-complete metric space as we
have shown in Example 1.3.19 .

\Denarius \Denarius \Denarius

### 2.2 Metrization results

#### 2.2.1 Bourbaki-completely metrizable spaces and related properties

Next, we are going to characterize those metric spaces that are
topologically metrizable by a Bourbaki-complete metric. This problem was
solved and deeply studied in the work by Junnila, Hohti and Meroño [ 51
] trough a property called strong Čech-completeness. Here we have
decided to present a shorter proof than the one in [ 51 ] that strongly
depends of the embeddings from the previous section.

Our characterization of the Bourbaki-completely metrizable spaces is
related to the following properties.

###### Definition 2.2.1.

A space @xmath is Čech-complete if there exist open sets @xmath , @xmath
of @xmath containing @xmath such that @xmath .

It is well-known that a space @xmath is Čech-complete if and only if it
has a complete sequence of covers (see [ 27 , Theorem 3.9.2 and notes on
page 199] ). Moreover, in the frame of metrizable spaces, Čech-complete
spaces are the completely metrizable spaces, that is, those spaces that
are metrizable by a complete metric .

Now, consider the following topological property.

###### Definition 2.2.2.

A space @xmath is completely paracompact if every open cover @xmath has
a refinement @xmath which is a subcollection of a family of sets @xmath
where each @xmath is an open star-finite cover of @xmath .

It is clear that every strongly paracompact space is completely
paracompact . Moreover, by Remark 1.1.22 we can write star-countable
instead of star-finite in the above definition.

Next, every completely paracompact space is paracompact . This follows
from the fact that every star-countable cover is @xmath - discrete ,
that is, a countable union of discrete families of sets, and from the
result of Michael [ 70 , Theorem 1] that states that if a space
satisfies that every open cover has a @xmath -star-finite refinement
then is paracompact. In particular, it is useful to recall the result of
Morita [ 71 ] that every locally compact paracompact space is strongly
paracompact and therefore also completely paracompact .

Now, we need to consider complete paracompactness in the frame of
metrizable spaces.

###### Definition 2.2.3.

A space is strongly metrizable if it has a base for the topology which
consists of the union of countably many star-finite open covers.

By the following result of Zarelua, completely paracompact metrizable
spaces are exactly the strongly metrizable spaces .

###### Theorem 2.2.4.

( [ 100 , Lemma 5] ) Let @xmath be a metrizable space. Then @xmath is
strongly metrizable if and only if it is completely paracompact.

Again, by Remark 1.1.22 we could also write, in the above definition of
strongly metrizable space, star-countable instead of star-finite.
Moreover, since star-finite covers are @xmath -discrete it follows from
the Nagata-Smirnov-Bing metrization Theorem [ 27 ] that every strongly
metrizable space is metrizable.

An example of metrizable space (paracompact space) which is not strongly
metrizable (completely paracompact) is provided by the following result
of Wiscamb.

###### Theorem 2.2.5.

( [ 98 , Theorem 5.2] ) A connected space is completely paracompact if
and only if it is Lindelöf.

Observe that the family of, non necessarily metrizable, Čech-complete
and completely paracompact spaces are well studied in [ 51 ] . On the
other hand, in the last subsection, we will analyze a uniform version of
complete paracompactness in the same line than uniform strong
paracompactness and uniform paracompactness.

From Theorem 2.1.11 it is immediate that every Bourbaki-complete metric
space is completely metrizable and strongly metrizable . Now we prove
the converse.

###### Theorem 2.2.6.

Let @xmath be a completely metrizable and strongly metrizable space.
Then @xmath is metrizable by a complete metric @xmath such that @xmath .
In particular @xmath is Bourbaki-complete.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is strongly metrizable there exists a countable family
@xmath of star-finite open covers of @xmath such that @xmath is a base
for the topology of @xmath . In particular, by paracompactness of @xmath
, the family of all the star-finite open covers of @xmath form a base
for the uniformity @xmath .Therefore we can apply the axioms of
uniformity to the countable family of star-finite open covers @xmath .
Thus, there exists a normal sequence of star-finite open covers @xmath ,
such that @xmath for every @xmath (as in the proof of Theorem 2.1.11 ).
Since @xmath is a base for the topology of @xmath , then @xmath is also
a base for the topology of @xmath .

Indeed, let @xmath an open set of @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is a
base, there exists some @xmath for some @xmath , such that @xmath .
Next, let @xmath be any metric on @xmath , and choose @xmath such that
@xmath . Again by the base condition of @xmath , there exists some
@xmath , such that for some @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next, consider the cover @xmath and choose some @xmath , such that
@xmath . Since @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have proved in this way that @xmath is also a base for the topology
of @xmath .

Next, apply Lemma 2.1.3 to @xmath and let @xmath be the pseudometric
obtained. Then @xmath is compatible with the topology @xmath , and in
particular, @xmath is a metric. Moreover, the uniformity induced by
@xmath has a star-finite base, that is, @xmath .

Consider now the completion @xmath of @xmath . Then @xmath is complete
and has a star-finite base by [ 85 , Lemma p. 370] , that is, @xmath .
Now, since @xmath is completely metrizable, by [ 27 , Theorem 4.3.24] ,
@xmath is a @xmath -set of @xmath . Thus, by [ 27 , Theorem 4.3.22] ,
@xmath is homeomorphic to a closed subspace of @xmath . Hence @xmath is
metrizable by a complete metric @xmath satisfying that @xmath ,
precisely, the restriction of @xmath over @xmath . Indeed, it is not
difficult to see that the product of two uniform spaces satisfying that
both uniformities have a star-finite base, has also a star-finite base
for the product uniformity. It is also clear the preservation of this
property to subspaces. Finally, observe that, in particular, @xmath must
be Bourbaki-complete.

∎

The next result collect several characterizations of the spaces
metrizables by a Bourbaki-complete metric.

###### Definition 2.2.7.

The cellularity of a space @xmath is the supremum of the cardinal of all
the partitions by open sets of the space.

###### Theorem 2.2.8.

Let @xmath be a space. The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is metrizable by a Bourbaki-complete metric;

2.  @xmath is metrizable by a complete metric @xmath , such that @xmath
    ;

3.  @xmath is homeomorphic to a closed subspace of @xmath where @xmath
    is a discrete space of cardinal the cellularity of @xmath ;

4.  @xmath is homeomorphic to a closed subspace of a countable product
    of locally compact metric spaces;

5.  @xmath is Čech-complete and strongly metrizable;

6.  @xmath is metrizable by a complete metric @xmath such that @xmath

###### Proof.

@xmath This is Theorem 2.1.12 .

@xmath Let @xmath a set a set of cardinal the cellularity of @xmath .
Then, it is clear that @xmath where the @xmath ’s are the cardinals from
2.1.2 such that @xmath can be embedded as a closed subspace of @xmath .
Then for every @xmath , @xmath can be identified with a subspace of
@xmath and thus @xmath is a closed subspace of the product space @xmath
. Then, the result follows from Theorem 2.1.2 .

@xmath This is trivial since @xmath and @xmath are locally compact.

@xmath First we show that every locally compact metric space @xmath is
metrizable by a Bourbaki-complete metric. For every @xmath let @xmath an
open neighborhood of @xmath such that @xmath is compact. Put @xmath . By
[ 97 , Lemma 38.1] , there exists a continuous pseudometric @xmath on
@xmath such that @xmath . In particular @xmath is compact for every
@xmath . Now, consider the metric @xmath on @xmath . This metric is
compatible with the topology of @xmath and, it is clear that every set
@xmath , @xmath is compact, that is, @xmath is uniformly locally
compact.

Next, since every uniformly locally compact space is Bourbaki-complete
(Theorem 1.2.19 ), a countable product of Bourbaki-complete metric
spaces is a Bourbaki-complete metric space (Theorem 1.2.47 ), and
Bourbaki-comple- teness is inherited by closed subspaces, the result
follows.

@xmath This is Theorem 2.1.11 .

@xmath This is Theorem 2.2.6 .

@xmath This is immediate.

@xmath We just need to prove complete paracompactness (see Theorem 2.2.4
). If @xmath then for every @xmath we can take a uniform star-countable
cover @xmath such that @xmath refines the uniform cover @xmath . Then
@xmath is a base of for the topology of @xmath and by Remark 1.1.22 , it
follows that @xmath is completely paracompact.

∎

From the result of Wiscamb, Theorem 2.2.5 , the following corollary
follows.

###### Corollary 2.2.9.

A connected space @xmath is metrizable by a Bourbaki-complete metric if
and only it is Lindelöf and completely metrizable.

Therefore, any non separable, connected and complete metric space is an
example of completely metrizable space which is not metrizable by a
Bourbaki-complete metric.

In the next result we give several characterizations of the property of
strong metrizability that can be deduced from the above result on
Bourbaki-complete metrization.

###### Theorem 2.2.10.

Let @xmath be a space. The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is metrizable by a metric @xmath such that @xmath ;

2.  @xmath is metrizable by a metric @xmath such that @xmath ;

3.  @xmath is homeomorphic to a subspace of @xmath where @xmath is a
    discrete space of cardinality the cellularity of @xmath ;

4.  @xmath is homeomorphic to a subspace of a countable product locally
    compact metric spaces;

5.  @xmath is strongly metrizable;

6.  @xmath is metrizable by a metric @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath If @xmath satisfies that @xmath , then its completion @xmath is
Bourbaki-complete by Corollary 1.3.13 . By Theorem 2.1.12 , @xmath is
metrizable by a complete metric @xmath such that @xmath satisfies that
@xmath . Since this last property is clearly hereditary, the restriction
of @xmath over @xmath is the desired metric.

@xmath If @xmath satisfies that @xmath then its completion @xmath too by
[ 85 , Lemma p. 370] . Then @xmath is homeomorphic to a closed subspace
of @xmath by Theorem 2.1.2 . Hence, @xmath is homeomorphic to a subspace
of @xmath .

@xmath This is trivial.

@xmath Consider the closure of @xmath in the countable product of
locally compact spaces and apply Theorem 2.2.8 . The result follows by
Corollary 1.3.13 .

@xmath This implication follows from Theorem 2.1.11 , Corollary 1.3.13
and from the fact that strong metrizability is an hereditary property.

@xmath Let @xmath be a strongly metrizable space. Then for any
compatible metric @xmath on @xmath , if @xmath denoted its completion,
then @xmath is strongly metrizable. In fact the open covers of @xmath
are extended to @xmath . Thus @xmath is strongly metrizable and
complete. The result is then immediate from Theorem 2.2.6 and Corollary
1.3.13 .

@xmath This is immediate.

@xmath This is like the proof of the implication @xmath in Theorem 2.2.8
. ∎

###### Remark 2.2.11.

That a space @xmath is strongly metrizable if and only if it is
homeomorphic to a subspace of @xmath is a well-known result (see [ 76 ]
, [ 80 ] an [ 8 ] ).

###### Example 2.2.12.

There is a complete metric space @xmath such that @xmath but which is
not strongly paracompact. In particular it is an example of strongly
metrizable space which is not strongly paracompact

###### Proof.

Consider the Example 1.2.53 , a take the product @xmath , where @xmath .
It is a product of complete metric spaces so it is complete. In
addition, it is easy to see that the uniformity induced by @xmath has a
star-finite base. In particular it is Bourbaki-complete and then
strongly metrizable (Theorem 2.2.8 ). However it is not strongly
paracompact since it is homeomorphic to @xmath which was shown not being
strongly paracompact ( [ 76 , Remark p. 169] ). ∎

Finally, we characterize those spaces which are uniformizable by a
Bourbaki-complete uniformity. These are exactly the @xmath -complete
spaces of García-Máynez ( [ 30 ] , see Definition 1.2.33).

###### Theorem 2.2.13.

For a space @xmath the following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is uniformizable by a Bourbaki-complete uniformity;

2.  @xmath is @xmath -complete;

3.  @xmath is homeomorphic to a closed subspace of @xmath where @xmath
    is a discrete space of cardinality the cellularity of @xmath ;

4.  @xmath is homeomorphic to a closed subspace of a product of locally
    compact metric spaces.

###### Proof.

@xmath . This implications follows from the fact that every
Bourbaki-uniform space is @xmath -complete.

@xmath Since @xmath is complete then, by Theorem 2.1.4 , @xmath can be
embedded as a closed subspace of @xmath where each @xmath are the
cardinals endowed with the discrete topology. Moreover, the cardinal of
@xmath is the cellularity of @xmath and then @xmath . Thus, each @xmath
can be identified with a subset of @xmath and @xmath is a closed
subspace of the product space @xmath .

@xmath This is trivial.

@xmath Every locally compact metrizable space is metrizable by a
uniformly locally compact metric by as in the proof of Theorem 2.2.8 .
In particular, every uniformly locally compact metric space is
Bourbaki-complete by Theorem 1.2.19 . Since Bourbaki-completeness is a
productive property (Theorem 1.2.47 ) and hereditary by closed subspaces
the result follows. ∎

###### Remark 2.2.14.

The equivalence of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the previous theorem
was well-known by García-Máynez (see [ 30 ] and [ 31 ] ).

###### Example 2.2.15.

There exists a @xmath -complete space which is not completely
paracompact.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath (Lemma 1.1.19 ), any realcompact non paracompact space is
such an example. For instance, the product of two Sorgenfrey lines. ∎

#### 2.2.2 Metric spaces that are Bourbaki-complete and cofinally
complete at the same time

In this section we study those metric spaces that are metrizable by a
metric which is Bourbaki-complete and cofinally complete at the same
time (Theorem 2.2.22 ). The interest in these spaces lies in the fact
that these are close to the metric spaces metrizable by a cofinally
Bourbaki-complete metric (Theorem 2.2.23 ) but they are topologically
weaker (Example 2.2.24 ).

On the other hand, recall that complete paracompactness is a property
lying between strong paracompactness and paracompactness. Therefore it
is interesting to ask if there exists a uniform extension of
completeness lying between the properties of uniform strong
paracompactness and uniform paracompactness, in such a way that it
coincides with complete paracompactness when the space is endowed with
the fine uniformity @xmath . To that purpose we we are going to
introduce the following family of covers.

###### Definition 2.2.16.

An open cover @xmath of a space @xmath is @xmath -star-finite ( @xmath
-star-countable ) if there exists a countable family @xmath , @xmath ,
of star-finite (star-countable) open covers of @xmath such that @xmath .

We will denote by @xmath - @xmath the family of all the uniform covers
from a uniform space @xmath having a @xmath -star-finite uniform open
refinement. We cannot tell if this family of uniform covers is in
general a base for some compatible uniformity on @xmath . However, we
have some particular examples of uniform spaces such that the original
uniformity has a base of @xmath -star-finite open covers.

###### Theorem 2.2.17.

The following statements are equivalent for a space @xmath

1.  @xmath is completely paracompact;

2.  @xmath is paracompact and @xmath - @xmath ;

###### Proof.

The proof is clear from the definition of completely paracompact space.
Moreover, recall that if a space @xmath is paracompact, a base of the
uniformity @xmath is given by all the open covers of @xmath . ∎

Another example of uniform space having a @xmath -star-finite open base
for its uniformity is any uniform space @xmath such that @xmath .
Indeed, any open star-finite cover is clearly @xmath -star-finite.
Moreover, we next prove that, if @xmath has a countable base for its
uniformity, then it has also a @xmath -star-finite open base for its
uniformity.

###### Theorem 2.2.18.

Let @xmath be a uniform space such that @xmath . Then @xmath has a a
base of @xmath -star-finite open covers.

###### Proof.

If @xmath is a countable uniform cover then each cover @xmath is uniform
and star-finite and @xmath , that is, @xmath is @xmath -star-finite. ∎

###### Remark 2.2.19.

It is not difficult to see that for a connected uniform space @xmath ,
the uniformity @xmath has a countable base, that is @xmath , if and only
if @xmath has a base of @xmath -star-finite open covers. The proof is
like Lemma 1.1.23 . Moreover, by this fact, we can easily deduce the
result by Wiscamb Theorem 2.2.5 .

Recall that in Theorem 1.2.28 it is proved that a uniform space @xmath
is uniformly strongly paracompact if and only if @xmath is cofinally
complete and @xmath has a star-finite base. Moreover, by Theorem 1.2.29
, every cofinally complete uniform space has a point-finite base for its
uniformity. In parallel to these results we propose the following
definition of uniformly completely paracompact space.

###### Definition 2.2.20.

A uniform space @xmath is uniformly completely paracompact if it is
cofinally complete (equivalently, uniformly paracompact) and the
uniformity @xmath has a base of @xmath -star-finite open covers.

From Theorem 2.2.17 it is clear that a topological space @xmath is
completely paracompact if and only if, when it is endowed with the fine
uniformity @xmath , the space @xmath is uniformly completely
paracompact.

Next, we are going to characterize those metric spaces that are
metrizable by a uniformly completely paracompact metric. To that purpose
recall the following result by Romaguera (a proof can be found also in [
10 , Theorem 4.1] ).

###### Theorem 2.2.21.

( [ 87 ] ) A metrizable space is metrizable by a cofinally complete
metric if and only if the family @xmath of points of @xmath without a
locally compact neighborhood, is compact.

###### Theorem 2.2.22.

Let @xmath be a metrizable space. The following statements are
equivalent:

1.  @xmath is metrizable by a uniformly completely paracompact metric;

2.  @xmath is strongly metrizable and @xmath is compact;

3.  @xmath is metrizable by a metric which is Bourbaki-complete and
    cofinally complete at the same time.

###### Proof.

@xmath This implication follows from Theorem 2.2.21 , Corollary 2.2.17
and Theorem 2.2.4 .

@xmath Suppose first that @xmath . Then @xmath is locally compact and,
as in the proof @xmath of Theorem 2.2.8 , @xmath is metrizable by a
uniformly locally compact metric @xmath . Therefore, by Theorem 1.2.19
@xmath is cofinally Bourbaki-complete. in particular it is uniformly
completely paracompact, by Theorem 1.2.28 .

Otherwise, assume that @xmath and let @xmath a metric on @xmath . Since
@xmath is compact, there exists a countable family of open sets @xmath
in @xmath such that for every open subset @xmath of @xmath containing
@xmath there exists @xmath satisfying that @xmath . For instance,
consider @xmath , @xmath . Now for every @xmath take @xmath an open
neighborhood of @xmath with compact closure. For every @xmath , let
@xmath .

Now, we start by @xmath . By strong metrizability (equivalently complete
paracompactness), the cover @xmath has a @xmath -star-finite open
refinement @xmath . Next, consider the open cover @xmath , and take an
open cover @xmath such that @xmath . Again, by complete paracompactness
we can take an open refinement @xmath of @xmath being @xmath
-star-finite.

Thus, proceeding in this way we obtain a normal sequence @xmath of
@xmath -star-finite open covers such that @xmath for every @xmath . Now,
applying Lemma 2.1.3 there exists compatible metric @xmath on @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(where @xmath ). Therefore the metric uniformity @xmath has a base of
@xmath -star-finite open covers.

Next, we prove that @xmath is cofinally complete. Let @xmath be a
cofinally Cauchy sequence in @xmath . If for some @xmath , @xmath is
cofinally in some @xmath , where @xmath is one of the above sets with
compact closure, then @xmath clusters in @xmath by compactness.
Otherwise, it follows that for every @xmath , @xmath is eventually in
@xmath . Indeed, by cofinal-Cauchyness, as @xmath , then for every
@xmath there must be some @xmath such that @xmath is cofinally in some
@xmath .

Suppose that @xmath does not cluster. Thus, @xmath is an open cover of
@xmath and in particular it is and open cover of @xmath . Since @xmath
is compact, there exists a finite subfamily @xmath such that @xmath .
Hence, for some @xmath we have that @xmath , and, since @xmath is
finite, this implies that for some @xmath , @xmath for every @xmath .
But this is a contradiction.

@xmath . Let @xmath be a strongly metrizable such that @xmath is
compact. In particular @xmath is completely metrizable. Therefore, by
Theorem 2.2.21 and Theorem 2.2.8 , @xmath is metrizable by a metric
@xmath and a metric @xmath , which are cofinally complete and
Bourbaki-complete respectively. Let @xmath , @xmath . Then it is easy to
check that @xmath is a metric compatible with the topology of @xmath
which is cofinally complete and Bourbaki-complete, as for every @xmath
and every @xmath , @xmath .

@xmath This follows from Theorem 2.2.6 and Theorem 2.2.21 . ∎

Similarly to the above theorem of metrization by a uniformly completely
paracompact metric we have the next theorem for spaces which are
metrizable by a cofinally Bourbaki-complete metric.

###### Theorem 2.2.23.

( [ 39 , Theorem 33] ) Let @xmath be a metrizable space. The following
statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is metrizable by a cofinally Bourbaki-complete (uniformly
    strongly paracompact) metric;

2.  @xmath is strongly paracompact and @xmath is compact.

###### Proof.

@xmath This implication follows from Theorem 1.2.30 .

@xmath This proof is similar to the proof of the implication @xmath in
the above Theorem 2.2.22 . Just change complete paracompactness by
strong paracompactness and @xmath -star-finite covers by star-finite
covers.

∎

###### Example 2.2.24.

There exists a uniformly completely paracompact metric space @xmath
which is not Bourbaki-complete and not strongly paracompact. In
particular, @xmath is not metrizable by a cofinally Bourbaki-complete
metric, even if, by Theorem 2.2.22 it is metrizable by a metric which is
Bourbaki-complete and cofinally complete at the same time.

###### Construction.

This is a subspace of the metric hedgehog (Example 1.2.14 ) @xmath . Let
@xmath be a partition of @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath . Let
@xmath where @xmath . Then @xmath is a cofinally complete metric space
since it is a closed subspace of @xmath . However, it is not
Bourbaki-complete because the Bourbaki-bounded subset given by taking
just one point of the form @xmath in each @xmath is a closed but not
compact.

On the other hand @xmath is strongly metrizable. Indeed, fixed @xmath ,
the open cover @xmath has the following @xmath -star-finite refinement.
For every @xmath and every @xmath , in the spine @xmath we can choose,
by compactness, a finite cover @xmath , of open balls of radius @xmath
and center in @xmath . For every @xmath define the open covers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, it is clear that each @xmath is open and star-finite. Moreover,
@xmath contains a refinement @xmath of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, @xmath is not strongly paracompact. For instance, take again
the open cover @xmath . Then for every @xmath , the open ball @xmath
meets always uncountably many parwise disjoint open balls @xmath , of
center @xmath , for any @xmath . Therefore it is easy to deduce that
@xmath cannot have a star-finite (star-countable) open refinement.

By Theorem 2.2.22 and Theorem 2.2.23 , @xmath is metrizable by a metric
which is Bourbaki-complete and cofinally complete at the same time but
not cofinally Bourbaki-complete

∎

OPEN PROBLEMS: In the above example, is it possible to construct
explicitly a metric which is Bourbaki-complete and cofinally complete at
the same time but which is not cofinally Bourbaki-completely metrizable?
Is every metric space @xmath , cofinally complete and Bourbaki-complete
at the same time, also uniformly completely paracompact?

###### Example 2.2.25.

There exists a complete metric space @xmath having a base @xmath
-star-finite open covers for the uniformity, but which is not cofinally
complete, nor Bourbaki-complete.

###### Proof.

By Theorem 2.2.17 , any separable Banach space, as the Hilbert space
@xmath is such example. Indeed by theorem 1.3.9 , @xmath is not
Bourbaki-complete because it is infinite dimensional. Moreover, by
Theorem 1.3.22 it is not cofinally complete. ∎

Related to the above example, we have the following topological
question.

OPEN PROBLEM: Is there an example of completely paracompact space not
being @xmath -complete?

We close this section with the following observations. Recall that in [
74 ] , a uniform extension of complete paracompactness and strong
paracompactness, called R-completely paracompactness and R-strong
paracompactness, respectively, were given. More precisely, a uniform
space @xmath is R-completely paracompact ( R-strongly paracompact ) if
for every open cover there exists a @xmath -star-finite open refinement
(star-finite open refinement) which is in addition uniformly locally
finite.

Observe that the property of @xmath -strong paracompactness is clearly
uniformly weaker than Hohti’s uniform strong paracompactness definition.
Indeed, applying Theorem 2.2.23 , every separable cofinally complete
space metric space which is not Bourbaki-complete is a counterexample.

We strongly believe that the same happens for the definition of @xmath
-completely paracompact and our definition of uniform complete
paracompactness. However, we don’t have a counterexample. By this reason
we propose the following open problems.

OPEN PROBLEMS: Give a definition of uniform complete paracompactness by
means of covers. Give an example of @xmath -completely paracompact space
which is not uniformly completely parcompact.

\Denarius \Denarius \Denarius

## Chapter 3 The Samuel realcompactification of a uniform space

### 3.1 Primary results

#### 3.1.1 Basic facts about realcompactifications

The definition of realcompact space that we use is the given in
Definition 1.2.35, that is, a space @xmath is realcompact if it is
homeomorphic to a closed subspace of a product of real lines. Moreover,
similarly to compactification we get the notion of realcompactification.

###### Definition 3.1.1.

A realcompactification of a space @xmath is a realcompact space @xmath
in which @xmath is densely embedded.

Next, we give some well-known results on realcompactifications. Many of
them can be found in [ 35 ] .

A classical way of generating realcompactifications of a space @xmath is
the following. First, we take a family @xmath of real-valued continuous
functions, separating points and closed sets of @xmath . Then, we embed
homeomorphically @xmath into the product space of real lines @xmath ,
through the evaluation map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, the closure of @xmath in @xmath is known as the
realcompactification of @xmath generated by @xmath . Usually, @xmath has
some algebraic structure. Here, we will suppose that @xmath is at least
a unital vector lattice , also because we will work with families of
real-valued functions that are lattices but which are not necessarily an
algebra (ring), as they are in the earliest paper by Isbell [ 57 ] . We
will denote by @xmath the realcompactification generated by @xmath
because it is exactly the set of all the real unital vector lattice
homomorphisms on @xmath .

On the other hand, for a unital vector lattice @xmath we can consider
@xmath the weak uniformity in @xmath which is the weakest uniformity
making each function in @xmath uniformly continuous [ 97 ] . When @xmath
separates points and closed sets in @xmath , then @xmath is a Hausdorff
uniformity compatible with the topology of @xmath . If we endow @xmath
with the weak uniformity @xmath and @xmath with the usual product
uniformity @xmath , then the evaluation map @xmath is now uniformly
continuous and the inverse map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is also uniformly continuous. Thus, @xmath is uniformly embedded in
@xmath . Since @xmath is a complete uniform space, the closure @xmath of
@xmath in @xmath is the completion of @xmath (by uniqueness of the
completion). We can summarize all of this as follows.

###### Theorem 3.1.2.

Let @xmath be a unital vector lattice separating points and closed sets
in the space @xmath . The realcompactification @xmath of @xmath is
(topologically) homeomorphic to the completion of the uniform space
@xmath where @xmath is the weak uniformity generated by @xmath .

If we just take the bounded functions @xmath in @xmath (where @xmath
denotes the family of bounded real-valued continuous functions) we get
that @xmath is now a compactification of @xmath .

Likewise compactifications, we can consider a partial order @xmath on
the set @xmath of all the realcompactifications of @xmath [ 26 ] .
Namely, for two realcompactifications @xmath and @xmath , we write
@xmath whenever there is a continuous mapping @xmath leaving @xmath
pointwise fixed. We say that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent whenever
@xmath and @xmath , and this implies the existence of a homeomorphism
between @xmath and @xmath leaving @xmath pointwise fixed.

###### Theorem 3.1.3.

( [ 35 ] ) The realcompactification @xmath (resp. @xmath ) is
characterized (up to equivalence) as the smallest realcompactification
(resp. compactification) of @xmath such that every function @xmath can
be continuously extended to it.

For the next result, recall that, if @xmath , we can regard @xmath as a
continuous function from X into the one-point compactification @xmath of
@xmath .

###### Theorem 3.1.4.

The realcompactification @xmath can be considered as a topological
subspace of @xmath . Thus, we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, every @xmath can be extended to a unique continuous
function @xmath . Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The partial order set @xmath is a complete upper semi-lattice where the
largest element is exactly the Hewitt-Nachbin realcompactification
@xmath . Hewitt himself observed [ 48 ] that the realcompactification
that bears his name can be obtained as the completion of the space
@xmath endowed with the weak @xmath uniformity generated by the family
of real-valued continuous functions. Moreover, Nachbin [ 75 ] developed
his theory of realcompactness, considering those spaces which are
complete in the above uniformity. Later, Shirota [ 89 ] , [ 90 ] proved
that the Hewitt realcompactification is homeomorphic to the completion
of the space @xmath together with the uniformity generated by all the
countable normal covers @xmath , and hence that realcompactness is
equivalent to the completeness of @xmath (Theorem 1.2.36 ).

Recall that, in the case of the compactifications @xmath of the space
@xmath , the partial order set @xmath is also a complete upper
semi-lattice, where the largest element is now the Stone-Čech
compactification @xmath . However, we have that, in the partial order
set of the realcompactifications,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and by Theorem 3.1.4

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Precisely, @xmath is the smallest realcompact subspace of @xmath
containing @xmath [ 43 , Theorem 8.5.b] .

The partial order set of realcompactifications, as well as the partial
order set of compactifications, of a space @xmath , is a complete
lattice if and only if @xmath is locally compact. In this case, the
smallest element in both lattices is the Alexandroff compactification,
also called the one-point compactification of @xmath which is generated
by the lattice of all the real-valued functions which are constant at
infinity [ 67 ] .

Next, let @xmath be a realcompactification of @xmath , which is not
explicitly generated by a lattice of real-valued continuous functions.
Then if @xmath is the algebra of all the real-valued continuous
functions on @xmath then the uniform space @xmath is complete [ 43 ] .
Precisely, it is the completion of @xmath where @xmath consists of the
restrictions to @xmath of the functions in @xmath .

The following theorems on extensions of maps are well-known.

###### Theorem 3.1.5.

( [ 18 ] ) Let @xmath and @xmath be uniform space spaces and let @xmath
and @xmath denote their respective completions. Let @xmath . Then @xmath
can be extended to a (unique) continuous map @xmath if and only if
@xmath is Cauchy-continuous.

It is clear that every uniformly continuous map is Cauchy-continuous and
that every Cauchy continuous map is continuous.

###### Theorem 3.1.6.

( [ 25 ] ) If a uniform space is complete then every real-valued
continuous function is Cauchy-continuous. The converse is in general
false. However it is true in the frame of metric spaces.

An example of non-complete uniform space such that every continuous
function is Cauchy-continuous is given by any fine uniform space which
is not complete as the space of all the countable ordinals @xmath .

By all the foregoing, we can describe @xmath as the family of those
continuous real-valued functions @xmath which are Cauchy-continuous when
@xmath is endowed with the weak uniformity @xmath (see [ 66 ] ).
Moreover, @xmath is isomorphic to the subalgebra @xmath of @xmath [ 45 ]
. From now on, we will not distinguish between @xmath and the
corresponding subalgebra @xmath of @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.1.7.

( [ 26 , Theorem 3] ) Given two realcompactifications @xmath and @xmath
of a space @xmath , @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath and @xmath
are equivalent realcompactifications if and only if @xmath .

By the previous theorem the algebra @xmath is uniquely determined by
@xmath and vice versa. However, different algebras of functions can
generate the same realcompactification ( [ 17 ] , [ 84 ] ).

Moreover, given @xmath and the realcompactification @xmath generated by
@xmath , it is clear that it is homeomorphic to the realcompactification
@xmath generated by @xmath . However, they are not necessarily uniformly
homeomorphic when they are endowed respectively with the weak
uniformities, @xmath and @xmath as we will point later.

#### 3.1.2 The Samuel realcompactification

In the frame of uniform spaces @xmath we have uniformly continuous
functions. The family of all the real-valued uniformly continuous
functions @xmath is of course a unital vector lattice which separates
points from closed sets of @xmath . Thus we get the realcompactification
@xmath which is exactly the smallest realcompactification of @xmath such
that every uniformly continuous function can be continuously extended.

###### Definition 3.1.8.

The Samuel realcompactification of a uniform space @xmath is the space
@xmath . Whenever @xmath we will say that the space @xmath is Samuel
realcompact.

Recall that we have defined the Samuel compactification @xmath of a
uniform space @xmath as the completion of @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath
is exactly @xmath , the smallest compactification (and
realcompactification) of @xmath such that every bounded uniformly
continuous function can be continuously extended. By Theorem 3.1.4 we
know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the unique continuous extension of @xmath to the above
domain and range.

Next, as well as every compactification is the Samuel compactification
for some suitable uniformity on the space [ 29 ] , every
realcompactification is equivalent to the Samuel realcompactification
for some uniformity on @xmath . In fact, let @xmath be a
realcompactification of X and observe that @xmath , because every
uniformly continuous functions is Cauchy-continuous [ 18 ] . Thus, we
have the following result.

###### Theorem 3.1.9.

Let @xmath be a realcompactification of the space @xmath . Then @xmath
is (topologically) homeomorphic to the Samuel realcompactification of
the uniform space @xmath .

For instance, the Hewitt-Nachbin realcompactification @xmath can be
considered the Samuel realcompactification of the uniform space @xmath [
43 ] . Equivalently, @xmath is the Samuel realcompactification of the
uniform space @xmath where @xmath is the universal uniformity on @xmath
, because the family of real-valued uniformly continuous functions on
@xmath is exactly @xmath . In the same way, the Stone-Čech
compactification @xmath is the Samuel compactification of the uniform
space @xmath .

By Theorem 1.1.24 the above result is immediate

###### Theorem 3.1.10.

Let @xmath be a cardinal and @xmath be the product of @xmath real lines
endowed with the product uniformity @xmath of the euclidean uniformities
on each factor. Then, @xmath is Samuel realcompact.

Observe that in the above result the Hewitt realcompactification @xmath
and the Samuel realcompactification @xmath are equivalent since both
realcompactifications are homeomorphic to @xmath . However, @xmath
@xmath is not a UC space.

In general, it is clear that every Samuel realcompact space @xmath
satisfies that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent. However, there are
uniform space spaces @xmath satisfying that both realcompactifications
are equivalent which are not necessarily Samuel realcompact.

###### Definition 3.1.11.

A uniform space @xmath is a UC space if every real-valued continuous
function is uniformly continuous.

Every UC uniform space satisfies trivially that @xmath and @xmath are
equivalently realcompactifications. For instance, every uniformly
discrete metric space is a UC space and there are uniformly discrete
space which are not realcompact and hence not Samuel realcompact.
Whether or not a uniformly discrete metric space is realcompact depends
on some particular assumption about the cardinality of the space, as we
will explain later. However, there are also examples of non-realcompact
UC spaces which do not depend of any cardinality property. Indeed,
observe that every fine uniform space is UC by Theorem 1.1.12 . So any
pseudocompact non-compact fine uniform space, as @xmath , does the work
because a pseudocompact space is realcompact if and only if it is
compact [ 27 ] .

In addition, observe that every metric UC space is a fine space ( [ 25 ]
). However, this is not true in the frame of uniform spaces. For
instance, take a uniformly discrete space @xmath of uncountable
cardinality and endowed it with the weak uniformity @xmath . This space
is still UC but it is not fine since @xmath does not have a countable
base.

###### Remark 3.1.12.

It is well-known [ 99 ] that a metric space @xmath is @xmath if and only
if @xmath and @xmath are equivalent compactifications. Then, every
metric space with @xmath satisfies also that @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent. However, it is clear that there are metric spaces @xmath
satisfying that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent but such that @xmath
and @xmath are not equivalent. Just consider the euclidean space @xmath
, which is not UC . On the other hand, there are uniform spaces @xmath
satisfying that @xmath but @xmath . This is due to the fact that in the
general frame of uniform spaces even if @xmath then @xmath is not
necessarily @xmath . Indeed, just endowed the real-line with the weak
uniformity @xmath . Then, @xmath .

In spite of Proposition 3.1.10 and of the UC spaces, in general @xmath
and @xmath are not equivalent realcompactifications. Similarly, not
every realcompact space is Samuel realcompact. In order to give such
example, we characterize first the uniform spaces such that the Samuel
realcompactification and the Samuel compactification coincide.

###### Theorem 3.1.13.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. Then @xmath if and only if @xmath , that
is, if and only if @xmath is Bourbaki-bounded.

###### Proof.

If @xmath then @xmath is compact and then every @xmath is bounded. In
particular since @xmath , then, @xmath , that is, @xmath is
Bourbaki-bounded [ 47 ] . The converse is trivial. ∎

Thus, every realcompact Bourbaki-bounded space, which fails compactness
is not Samuel realcompact. For instance, take the metric hedgehog
(Example 1.2.14 ) @xmath which is realcompact because in particular it
is Lindelöf.

Now, we finish with some easy results in this topic, that we will use
later.

###### Theorem 3.1.14.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. For every uniformity @xmath on @xmath
satisfying that @xmath it is satisfied that @xmath .

###### Proof.

It follows easily from the fact that @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 3.1.15.

Let @xmath be the completion of a uniform space @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

It is known that the functions in @xmath are exactly the restrictions of
the real-valued uniformly continuous functions of the completion @xmath
(see [ 97 ] ). Thus, by density of @xmath is @xmath , the result
follows. ∎

#### 3.1.3 Samuel realcompact spaces

In this section we solve the problem of characterizing those uniform
spaces @xmath which are Samuel realcompact, that is, those spaces
satisfying that @xmath , or equivalently, that @xmath is complete. This
result is strictly related to the classical Katětov-Shirota Theorem.

###### Theorem 3.1.16.

( [ 89 ] and [ 63 ] (only for paracompact spaces)) A space @xmath is
realcompact if and only it is topologically complete and there is no
closed discrete subspace of Ulam-measurable cardinal.

Next, recall the definition of Ulam-measurable cardinal.

###### Definition 3.1.17.

A filter @xmath on a set @xmath satisfies the countable intersection
property if for every countable family @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, if an ultrafilter @xmath satisfies the countable
intersection porperty, then, by maximality, @xmath , that is, @xmath is
closed under countable intersection .

###### Definition 3.1.18.

An infinite cardinal @xmath is Ulam-measurable if there is a free
(non-principal) ultrafilter @xmath (that is, @xmath ) satisfying the
countable intersection property on any set of cardinal @xmath .

As we have explained in the introduction, the above definition is
equivalent to say that any discrete space of cardinal @xmath is not
realcompact. Moreover given two cardinals @xmath , if @xmath is
Ulam-measurable then @xmath is also Ulam-measurable.

We are going to see now that a Katětov-Shirota type theorem
characterizing Samuel realcompactness can be obtained where
Bourbaki-completeness will play the role of topological completeness in
the classical one. The proof that we give here is different than the
proofs in [ 41 ] , [ 42 ] and even in [ 56 ] where a categorical method
is used. It uses the embedding results from Part 2.

###### Lemma 3.1.19.

If @xmath is uniformly continuous then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is uniformly continuous.

###### Proof.

That @xmath is uniformly continuous is clear. Now, recall that linear
covers are a subbase for the weak uniformity @xmath . Thus, take a
linear cover @xmath then @xmath by uniform continuity of @xmath . Next,
it is clear that @xmath is countable. Moreover, @xmath is always
satisfied. Therefore, @xmath is linear because @xmath whenever @xmath .
∎

###### Theorem 3.1.20.

Let @xmath be a uniform space and @xmath be a Samuel realcompact space
such that there exists an embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is uniformly continuous and @xmath is closed in @xmath
. Then @xmath is Samuel realcompact.

###### Proof.

We are going to prove that @xmath is complete. Let @xmath be a Cauchy
filter of @xmath . By Lemma 3.1.19 then @xmath is a Cauchy filter of
@xmath . By Samuel realcompactness, @xmath clusters in @xmath . Since
@xmath and @xmath is a closed subspace then @xmath cluster in @xmath .
Finally @xmath clusters in @xmath because @xmath is an embedding. ∎

###### Theorem 3.1.21.

Let @xmath , @xmath , be uniform spaces. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is Samuel realcompact if and only if each factor @xmath is Samuel
realcompact.

###### Proof.

@xmath This implication is clear from Theorem 3.1.20 since each factor
@xmath is uniformly homeomorphic to a closed subspace of @xmath .

@xmath We prove that @xmath is complete. By Lemma 3.1.19 the projection
maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are uniformly continuous. Let @xmath be a Cauchy ultrafilter of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is a Cauchy ultrafilter of @xmath By Samuel realcompactness
@xmath converges to some @xmath . Then, @xmath converges to the the
point @xmath by maximality. ∎

The next theorem characterizes those uniform spaces having no uniform
partition of Ulam-measurable cardinal. This is the clue to our
Katětov-Shirota Theorem 3.1.23 characterizing Samuel realcompact uniform
spaces.

###### Theorem 3.1.22.

Let @xmath be a uniform space and let @xmath be the completion of @xmath
. The following statements are equivalent:

1.   There is no uniform partition of @xmath having Ulam-measurable
    cardinal;

2.  @xmath (that is, @xmath is Samuel realcompact);

3.  @xmath is realcompact;

4.   there is no uniformly discrete subspace of @xmath having
    Ulam-measurable cardinal;

5.   there is no uniform partition of @xmath having Ulam-measurable
    cardinal.

###### Proof.

@xmath By Lemma 3.1.14 and Lemma 3.1.15

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore it is enough to prove that @xmath , that is, that @xmath is
Samuel realcompact.

By [ 85 , Lemma p. 370] the uniformity @xmath has a star-finite base.
Then applying Theorem 2.1.4 , there exists an embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each cardinal @xmath satisfies that @xmath . It is clear that
@xmath . Therefore each cardinal @xmath has no Ulam-measurable cardinal
by hypothesis and then by Theorem 3.1.10 and Theorem 3.1.21 , the space
@xmath is Samuel realcompact. Thus by Theorem 3.1.20 it follows that
@xmath is Samuel realcompact.

@xmath This implication is trivial.

@xmath Since every uniformly discrete subspace of @xmath is a closed
discrete subspace of the completion @xmath , then it follows that there
is no uniformly discrete subspace of @xmath having Ulam-measurable
cardinal.

@xmath . This follows taking into account that every uniform partition
determines a uniformly discrete subspace with the same cardinal.

@xmath . It is clear since @xmath and @xmath share the same uniform
partitions. ∎

From the last result we deduce easily our Katětov-Shirota type Theorem.

###### Theorem 3.1.23.

( Katětov-Shirota type theorem) A uniform space @xmath is Samuel
realcompact if and only if it is Bourbaki-complete and there is no
uniform partition having Ulam-measurable cardinal.

###### Proof.

If @xmath is Samuel realcompact, that is, @xmath is complete, then it is
clear that @xmath is complete as @xmath . Therefore, by Theorem 1.2.11 ,
@xmath is Bourbaki-complete. On the other hand, Samuel realcompactness
implies realcompactness. Hence, given a uniform partition @xmath of
@xmath , the cardinal of @xmath is no Ulam-measurable. Indeed, if we
take representative points @xmath for every @xmath , then the subspace
@xmath of @xmath is closed and discrete. Hence, by realcompactness,
@xmath has no Ulam-measurable cardinal, and so does @xmath .

Conversely, let @xmath denote the completion of @xmath . Then, by
Theorem 3.1.22 , @xmath . Next, by Bourbaki-completeness (Theorem 1.2.11
), the space @xmath is homeomorphic with the completion @xmath .
Therefore @xmath , that is, @xmath is Samuel realcompact. ∎

As a corollary of the above theorem we have the following result for
uniformly 0-dimensional spaces from [ 55 ] . Recall that uniformly
0-dimensional spaces are those spaces having a base of partitions for
their uniformity, or equivalently, that are uniform subspaces of a
product of uniformly discrete spaces (see Remark 2.1.6 ).

###### Corollary 3.1.24.

A uniformly 0-dimensional space is Samuel realcompact if and only if it
is complete and it does not have a uniformly discrete subset of
Ulam-measurable cardinal.

###### Proof.

Every complete uniformly 0-dimensional space is Bourbaki-complete
because it has a base of partitions for its uniformity (hence, @xmath ).
By the same reason, uniformly discrete subsets determine the uniform
partitions. Therefore, the result follows from Theorem 3.1.23 . ∎

We must notice now that the above Katětov-Shirota type theorem can also
be found in the paper by Rice and Reynolds [ 85 ] . However their result
is stated as follows.

###### Theorem 3.1.25.

( [ 85 ] ) Let @xmath be a uniform space such that no uniform cover has
Ulam-measurable cardinal. Then @xmath is complete if and only if @xmath
is complete.

Observe that Theorem 1.2.11 , that is, the equivalence between
Bourbaki-completeness of a uniform space and completeness of the
star-finite modification, is the link between our Katětov-Shirota result
(Theorem 3.1.23 ) and the result by Rice and Reynolds. However, we point
out now a slight difference between them. It is clear that only the non
Ulam-measurability of the uniform partitions is needed in last Theorem
3.1.25 , and not the (stronger) condition of the non Ulam-measurability
of the cardinality of the uniform covers. In fact Theorem 3.1.22
characterizes precisely uniform spaces having no uniform partition of
Ulam-measurable cardinal, which is not in general equivalent to satisfy
that no uniformly discrete subspace has Ulam-measurable cardinal, even
if this equivalence is true whenever we consider the uniformity @xmath .
Examples of uniform spaces such that no uniform partition has
Ulam-measurable cardinal but having uniform covers of Ulam-measurable
cardinal are easy to find. Just think on connected spaces containing a
uniformly discrete subspace of Ulam-measurable cardinal as, for
instance, the metric hedgehog @xmath or any @xmath where @xmath is an
Ulam-measurable cardinal.

Now, if we apply Theorem 3.1.23 to the fine uniformity @xmath on a space
@xmath we obtain the following result which is a refinement of the
classical Katětov-Shirota Theorem.

###### Corollary 3.1.26.

A space @xmath is realcompact if and only if @xmath is @xmath -complete
and there is no open partitions of @xmath having Ulam-measurable
cardinal.

Observe that from the above result we can also deduce Corollary 1.2.39 .

#### 3.1.4 Uniformities having a base of countable uniform covers

In his famous paper [ 89 ] , Shirota proved that the Hewitt-Nachbin
realcompactification @xmath of a space @xmath is homeomorphic to the
completion of @xmath where @xmath is the uniformity having as a base all
the cozero countable covers of @xmath . Since for the fine uniformity
@xmath , @xmath , we have that the completion of @xmath and the
completion of @xmath are homeomorphic.

There is another class of uniform spaces @xmath satisfying that the
Samuel realcompactification @xmath is homeomorphic to the completion of
@xmath , precisely, the uniformly 0-dimensional spaces. Indeed, for
these spaces @xmath as 0-dimensional spaces have a base of partitions
for their uniformity.

In general, for a uniform space @xmath , it is not true that the
completion of @xmath and the completion @xmath are homeomorphic. Indeed,
there are complete metric spaces which are separable, and therefore,
satisfying that their metric uniformity has a base of countable covers,
but which are not Bourbaki-complete, and hence not Samuel realcompact by
Theorem 3.1.23 . For instance the metric hedgehog @xmath .

That the completion of @xmath is a realcompactification of @xmath
follows from the fact that it is also complete with the uniformity
having as a base all the countable uniform covers of its fine
uniformity, and therefore, by the Shirota result, it is realcompact.
Moreover, it represents a uniform generalization of realcompactness to
the frame of uniform spaces as the Samuel realcompactification does ( [
56 ] ). Precisely it is the realcompactification of @xmath generated by
the subalgebra of @xmath given by all the Cauchy-continuous functions of
@xmath (see Theorem 3.1.5 ).

In the next result we show how the Samuel realcompactification @xmath of
a uniform space and the completion of @xmath are related even if they
are different.

###### Theorem 3.1.27.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. The following spaces are (topologically)
homeomorphic:

1.   The Samuel realcompactification @xmath ;

2.   the subspace of @xmath of all the cluster points of the
    Bourbaki-Cauchy filters of @xmath ;

3.   the completion of @xmath ;

4.   the subspace of @xmath of all the cluster points of the
    Bourbaki-Cauchy filters of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Applying Theorem 3.1.14 several times, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The same is true for the Samuel compactification. Since every uniform
partition of @xmath is countable then, by Theorem 3.1.22 , the
completion of @xmath coincides with its Samuel realcompactification
which is exactly @xmath as we have previously shown. Therefore @xmath
and @xmath are homeomorphic. Next, by Theorem 1.2.10 , the subspace of
@xmath of all the cluster points of the Bourbaki-Cauchy filters of
@xmath is homeomorphic to the completion of @xmath . Hence, @xmath and
@xmath are homeomorphic. Finally applying similarly Theorem 3.1.22 and
Theorem 1.2.10 to the uniform space @xmath , the homeomorphisms of
@xmath and @xmath follows also at once. ∎

###### Theorem 3.1.28.

Let @xmath be a uniform space. The following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is Samuel realcompact.

2.  @xmath is Bourbaki-complete.

3.  @xmath is complete.

4.  @xmath is complete.

###### Proof.

We only need to prove @xmath . If @xmath is complete then @xmath is
complete since the identity map @xmath is uniformly continuous. In
addition, @xmath is a realcompact space since, as we have said before,
the completion of every uniformity of type @xmath is a
realcompactification of @xmath . Thus, every uniform cover of @xmath has
no Ulam-measurable cardinal and then, by Theorem 3.1.25 , @xmath is
Samuel realcompact. ∎

In [ 85 ] , Rice and Reynolds characterize those uniform spaces @xmath
satisfying that @xmath is complete.

###### Theorem 3.1.29.

( [ 85 ] ) Let @xmath be a uniform space. If there is no uniform cover
of @xmath having Ulam-measurable cardinal, then @xmath is complete if
and only if @xmath is complete.

By the results of Pelant in [ 82 ] (see also [ 56 ] for more
information), it is known that the Banach space @xmath satisfies that
its point-finite modification @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
uniformity induced by the norm, is not complete, even if @xmath is
complete. Therefore, we can deduce from Theorem 3.1.29 that not every
complete uniform space, satisfying that every uniform cover has no
Ulam-measurable cardinal, is complete whenever it is endowed with the
countable modification @xmath .

Finally, observe that Reynolds and Rice asked if it is possible to prove
their result Theorem 3.1.25 from Theorem 3.1.29 . The problem was that
they did not know if the modification @xmath has a base of star-finite
covers, or more precisely, if @xmath , as we don’t know either. Related
to the above question of Rice and Reynolds, observe that in condition
@xmath of Theorem 3.1.27 , it would be interesting to be able to
consider the completion of @xmath instead of the set of cluster points
of its Bourbaki-Cauchy filters, as it happens in condition @xmath of
Theorem 3.1.28 . However, since we cannot assure that the uniformity
@xmath has a star-finite base we cannot refine the result. Thus,
according to Theorem 3.1.28 , we wonder if the difference between the
above results lies in the non Ulam-measurability of the cardinality of
the uniform covers. Nevertheless, for uniformly 0-dimensional we have
that @xmath

\Denarius \Denarius \Denarius

### 3.2 A step forward: relating the Samuel realcompactification and the
Hewitt realcompactification.

#### 3.2.1 Certain family of real-valued continuous functions

The first problem that we want to solve in this section is to know if
every metric space @xmath is Bourbaki-complete, whenever the Hewitt
realcompactification and the Samuel realcompactification of @xmath are
equivalent. Recall that in [ 41 ] it was already proved the necessity of
completeness. However, this fact is clearly false in the general frame
of uniform spaces since there are fine uniform spaces which are not even
complete. For instance, the space @xmath is not complete but @xmath

To that purpose, we are going to characterize Bourbaki-completeness by
means of certain family of real-valued functions. Recall that by Theorem
3.1.6 a metric space @xmath is complete if and only if every real-valued
continuous functions preserves Cauchy filters of @xmath , that is,
@xmath is Cauchy-continuous. Next, let us denote by @xmath the
subalgebra of all the Cauchy-continuous functions on a uniform space
@xmath . By Theorem 1.2.11 and Theorem 3.1.6 , every Bourbaki-complete
uniform space satisfies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we ask it the converse is true for a metric space @xmath , that is,
if @xmath is satisfied, then @xmath is Bourbaki-complete.

###### Theorem 3.2.1.

For a metric space @xmath the following statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is Bourbaki-complete;

2.  @xmath

###### Proof.

@xmath This follows at one by Theorem 1.2.11 and Theorem 3.1.6 .

@xmath If @xmath then @xmath because, since @xmath , then @xmath .
Hence, by Theorem 3.1.6 , the metric space @xmath must be complete.

Assume by contradiction that @xmath is not Bourbaki-complete and take
@xmath a Bourbaki-bounded subset in @xmath which fails to be totally
bounded (see Theorem 1.3.8 ). Then, for some @xmath , @xmath contains a
subset @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath , @xmath . Let us define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is continuous because it is uniformly continuous when
restricted over every ball @xmath , @xmath .

Moreover, the set @xmath is Bourbaki-bounded in @xmath and, in
particular, it is a totally bounded subset of @xmath (see Theorem 1.2.5
). Next, consider the filter base @xmath and let @xmath the filter of
@xmath induced by it. By Theorem 1.2.1 , @xmath is contained in some
filter @xmath which is Cauchy in @xmath . Observe that @xmath does not
cluster because @xmath does not cluster either. Thus, since @xmath is
unbounded on @xmath , it cannot map the filter @xmath to a Cauchy filter
of @xmath . Hence, @xmath does not belong to @xmath contradicting the
hypothesis (see [ 13 ] and [ 14 ] for similar techniques.)

∎

Now consider the Samuel realcompactification @xmath of a uniform space
@xmath . By Theorem 3.1.5 , the subalgebra @xmath is isomorphic to the
subalgebra of Cauchy continuous functions @xmath . Moreover, observe
that in general, for a uniform space @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath .

By all the foregoing and Theorem 3.2.1 , the following theorem is
immediate.

###### Theorem 3.2.2.

Let @xmath be a uniform space satisfying that the realcompactifications
@xmath and @xmath are equivalent. Then @xmath . In particular, for a
metric space, this implies that the space is Bourbaki-complete.

#### 3.2.2 A positive result

Now, we want solve the converse problem form the previous section, that
is, if for every Bourbaki-complete uniform space the Hewitt
realcompactification and the Samuel realcompactification are equivalent.
This is clearly true in the frame of Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces
having no uniform partition of Ulam-measurable cardinal, since by Samuel
realcompactness (Theorem 3.1.23 ) both realcompactifications are
homeomorphic to the space. However, we are interested here in examples
and results not implying Samuel realcompactness. For instance, any
uniformly discrete metric space, independently of its cardinality
satisfies that both realcompactifications are equivalent.

We start next, by analyzing the case of the product of two uniform
spaces, one of them being Samuel realcompact. From it we will derive a
first answer in the frame of metric spaces.

###### Lemma 3.2.3.

Let @xmath be a Samuel realcompact space and @xmath be a uniform space.
Then every uniformly continuous function @xmath can be continuously
extended to @xmath .

###### Proof.

(See [ 99 ] for similar techniques.) Observe that for every @xmath the
function @xmath defined by @xmath , for every @xmath , is uniformly
continuous and hence, it can be extended to a unique continuous function
@xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by @xmath . We are going to prove that @xmath is continuous. To that
purpose it is enough to prove that @xmath is continuous on @xmath for
every @xmath and @xmath (see [ 43 , Exercise 6H] ).

Fix @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Since @xmath is continuous there
exists @xmath open set such that @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, if @xmath then @xmath .

On the other hand, as @xmath is uniformly continuous, there exists a
uniform cover @xmath such that @xmath whenever @xmath for every @xmath .

Now, take @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath . Then, if
@xmath we have that by all the foregoing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is continuous in @xmath as we claimed. ∎

As a consequence of the above lemma we have that for a Samuel
realcompact space @xmath and for any uniform space @xmath the following
is satisfied:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next we see that the reverse inequality is, in general, always
satisfied.

###### Lemma 3.2.4.

Let @xmath and @xmath be uniform spaces. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the identity map then, it is uniformly continuous. Indeed,
the projections maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are uniformly continuous by Lemma 3.1.19 and hence, @xmath is uniformly
continuous as the product uniformity @xmath is the weakest uniformity on
@xmath making the above projections onto @xmath and @xmath uniformly
continuous (see [ 97 ] ). Therefore, @xmath , that is, the identity map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is uniformly continuous. Hence, the the map @xmath can be extended to a
continuous map between the completions of both spaces, that is, @xmath .
∎

###### Theorem 3.2.5.

Let @xmath be a Samuel realcompact space and @xmath any uniform space.
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proof follows at once by Lemma 3.2.3 and Lemma 3.2.4 . ∎

Next, we study the problem for a product of a Samuel realcompact space
and a uniformly discrete space. To that purpose we recall the following
result by Hušek.

###### Theorem 3.2.6.

( [ 54 , Theorem 3] ) Let @xmath be a discrete space. Then @xmath if and
only if either @xmath or @xmath do not have Ulam-measurable cardinal.

###### Theorem 3.2.7.

Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-complete uniform space having no
Ulam-measurable cardinal, and @xmath be any uniformly discrete space.
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is Bourbaki-coomplete and has not Ulam-measurable cardinal,
@xmath is Samuel realcompact. Moreover, @xmath is a uniformly discrete
space, in particular, a UC space. Then by Theorem 3.1.21 and Theorem
3.2.6

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Corollary 3.2.8.

Let @xmath be a Samuel realcompact metric space and @xmath be any
uniformly discrete space. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If @xmath is any Samuel realcompact metric space, then by Theorem 3.1.23
, @xmath is Bourbaki-complete and there is no uniform partition having
Ulam-measurable cardinal. Moreover, by Theorem 2.1.13 there exists an
embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where no cardinal @xmath is Ulam-measurable, @xmath is uniformly
continuous and @xmath is a closed subspace of @xmath . Then, @xmath does
not have Ulam-measurable cardinal and we can apply Theorem 3.2.7 . ∎

From the above result and the embedding Theorem 2.1.13 we are going to
characterize the class of Bourbaki-complete metric spaces satisfying
that the Samuel realcompactification and the Hewitt realcompactification
are equivalent. But first, we introduce a couple of useful lemmas.

###### Lemma 3.2.9.

Let @xmath be a uniform space and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By Lemma 1.1.17 and Theorem 3.1.4

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose that there is some @xmath such that @xmath . Then for some
@xmath , @xmath . But @xmath and by uniqueness of the extension @xmath ,
which is a contradiction as @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 3.2.10.

Let @xmath be a metric space satisfying that @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent realcompactifications. Let @xmath be a metric space such that
there exists an embedding @xmath satisfying that @xmath is uniformly
continuous and @xmath is a closed subspace of @xmath . Then @xmath and
@xmath are also equivalent realcompactifications.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and identify @xmath with its image @xmath . We are going to
prove that @xmath can be continuously extended to @xmath . Indeed, since
@xmath is a closed subspace of @xmath then, by normality, @xmath can be
extended to a continuous function @xmath . Then, by hypothesis, @xmath
can be continuously extended to @xmath . Therefore, by Lemma 3.2.9 ,
@xmath can be continuously extended to @xmath . Hence, @xmath .
Moreover, since @xmath is uniformly continuous then @xmath . Thus,
@xmath ∎

###### Lemma 3.2.11.

Let @xmath be a Bourbaki-complete metric space, @xmath be the family of
all the chainable components induced by the cover of open balls @xmath ,
@xmath , and consider the embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from Theorem 2.1.13 . Then, there is some @xmath satisfying that for
every @xmath and for every @xmath , the subfamily of chainable
components @xmath does not have Ulam-measurable cardinal if and only if
for some @xmath , @xmath is not Ulam-measurable for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

Recall that for a uniform space @xmath , the family of uniform
partitions of @xmath coincides with the family of uniform partitions of
@xmath . In addition, recall that from Theorem 2.1.11 there exists a
complete sequence @xmath of star-finite covers @xmath such that @xmath
is a base for the topology of @xmath . From the proof of Theorem 2.1.12
and Theorem 2.1.11 , it is easy to realize that for every @xmath , the
family @xmath of chainable components induced by @xmath refines @xmath .
Moreover, since every @xmath is a uniform cover for the metric
uniformity @xmath , for every @xmath there exists some @xmath such that
@xmath refines @xmath . Thus, it is clear that there is some @xmath
satisfying that for every @xmath and for every @xmath , the subfamily of
chainable components @xmath does not have measurable cardinal if and
only if there is some @xmath such that for every @xmath and every @xmath
the subfamily of chainable components @xmath does not have
Ulam-measurable cardinal.

Next, if we apply the construction in the proof of Theorem 2.1.2 to the
sequence @xmath we obtain the desired embedding @xmath (Theorem 2.1.13 )
and we can deduce the result. ∎

###### Theorem 3.2.12.

Let @xmath be a Bourbaki metric space and @xmath be the family of all
the chainable components induced by the cover of the open balls @xmath .
Suppose that for some @xmath , for every @xmath and for every @xmath ,
the subfamily of chainable components @xmath does not have
Ulam-measurable cardinal. Then @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
realcompactications.

###### Proof.

By the above Lemma 3.2.11 there exists and embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where each cardinal @xmath is endowed with the discrete uniformity,
@xmath is uniformly continuous, @xmath is a closed subspace of @xmath ,
satisfying the additional property that for some @xmath , @xmath is not
Ulam-measurable for every @xmath .

Now, we apply Theorem 3.2.5 twice to the metric space @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last equality is possible since it is clear that the space @xmath is
uniformly homeomorphic to the product space @xmath where @xmath is of
course a uniformly discrete space. Therefore, by Corollary 3.2.8 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, by Lemma 3.2.10 the result follows. ∎

#### 3.2.3 The @xmath-closure of a uniform space in its Samuel
compactification

By Theorem 3.1.23 it is clear that if @xmath is Bourbaki-complete and no
uniform partition has Ulam-measurable cardinal, then the Samuel
realcompactification and the Hewitt realcompactification of @xmath are
equivalent by Samuel realcompactness. Therefore, in order to find a
counterexample we need to work with Ulam-measurable cardinals.

###### Example 3.2.13.

There exists a Bourbaki-complete uniform space such that its Samuel
realcompactification is not equivalent to its Hewitt
realcompactification .

###### Construction.

Let @xmath be a discrete space of Ulam-measurable cardinal and let
@xmath . Endow @xmath with product uniformity @xmath of the discrete
metric uniformity on @xmath and the unique uniformity on @xmath . Then
@xmath is not equivalent to @xmath by the Theorem 3.2.6 . However,
@xmath by Theorem 3.2.5 . Thus, both realcompactifications are clearly
not equivalent. ∎

The above example does not close the problem. It is just a restriction.
Indeed, even if @xmath and @xmath are not equivalent compactifications,
we are going to see that @xmath is equivalent to another
realcompactification of @xmath , namely the @xmath -closure of @xmath in
its Samuel compactification @xmath .

Consider the below generalization of closure.

###### Definition 3.2.14.

Let @xmath two spaces, then @xmath is @xmath -closed in @xmath if for
every @xmath there exists a @xmath -set @xmath on @xmath such that
@xmath . Thus, we say that @xmath is the @xmath -closure of @xmath in
@xmath , if @xmath is @xmath -closed in @xmath and every @xmath -set on
@xmath which meets @xmath also meets @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is @xmath
-dense in @xmath if @xmath .

It is clear that it is possible to define the notion of @xmath -closed
space for any family of subsets @xmath of @xmath . In particular, for a
(Tychonoff) space @xmath , @xmath is @xmath -closed in @xmath if and
only if @xmath is zero-closed . Indeed, in a (Tychonoff) space every
zero-set is @xmath -set and, conversely, for every @xmath -set @xmath
and every @xmath there exists a zero-set @xmath such that @xmath .

It is well-known that the Hewitt realcompactification @xmath of a space
@xmath is the @xmath -closure of @xmath in its
Stone-Čech-compactification @xmath [ 43 , 8.8] . Moreover, given @xmath
a space and @xmath a unital vector lattice separating points from closed
sets of @xmath , @xmath is @xmath -closed in @xmath . Indeed, if @xmath
, then there exists a function @xmath such that @xmath (Theorem 3.1.4 ).
Then, @xmath belongs to the @xmath -set @xmath , which is disjoint from
@xmath . As a consequence, the @xmath -closure of @xmath in @xmath is
contained in @xmath . In fact, the @xmath -closure of @xmath in @xmath
is a realcompactification of @xmath ( [ 46 ] ).

Next, we consider the unital vector lattice @xmath of a uniform space
@xmath . We denote by @xmath the smallest uniformly closed subalgebra of
@xmath containing @xmath which, in addition, is closed under inversion,
that is, @xmath for every @xmath such that @xmath for every @xmath . By
[ 36 , Theorem 2.5] , @xmath is exactly the uniform closure of any of
the following families of functions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us denote by @xmath the family of all zero-sets @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath for some @xmath (equivalently, @xmath ).

###### Definition 3.2.15.

A @xmath - filter of a space @xmath is a filter such that @xmath is a
filter-base of @xmath . A @xmath - ultrafilter @xmath is a @xmath
-filter such that @xmath is a maximal family in @xmath , that is, @xmath
belongs to @xmath whenever @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.2.16.

( [ 46 ] , [ 56 ] ) Let @xmath be a uniform space. The following
statements are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is the @xmath -closure of @xmath in @xmath ;

2.  @xmath is the intersection of all the cozero-sets in @xmath
    containing @xmath ;

3.   for every @xmath there exists some strictly positive function
    @xmath (or @xmath ) such that @xmath ;

4.  @xmath is the subset of all the clusters points in @xmath of all the
    @xmath -ultrafilters of @xmath satisfying the countable intersection
    property;

5.  @xmath is a realcompactification equivalent to @xmath .

###### Remark 3.2.17.

The realcompactification @xmath is the smallest realcompactification of
@xmath such that every function in @xmath and every inverse function
@xmath of every non-vanishing function @xmath in @xmath can be
continuously extended to it. In particular, @xmath is @xmath -dense in
@xmath .

###### Remark 3.2.18.

By Theorem 3.1.4 , the realcompactification @xmath is a topological
subspace of the compactification @xmath where @xmath . In general the
compactification @xmath is not equivalent to the Samuel compactification
@xmath (see [ 22 , Example I] and [ 46 ] ).

Recall that a topological space @xmath is @xmath - embedded in the space
@xmath , whenever @xmath and each zero-set of @xmath is the intersection
with @xmath of a zero-set in @xmath . For instance, any metric space
@xmath is clearly @xmath -embedded in @xmath and therefore in any set
@xmath such that @xmath . Moreover a subspace @xmath of a space @xmath
is @xmath - embedded in @xmath if every real-valued continuous function
on @xmath can be extended to a continuous function on @xmath . Next,
applying the result [ 16 , Corollary 3.6] of Blair and Hager, we have
that under @xmath -density assumption, @xmath -embedding and @xmath
-embedding are equivalent properties. Then, the following result can be
deduced.

###### Theorem 3.2.19.

For a metric space @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
realcompactifications. In particular, @xmath is a topological subspace
of @xmath , that is, @xmath .

###### Proof.

As we have said above, @xmath is clearly @xmath -embedded in @xmath and
also in @xmath . Now, since @xmath is @xmath -dense in @xmath (see
Remark 3.2.17 ), by the above mentioned result, @xmath is @xmath
-embedded in @xmath . But the unique realcompactification in which
@xmath is @xmath -embedded is @xmath [ 43 ] . Therefore, @xmath and
@xmath must be equivalent realcompactifications.

Finally, since @xmath , as @xmath is the @xmath -closure of @xmath in
@xmath , then @xmath . ∎

###### Example 3.2.20.

There exists a complete metric space @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
are not equivalent realcompactifications .

###### Proof.

Since for any metric space @xmath , then any complete but not
Bourbaki-complete realcompact metric space is such and example by
Theorem 3.1.23 . ∎

Motivated by Example 3.2.13 , as not every Bourbaki-complete uniform
space satisfies that the Hewitt realcompactification and the Samuel
compactification are equivalent realcompactifications, we ask know when
the realcompactifications @xmath and @xmath are equivalent. Clearly, by
Theorem 3.2.19 , in the frame of metric spaces, this is the same than
asking if for every Bourbaki-complete metric space, @xmath and @xmath
are equivalent realcompactifications. Observe that, by Theorem 3.2.16 ,
this is also equivalent to ask if for every non-vanishing function
@xmath the inverse @xmath can be continuously extended to @xmath . Thus,
solving this questions, should allow us to know a little bit more the
subalgebra of functions @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.2.21.

Let @xmath be a uniform space such that @xmath (or in particular, Samuel
realcompact) and let @xmath be any uniform space. Then every uniformly
continuous function @xmath satisfying that @xmath for every @xmath can
be extended to a continuous function @xmath on @xmath satisfying also
that @xmath for every @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath satisfying the additional property that @xmath for every
@xmath . Then every function @xmath defined by @xmath , is uniformly
continuous and satisfies also that @xmath for every @xmath . By Theorem
3.2.16 every function @xmath can be extended to a continuous function
@xmath satisfying that @xmath for every @xmath .

Like in the proof of Lemma 3.2.3 , the function @xmath defined by @xmath
is continuous. In addition, it is trivial that @xmath for every @xmath .
∎

###### Theorem 3.2.22.

Let @xmath Samuel realcompact space and @xmath a uniform space
satisfying that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent realcompactifications.
Then all the following realcompactifications of @xmath are equivalent:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath

6.  @xmath

7.  @xmath

8.  @xmath

###### Proof.

By Theorem 3.2.5 , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, since @xmath is Samuel realcompact and @xmath satisfies that
@xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 3.2.21

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, @xmath in general. Therefore, by the above
equalities,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

By the above result, it is clear that, for Example 3.2.13 , @xmath ,
where @xmath is of course a Bourbaki-complete space. However, we don’t
have a general answer for Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces parallel to
Theorem 3.2.12 .

###### Remark 3.2.23.

It is clear that in order to characterize those Bourbaki-complete metric
spaces @xmath (or Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces @xmath ) satisfying
that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent realcompactifications (or, for
uniform spaces, @xmath and @xmath are equivalent realcompactifications),
we need a counterexample to the question. We strongly believe that this
counterxample will be the uniformly 0-dimensional @xmath where @xmath is
a uniformly discrete space whose cardinal is not only Ulam-measurable
cardinal but also @xmath -strongly compact (see [ 6 ] and [ 7 ] for
definitions). With the help of this couterexample, and Theorem 3.2.12 we
would like first to characterize those complete uniformly 0-dimensional
space satisfying our question, and then deduce from it the general case
for all the Bourbaki-complete uniform spaces, with the help of the
embeddings from the second part of this thesis.

\Denarius \Denarius \Denarius
