## Chapter 1 Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics

70

### 1.1 Introduction

The standard approach to solving the equations of fluid dynamics
numerically is to define fluid quantities on a regular spatial grid,
computing derivatives using finite difference or finite volume schemes.
This is an extremely well studied approach and most ‘state of the art’
methods for fluid dynamics have been developed in this manner. In
astrophysical fluid dynamics problems frequently involve changes in
spatial, temporal and density scales over many orders of magnitude.
Thus, adaptivity is an essential ingredient which is absent from a
fixed-grid approach. Progress in this area has been rapid in recent
years with the development of procedures for adaptive mesh refinement
(AMR). The implementation of such procedures is far from trivial,
although the availability of libraries and toolkits for grid-based codes
eases this burden somewhat. However, a further constraint is that
astrophysical problems are frequently asymmetric which can result in
substantial numerical diffusion when solving on (fixed or adaptive)
Cartesian grids. Other approaches to this problem are to use
unstructured grids (where typically the grid is reconstructed at each
new timestep) or Lagrangian grid methods, where the grid shape deforms
according to the flow pattern.

An alternative to all of these methods is to remove the spatial grid
entirely, resulting in methods which are inherently adaptive. In this
approach fluid quantities are carried by a set of moving interpolation
points which follow the fluid motion. Since each point carries a fixed
mass, the interpolation points are referred to as ‘particles’.
Derivatives are evaluated either by interpolation over neighbouring
particles (referred to as particle methods), or via a hybrid approach by
interpolation to an overlaid grid (referred to as particle-mesh methods,
typified by the particle-in-cell (PIC) method used extensively in plasma
physics.

Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) is a particle method introduced by
Lucy ( 1977 ) and Gingold and Monaghan ( 1977 ) . It has found
widespread use in astrophysics due to its ability to tackle a wide range
of problems involving complex, asymmetric phenomena with relative ease.
Since these features are highly desirable in many non-astrophysical
applications, it is unsurprising that SPH is currently finding many
applications in other fields such as geophysics and engineering (and
even film-making ¹ ¹ 1 for example many of the graphics involving fluids
in the film ‘Tomb Raider’ were computed using SPH ).

The advantages of SPH over standard grid based approaches can be
summarised as follows: Firstly, SPH is conceptually both simple and
beautiful. All of the equations can be derived self-consistently from
physical principles with a few basic assumptions. As a result complex
physics is relatively simple to incorporate. Its simplicity means that
for the user it is a very intuitive numerical method which lends itself
easily to problem-specific modifications. Secondly, adaptivity is a
built-in feature. The Lagrangian nature of the method means that changes
in density and flow morphology are automatically accounted for without
the need for mesh refinement or other complicated procedures. As a
result of its adaptivity, SPH is also very efficient in that resolution
is concentrated on regions of high density, whilst computational effort
is not wasted on empty regions of space. Thirdly, free boundaries,
common in astrophysical problems, are simple and natural in SPH but
often present difficulties for grid-based codes (such as spurious
heating from the interaction with a low density surrounding medium).
This means that no portions of fluid can be lost from the simulation,
unlike in a grid based code where fluid which has left the grid cannot
return (this has been dubbed the ‘Columbus effect’ by Melvyn Davies,
since fluid can fall off the edge of the world). Fourthly, a significant
advantage in an astrophysical context is that SPH couples naturally with
widely used N-Body codes and techniques, for which there exists a vast
amount of literature. Finally (although perhaps many more advantages
could be given) visualisation and analysis is also somewhat easier with
Lagrangian techniques, since it is a simple matter to track and
visualise portions of the flow.

SPH also has a number of disadvantages when compared to finite
difference codes. The first of these is that, unlike grid-based codes,
SPH involves the additional computational cost of constructing the
neighbour lists. This is offset somewhat in that N-Body techniques used
to calculate the gravitational force (namely via tree-codes) can also be
used in constructing the neighbour lists. Secondly, SPH suffers from a
lack of algorithm development, since a vast amount of research effort is
focussed on finite difference or finite volume techniques. This often
means that such techniques, although often applicable in an SPH context,
can be slow to filter into mainstream use. Thirdly, although not a
disadvantage as such but a point which is often overlooked, is that the
setup of initial conditions is often more complicated and requires much
greater care. Since particles can be laid down in an infinite variety of
ways, choosing an appropriate setup for a given problem requires some
experience and usually some experimentation. Inappropriate particle
setups can lead to poorer simulation results than might otherwise be
expected (we give some examples of this in § 1.7.5 ). Finally, in the
case of magnetohydrodynamics and other problems involving anisotropic
stresses (as we will discuss in chapter LABEL:chap:spmhd ), numerical
stability can become an issue which must be dealt with appropriately.

In this chapter we provide an overview of the SPH method, including
several improvements to the basic method which have been made since the
review article of Monaghan ( 1992 ) was published (such as improvements
in shock-capturing techniques and the treatment of terms related to the
use of a variable smoothing length). In particular we focus on those
aspects of the algorithm that are relevant in an MHD context. The
chapter is organised as follows: In section § 1.2 we present the basic
formalisms inherent to SPH; in § 1.3 we derive the SPH equations for
compressible hydrodynamics using a variational principle. Formulations
of dissipative terms used to capture shocks are presented and discussed
in § 1.5 . In § 1.3.4 we discuss the incorporation of terms relating to
the spatial variation of the smoothing length and in § 1.4 alternative
formulations of SPH are examined within the variational framework.
Timestepping is discussed in § 1.6 . Finally, we present numerical tests
in § 1.7 in support of the previous sections and as preliminaries for
the MHD tests described in Chapters LABEL:chap:spmhd and LABEL:chap:divb
.

### 1.2 Basic formalisms

#### 1.2.1 Interpolant

The basis of the SPH approach is given as follows (Monaghan, 1992 ) . We
begin with the trivial identity ² ² 2 It is interesting to note that
this equation, with @xmath is used to define the density of the fluid in
terms of the Lagrangian co-ordinates in the Hamiltonian description of
the ideal fluid (eq. (94) in Morrison, 1998 ) . Similarly the SPH
equivalent of this expression, ( 1.42 ), forms the basis for the
Hamiltonian description of SPH (see § 1.3.2 ).

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is any variable defined on the spatial co-ordinates @xmath
and @xmath refers to the Dirac delta function. This integral is then
approximated by replacing the delta function with a smoothing kernel
@xmath with characteristic width @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

giving

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The kernel function is normalised according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally the integral ( 1.3 ) is discretised onto a finite set of
interpolation points (the particles) by replacing the integral by a
summation and the mass element @xmath with the particle mass @xmath ,
ie.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the subscript @xmath refers the quantity evaluated at the position
of particle @xmath . This ‘summation interpolant’ is the basis of all
SPH formalisms. The errors introduced in this step are discussed in §
1.2.2 . Gradient terms may be calculated by taking the analytic
derivative of ( 1.5 ), giving

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.6)
              @xmath   @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have assumed that the gradient is evaluated at another particle
@xmath (ie. @xmath ), defining @xmath and @xmath .

#### 1.2.2 Errors

The errors introduced by the approximation ( 1.3 ) can be estimated by
expanding @xmath in a Taylor series about @xmath (Benz, 1990 ; Monaghan,
1992 ) , giving

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath ; @xmath and @xmath are indices denoting co-ordinate
directions (with repeated indices implying a summation) and we have used
the normalisation condition ( 1.4 ). The odd error terms are zero if
@xmath is an even function of @xmath (ie. depending only on its
magnitude), which, since @xmath is always less than the smoothing radius
( @xmath in most cases), results in an approximation to @xmath . In
principle it is also possible to construct kernels such that the second
moment is also zero, resulting in errors of @xmath (discussed further in
§ 1.2.7 ). The disadvantage of such kernels is that the kernel function
becomes negative in some part of the domain, resulting in a potentially
negative density evaluation. The errors in the summation interpolant
differ slightly since the approximation of integrals by summations over
particles no longer guarantees that these terms integrate exactly.
Starting from the summation interpolant evaluated on particle @xmath ,
we expand @xmath in a Taylor series around @xmath , giving

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this we see that the summation interpolation is exact for constant
functions only when the interpolant is normalised by dividing by the
interpolation of unity. In practical calculations the summation
interpolant is only used in the density evaluation (§ 1.3.1 ), resulting
in a slight error in the density value. More important are the errors
resulting from the SPH evaluation of derivatives, since these are used
throughout in the discretisation of the fluid equations (§ 1.3 ).

The errors resulting from the gradient evaluation ( 1.6 ) may be
estimated in a similar manner by again expanding @xmath in a Taylor
series about @xmath , giving

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used the fact that @xmath for even kernels, whilst the
second term integrates to unity for even kernels satisfying the
normalisation condition ( 1.4 ). The resulting errors in the integral
interpolant for the gradient are therefore also of @xmath . The errors
in the summation interpolant for the gradient ( 1.7 ) are given by
expanding @xmath in a Taylor series around @xmath , giving

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the summations represent SPH approximations to the integrals in
the second line of ( 1.10 ).

#### 1.2.3 First derivatives

From ( 1.11 ) we immediately see that a straightforward improvement to
the gradient estimate ( 1.7 ) can be obtained by a simple subtraction of
the first error term (i.e. the term in ( 1.11 ) that is present even in
the case of a constant function), giving (Monaghan, 1992 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is an SPH estimate of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the first error term in ( 1.11 ) is removed, the interpolation is
exact for constant functions and indeed this is obvious from the form of
( 1.12 ). The interpolation can be made exact for linear functions by
dividing by the summation multiplying the first derivative term in (
1.11 ), ie.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This normalisation is somewhat cumbersome in practice,
since @xmath is a matrix quantity, requiring considerable extra storage
(in three dimensions this means storing @xmath extra quantities for each
particle) and also since calculation of this term requires prior
knowledge of the density. However, for some applications of SPH (e.g.
solid mechanics) it is desirable to do so in order to retain angular
momentum conservation in the presence of anisotropic forces (Bonet and
Lok, 1999 ) .

A similar interpolant for the gradient follows by using

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.15)
              @xmath   @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which again is exact for a constant @xmath . Expanding @xmath in a
Taylor series, we see that in this case the interpolation of a linear
function can be made exact using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has some advantages over ( 1.14 ) in that it can be computed
without prior knowledge of the density.

An alternative gradient interpolant is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which is commonly used in the SPH evaluation of the pressure gradient
since it guarantees conservation of momentum by the pairwise symmetry in
the gradient term. It is also the formulation of the pressure gradient
which follows naturally in the derivation of the SPH equations from a
variational principle (§ 1.3.2 ). Expanding @xmath in a Taylor series
about @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.19)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

from which we see that for a constant function the error is governed by
the extent to which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although a simple subtraction of the first term in ( 1.19 ) from ( 1.18
) eliminates this error, the symmetry in the gradient necessary for the
conservation of momentum is lost by doing so. Retaining the exact
conservation of momentum therefore requires that such error terms are
not eliminated. In applications of SPH employing anisotropic forces
(such in the MHD case), these error terms can be sufficient to cause
numerical instabilities (§ LABEL:sec:mhdstability ).

Derivatives of vector quantities follow in a similar manner. For example
the divergence of a vector quantity @xmath can be estimated using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

whilst the curl is given by (e.g.)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 1.2.4 Second derivatives

Second derivatives are slightly more complicated since for kernels with
compact support a straightforward estimation using the second derivative
of the kernel proves to be very noisy and sensitive to particle
disorder. For this reason it is better to use approximations of the
second derivative which utilise only the first derivative of the kernel
(Brookshaw, 1985 ; Monaghan, 1992 ) . For a scalar quantity the second
derivative may be estimated using the integral approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

giving the SPH Laplacian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This formalism is commonly used for heat conduction in
SPH (e.g. Brookshaw 1985 ; Cleary and Monaghan 1999 and more recently
Jubelgas et al. 2004 ). The integral approximation ( 1.24 ) can be
derived by expanding @xmath to second order in a Taylor series about
@xmath , giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding this expression into ( 1.24 ), the integral is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first integral is zero for spherically symmetric kernels, whilst the
second term integrates to a delta function, giving @xmath . A
generalisation of ( 1.25 ) is derived for vector quantities by Español
and Revenga ( 2003 ) . In three dimensions the integral approximation is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in SPH form becomes

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.29)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 1.2.5 Smoothing kernels

The smoothing kernel @xmath must by definition satisfy the requirement
that it tends to a delta function as the smoothing length @xmath tends
to zero ( 1.2 ) and the normalisation condition ( 1.4 ). In addition the
kernel is usually chosen to be an even function of @xmath to cancel the
first error term in ( 1.8 ) and may therefore be written in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the number of spatial dimensions. Written in
this form the normalisation condition ( 1.4 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and the volume element @xmath or @xmath in one, two and
three dimensions. The simplest kernel with this property is the Gaussian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath in [1,2,3] dimensions. This has the advantage
that the spatial derivative is infinitely smooth (differentiable) and
therefore exhibits good stability properties (Figure 1.2 ). For
practical applications, however, using a Gaussian kernel has the
immediate disadvantage that the interpolation spans the entire spatial
domain (with computational cost of @xmath ), despite the fact that the
relative contribution from neighbouring particles quickly become
negligible with increasing distance. For this reason it is far more
efficient to use kernels with finite extent (ie. having compact
support), reducing the calculation to a sum over closely neighbouring
particles which dramatically reduces the cost to @xmath where @xmath is
the number of contributing neighbours (although there is also the
additional cost of finding the neighbouring particles). Kernels which
are similar to the Gaussian in shape generally give the best performance
(see, e.g. Fulk and Quinn, 1996 ) . Of these the most commonly used
kernel is that based on cubic splines (Monaghan and Lattanzio, 1985 ) ,
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

with normalisation @xmath . This kernel satisfies the basic requirements
( 1.2 ) and ( 1.4 ), is even, has continuous first derivatives and
compact support of size @xmath . Smoother kernels can be introduced by
increasing the size of the compact support region (which correspondingly
increases the cost of evaluation by increasing the number of
contributing neighbours) and by using higher order interpolating spline
functions. To this end the quartic spline kernel

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with normalisation @xmath and quintic spline kernel

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

with normalisation @xmath can be used (e.g. Morris, 1996 ) . The higher
order polynomials have the advantage of smoother derivatives which, in
combination with the increased size of compact support, decreases the
sensitivity of the kernel to disorder in the particle distribution (§
1.2.7 ).

Note that it is entirely possible to construct kernels based on smoother
splines but which retain compact support of size @xmath . We derive a
class of such kernels and compare their stability properties with the
kernels given in this section in § 1.2.6 . In principle it is also
possible to construct higher order kernels where the second error term
in ( 1.8 ) is also zero. Monaghan ( 1992 ) demonstrates that such higher
order kernels may be constructed from any lower order kernel such as (
1.33 ) by the simple relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the parameters @xmath and @xmath are chosen to cancel the second
moment and to satisfy the normalisation condition ( 1.4 ). The
disadvantage of all such kernels is that the kernel becomes negative in
part of the domain which could result in a negative density evaluation.
Also it is not clear that such kernels actually lead to significant
improvements in accuracy in practical situations (since the kernel is
sampled at only a few points).

From time to time various alternatives have been proposed to the kernel
interpolation at the heart of SPH, such as the use of Delaunay
triangulations (Pelupessy et al., 2003 ) and normalisations of the
kernel interpolant (involving matrix inversion) which guarantee exact
interpolations to arbitrary polynomial orders (Maron and Howes, 2003 ;
Bonet and Lok, 1999 ) . It remains to be seen whether any such
alternative proposals are viable in terms of the gain in accuracy versus
the inevitable increase in computational expense and algorithmic
complexity.

Finally we note that in most SPH codes, the kernel is evaluated by
linear interpolation from a pre-computed table of values, since kernel
evaluations are computed frequently. The computational cost involved in
calculating the kernel function is therefore the same whatever the
functional form. In the calculations given in this thesis, the kernel is
tabulated as @xmath and @xmath , where the table is evenly spaced in
@xmath to give a better interpolation in the outer edges.

#### 1.2.6 A general class of kernels

In this section we consider the possibility of constructing kernels
based on smoother splines than the cubic but which retain compact
support of size @xmath . A general class of such kernels may be derived
by considering kernels of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the order, @xmath is the compact support size (in this
case @xmath ), @xmath and @xmath are parameters to be determined and
@xmath and @xmath are the two matching points (with @xmath ), although
an arbitrary number of matching points could be added. The formulation
given above guarantees that the kernel and its derivatives are
continuous at the matching points and zero at the compact support radius
@xmath . To determine the parameters @xmath and @xmath we require two
further constraints on the form of the kernel. For the kernels to
resemble the Gaussian, we constrain the kernel gradient to be zero at
the origin and also that the second derivative be minimum at the origin
(this also constrains @xmath ), ie.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the moment we leave the matching points as free parameters. From the
conditions ( 1.38 ), the parameters @xmath and @xmath are given in terms
of the matching points by

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.39)
  -- -- -- --------

In one dimension the normalisation constant is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

As an example we can construct a quintic ( @xmath ) kernel that closely
resembles the cubic spline kernel ( 1.33 ) in all but the continuity of
the second derivative. An example of such a kernel is given by the
choice @xmath , @xmath . This was chosen by constraining the second
derivative to be equal to that of the cubic spline at the origin (ie.
@xmath ) and the turning point in the second derivative to be located as
close as possible to the that of the cubic spline ( @xmath ; note that
an exact match is not possible under the constraints given). This kernel
is shown in Figure 1.1 (‘cubic-like quintic’). The stability properties
are discussed in § 1.2.7 .

However, it would be more interesting to investigate whether other
kernels with even better stability properties can be constructed. To
this end we have performed a survey of parameter space for quintic (
@xmath ) kernels, from which we find that the most stable kernels are
those with matching points in the range @xmath with @xmath or @xmath
with @xmath . These two kernels (‘New Quintic(1)’ and ‘New Quintic (2)’)
are shown in Figure 1.1 . The stability properties are discussed below.

#### 1.2.7 Kernel stability properties

The accuracy of the kernels given in § 1.2.5 and § 1.2.6 may be compared
via a stability analysis of the SPH equations. Detailed investigations
of the stability properties of SPH have been given elsewhere (e.g.
Morris 1996 ) and for this reason we refer the details of the stability
analysis to appendix A (although as for the fluid equations, the
linearised form of the SPH equations are derived from a variational
principle). The result for one-dimensional SPH (for any equation of
state) is the dispersion relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.41)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the sound speed. Figure 1.2 shows contours of the
(normalised) square of the numerical sound speed @xmath as a function of
wavenumber and smoothing length (both in units of the average particle
spacing). The sums in ( 1.41 ) are calculated numerically assuming an
(isothermal) sound speed and particle spacing of unity (both wavelength
and smoothing length are calculated in units of the particle spacing).
The quintic spline (top, centre) and the Gaussian (top right) show
increasingly better stability properties over the standard cubic spline
(top left) although at increased computational expense.

The stability properties of the ‘cubic-like’ quintic kernel derived in §
1.2.6 (bottom left) are very similar to that of the cubic spline, except
that the ‘trough’ in the contours of @xmath observed at @xmath (where
the closest neighbour crosses the discontinuity in the second
derivative) is much smoother. However, the accuracy of this kernel
appears to degrade for small smoothing lengths ( @xmath ) where the
cubic spline retains a reasonable accuracy. Of the remaining two kernels
derived in § 1.2.6 (bottom centre and bottom right), the second example
(‘New Quintic (2)’) in particular appears to give slightly better
accuracy than the cubic spline over the range @xmath although both
kernels show the rapid decline in accuracy for small smoothing lengths (
@xmath ) observed in the cubic-like quintic. It is worth noting that
most multidimensional calculations use smoothing lengths in the range
@xmath .

In summary the new kernels appear to give a small gain in accuracy over
the cubic spline kernel, provided @xmath . However, the gain in accuracy
from the use of these alternative kernels is very minor compared to the
substantial improvements in accuracy gained by the incorporation of the
variable smoothing length terms (§ 1.3.4 ), which effectively act as a
normalisation of the kernel gradient.

### 1.3 Fluid Equations

#### 1.3.1 Continuity equation

The summation interpolant ( 1.5 ) takes a particularly simple form for
the evaluation of density, ie.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the (Lagrangian) time derivative, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

which may be translated back to continuum form via the summation
interpolant ( 1.5 ) to give

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.44)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This reveals that ( 1.43 ) and therefore ( 1.42 ) are SPH expressions
for the continuity equation. It is a remarkable fact that the entire SPH
formalism can be self-consistently derived using only ( 1.42 ) in
conjunction with the first law of thermodynamics via a Lagrangian
variational principle. Such a derivation demonstrates that SPH has a
robust Hamiltonian structure and ensures that the discrete equations
reflect the symmetries inherent in the Lagrangian, leading to the exact
conservation of momentum, angular momentum and energy.

#### 1.3.2 Equations of motion

The Lagrangian for Hydrodynamics is given by (Eckart, 1960 ; Salmon,
1988 ; Morrison, 1998 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the internal energy per unit mass. In SPH form this
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where as previously we have replaced the volume element @xmath with the
mass per SPH particle @xmath . We regard the particle co-ordinates as
the canonical variables. Being able to specify all of the terms in the
Lagrangian directly in terms of these variables means that the
conservation laws will be automatically satisfied, since the equations
of motion then result from the Euler-Lagrange equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The internal energy is regarded as a function of the particle’s density,
which in turn is specified as a function of the co-ordinates by ( 1.42
). The terms in ( 1.47 ) are therefore given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

From the first law of thermodynamics in the absence of dissipation we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and using ( 1.42 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.52)
              @xmath   @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have used the fact that the gradient of the kernel is
anti-symmetric (ie. @xmath ). The SPH equation of motion in the absence
of dissipation is therefore given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be seen to explicitly conserve momentum since the contribution
of the summation to the momentum of particle @xmath is equal and
opposite to that given to particle @xmath (given the antisymmetry of the
kernel gradient). Taking the time derivative of the total angular
momentum, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      (1.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the kernel gradient has been written as @xmath This last
expression is zero since the double summation is antisymmetric in @xmath
and @xmath (this can be seen by swapping the summation indices @xmath
and @xmath in the double sum and adding half of this expression to half
of the original expression, giving zero). Angular momentum is therefore
also explicitly conserved.

#### 1.3.3 Energy equation

The energy equation also follows naturally from the variational
approach, where we may choose to integrate either the particle’s
internal energy @xmath , its specific energy @xmath or even its specific
entropy @xmath . Integrating the specific energy guarantees that the
total energy is exactly conserved and it is common practice to use this
quantity in finite difference schemes. However the usual argument
against this (which applies equally to finite difference schemes) is
that in some circumstances (where the kinetic energy is much greater
than the thermal energy) the thermal energy can become negative by
round-off error. Integration of the specific entropy has some advantages
and has been argued for in both SPH (Springel and Hernquist, 2002 ) and
finite difference schemes (e.g. Balsara and Spicer 1999 ).

##### Internal energy

The internal energy equation in the absence of dissipation follows from
the use of the first law of thermodynamics ( 1.50 ), giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 1.43 ) therefore gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Total energy

The conserved (total) energy is found from the Lagrangian via the
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where using ( 1.48 ) and ( 1.46 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is simply the total energy of the SPH particles @xmath since the
Lagrangian does not explicitly depend on the time. Taking the
(Lagrangian) time derivative of ( 1.60 ), we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( 1.54 ) and ( 1.58 ) and rearranging we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus the specific energy equation (in the absence of dissipation) is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dissipative terms are discussed in § 1.5 .

##### Entropy

In the case of an ideal gas equation of state where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

the function @xmath evolves according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.65)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This has the advantage of placing strict controls on sources of entropy,
since @xmath is constant in the absence of dissipative terms. The
thermal energy is evaluated using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formulation of the energy equation has been advocated in an SPH
context by Springel and Hernquist ( 2002 ) .

#### 1.3.4 Variable smoothing length terms

The smoothing length @xmath determines the radius of interaction for
each SPH particle. Early SPH simulations used a fixed smoothing length
for all particles. However allowing each particle to have its own
associated smoothing length which varies according to local conditions
increases the spatial resolution substantially (Hernquist and Katz, 1989
; Benz, 1990 ) . The usual rule is to take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of spatial dimensions, although others are
possible (Monaghan, 2000 ) . Implementing this rule self-consistently is
more complicated in SPH since the density @xmath is itself a function of
the smoothing length @xmath via the relation ( 1.42 ). A simple approach
is to use the time derivative of ( 1.67 ), (Benz, 1990 ) , ie.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can then be evolved alongside the other particle quantities. This
rule works well for most practical purposes, and maintains the relation
( 1.67 ) particularly well when the density is updated using the
continuity equation ( 1.43 ). However, it has been known for some time
that, in order to be fully self-consistent, extra terms involving the
derivative of @xmath should be included in the momentum and energy
equations (e.g. Nelson 1994 ; Nelson and Papaloizou 1994 ; Serna et al.
1996 ). Attempts to do this were, however, complicated to implement
(Nelson and Papaloizou, 1994 ) and therefore not generally adopted by
the SPH community. Recently Springel and Hernquist ( 2002 ) have shown
that the so-called @xmath terms can be self-consistently included in the
equations of motion and energy using a variational approach. Springel
and Hernquist ( 2002 ) included the variation of the smoothing length in
their variational principle by use of Lagrange multipliers, however, in
the context of the discussion given in § 1.3.2 we note that by
expressing the smoothing length as a function of @xmath we can therefore
specify @xmath as a function of the particle co-ordinates (Monaghan,
2002 ) . That is we have @xmath where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the time derivative, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

A simple evaluation of @xmath for the kernel in the form ( 1.30 ) shows
that this term differs from unity even in the case of an initially
uniform density particle distribution (i.e. with constant smoothing
length). The effects of this correction term even in this simple case
are investigated in the sound wave tests described in § 1.7.2 .

The equations of motion in the hydrodynamic case may then be found using
the Euler-Lagrange equations ( 1.47 ) and will therefore automatically
conserve linear and angular momentum. The resulting equations are given
by (Springel and Hernquist, 2002 ; Monaghan, 2002 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Calculation of the quantities @xmath involve a summation over the
particles and can be computed alongside the density summation ( 1.69 ).
To be fully self-consistent we solve ( 1.69 ) iteratively to determine
both @xmath and @xmath self-consistently. We do this as follows: Using
the predicted smoothing length from ( 1.68 ), the density is initially
calculated by a summation over the particles. A new value of smoothing
length @xmath is then computed from this density using ( 1.67 ).
Convergence is determined according to the criterion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

For particles which are not converged, the density of (only) those
particles are recalculated (using @xmath ). This process is then
repeated until all particles are converged. Note that a particle’s
smoothing length is only set equal to @xmath if the density is to be
recalculated (this is to ensure that the same smoothing length that was
used to calculate the density is used to compute the terms in the other
SPH equations). Also, the density only needs to be recalculated on those
particles which have not converged, since each particle’s density is
independent of the smoothing length of neighbouring particles. This
requires a small adjustment to the density calculation routine (such
that the density can be calculated only for a selected list of
particles, rather than for all), but is relatively simple to implement
and means that the additional computational cost involved is negligible
(at least for the problems considered in this thesis). Note that in
principle the calculated gradient terms ( 1.71 ) may also be used to
implement an iteration scheme such as the Newton-Raphson method which
converges faster than our simple fixed point iteration.

Where the variable smoothing length terms are not explicitly calculated,
we use a simple averaging of the kernels and kernel gradients to
maintain the symmetry in the momentum and energy equations (Hernquist
and Katz, 1989 ; Monaghan, 1992 ) , ie.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and correspondingly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Many of the test problems in this thesis are performed using this simple
formulation. This is in order to show (particularly in the MHD case)
that satisfactory results on the test problems are not dependent on the
variable smoothing length formulation. In almost every case, however,
self-consistent implementation of the variable smoothing length terms as
described above leads to a substantial improvement in accuracy
(demonstrated, for example, in § 1.7 and in the MHD case in §
LABEL:sec:1Dtests ). Perhaps the only disadvantage to the full
implementation of the variable smoothing length terms is that the
iterations of @xmath with @xmath mean that small density fluctuations
are resolved by the method rather than being smoothed out, which may be
disadvantageous under some circumstances (e.g. where the fluctuations
are unphysical). One possible remedy for this might be to use a slightly
different relationship between @xmath and @xmath than is given by ( 1.67
).

### 1.4 Alternative formulations of SPH

In § 1.3 the SPH equations of motion and energy were derived from a
variational principle using only the density summation ( 1.42 ) and the
first law of thermodynamics ( 1.50 ), leading to the equations of motion
in the form ( 1.54 ) and the energy equation ( 1.58 ) or ( 1.63 ).
However many alternative formulations of the SPH equations are possible
and have been used in various contexts. In this section we demonstrate
how such alternative formulations may also be derived self-consistently
using a variational principle.

For example, a general form of the momentum equation in SPH is given by
(Monaghan, 1992 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is symmetric between particle pairs for all choices of the
parameter @xmath and therefore explicitly conserves momentum. Ritchie
and Thomas ( 2001 ) use this form of the momentum equation with @xmath
in their SPH formalism, finding that it gives slightly better results
for problems involving large density contrasts (they also use a slightly
different procedure for evaluating the density). Marri and White ( 2003
) , for similar reasons, use this equation with @xmath , citing a
reduction in the relative error in the force calculation on particle
@xmath due to the influence of particle @xmath which is desirable in the
case of particles with large density differences. However, it is
apparent from the derivation given in § 1.3.2 that forms of this
equation other than the standard @xmath case cannot be derived
consistently using the density summation ( 1.42 ) and correspondingly
the continuity equation in the form ( 1.43 ). We are therefore led to
the conclusion that a consistent formulation of the SPH equations using
the general form of the momentum equation given above must involve
modification of the continuity equation in some way. We show below that
the general form of the continuity equation which is consistent with (
1.76 ) is derived from the continuum equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

expressed in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

with SPH equivalent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to demonstrate that this is so, we use this expression for the
density to derive the equations of motion and energy via a variational
principle.

#### 1.4.1 Variational principle

In the derivation given in § 1.3.2 , the variables in the Lagrangian
were explicitly written as a function of the particle co-ordinates (via
the identity 1.42 ), guaranteeing the exact conservation of linear and
angular momentum in the equations of motion via the use of the
Euler-Lagrange equations. Using a more general form of the continuity
equation, however, means that the density can no longer be expressed
directly as a function of the particle co-ordinates and therefore that
the derivation given in the previous section cannot be applied in this
case. However we may still use the Lagrangian to derive the equations of
motion by introducing constraints on @xmath in a manner similar to that
of Bonet and Lok ( 1999 ) . In this case conservation of momentum and
energy can be shown to depend on the formulation of the velocity terms
in the continuity equation (in particular that the term should be
expressed as a velocity difference). Clearly the major disadvantage of
using a continuity equation of any form rather than the SPH summation is
that mass is no longer conserved exactly. It is shown in §
LABEL:sec:spmhdmom that the kind of variational principle given below
may also be used to derive the equations of motion and energy in the MHD
case.

For stationary action we require

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we consider variations with respect to a small change in the
particle co-ordinates @xmath . We therefore have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Lagrangian variation in density is given, from ( 1.79 ), by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using ( 1.82 ) and the first law of thermodynamics ( 1.50 ) in ( 1.81 )
and rearranging, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting this back into ( 1.80 ), integrating the velocity term by parts
and simplifying (using @xmath ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we obtain the momentum equation in the form ( 1.76 ). This
equation is therefore consistent with the continuity equation in the
form ( 1.79 ). In the particular case considered by Marri and White (
2003 ) ( @xmath ) this would imply a discrete form of the continuity
equation given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Marri and White ( 2003 ) choose to retain the use of the usual SPH
summation ( 1.42 ) to determine the density. In the case considered by
Ritchie and Thomas ( 2001 ) ( @xmath ), the continuity equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is again somewhat different to the density estimation used in
their paper. The continuity equation ( 1.86 ), when used in conjunction
with the appropriate formulation of the momentum equation, has some
advantages in the case of fluids with large density differences (e.g. at
a water/air interface) since the term inside the summation involves only
the particle volumes @xmath rather than their mass, with the effect that
large mass differences between individual particles have less influence
on the calculation of the velocity divergence (Monaghan, private
communication). An alternative is the formalism proposed by Ott and
Schnetter ( 2003 ) , which we discuss in § 1.4.3 .

The internal energy equation consistent with the general momentum
equation ( 1.76 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is indeed the formalism used by Marri and White ( 2003 ) (with
@xmath ) since it was found, unsurprisingly in this context, that
integration of this equation resulted in much less numerical noise than
using other formalisms of the internal energy equation (in conjunction
with their use of ( 1.76 ) with @xmath as the momentum equation). The
form of the total energy equation consistent with ( 1.76 ) and ( 1.79 )
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note the energy equation used by Ritchie and Thomas ( 2001 ) is
different to the formulation given above (with @xmath ) and therefore
variationally inconsistent with their implementation of the momentum
equation. Hernquist and Katz ( 1989 ) point out that inconsistencies
between the forms of the energy and momentum equations result in errors
of @xmath in the energy conservation. In this sense the difference
between a consistent and inconsistent formalism is fairly minor,
although a consistent formulation between the momentum and energy
equations in general appears to lead to slightly improved results (as
found by Marri and White ). In practise we find that using alternative
formulations of the continuity equation generally gives slightly worse
results than (even inconsistent) use of the density summation.

#### 1.4.2 General alternative formulation

The momentum equation ( 1.76 ) can be generalised still further by
noting that the continuity equation ( 1.44 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

with SPH equivalent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is any scalar variable defined on the particles. Deriving
the momentum equation consistent with this equation in the manner given
above we find

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.91)
  -- -- -- --------

which conserves momentum for any choice of @xmath . In the case given in
the previous section we would have @xmath . Choosing @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the momentum equation used by Hernquist and Katz ( 1989 ) . The
continuity equation consistent with this form is therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

which at first sight appears somewhat bizarre, although it is certainly
a valid expression of the continuity equation in SPH form. It is unclear
whether using such alternative formulations of the continuity equation,
in the name of consistency, has any advantages over the usual density
summation. We leave it as an exercise for the reader to amuse themselves
by exploring various other combinations of variables, noting that the
forms of the internal and total energy equations consistent with ( 1.90
) and ( 1.91 ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 1.4.3 Ott and Schnetter formulation

Other formulations of the SPH equations have also been proposed to deal
with the problem of large density gradients. For example Ott and
Schnetter ( 2003 ) propose modifying the SPH summation to give

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.96)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

that is where the number density of particles @xmath is calculated by
summation rather than the mass density @xmath . This is to improve the
interpolation when particles of large mass differences interact. Taking
the time derivative of ( 1.96 ), the continuity equation is given by (as
in Ott and Schnetter 2003 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

For equal mass particles this formalism is exactly the same as the usual
summation ( 1.42 ). The formulation ( 1.96 ) enables the density to be
expressed as a function of the particle co-ordinates and thus the
derivation of the equations of motion and energy can be done in a
straightforward manner using the Euler-Lagrange equations, as in § 1.3.2
. The resulting equation of motion is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is somewhat different to the equation of motion used in Ott and
Schnetter ( 2003 ) (they use the form 1.76 with @xmath ). The internal
energy equation follows from the continuity equation ( 1.97 ) and the
first law of thermodynamics ( 1.50 ). We find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

Ott and Schnetter ( 2003 ) use a formulation of the internal energy
equation where the pressure term is symmetrised, which is inconsistent
with their use of ( 1.96 ). The total energy equation consistent with
their formalism can also be derived using the Hamiltonian (§ 1.3.3 ) and
is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this case use of the self-consistent formalism presented above should
lead to slightly improved results over the momentum and energy equations
employed by Ott and Schnetter ( 2003 ) , since the density is still
calculated via a direct summation over the particles.

### 1.5 Shocks

In any high-order numerical scheme, the simulation of shocks is
accompanied by unphysical oscillations behind the shock front. This
occurs because in discretising the continuum equations (in the SPH case
using 1.5 ) we assume that the fluid quantities are smoothly varying on
the smallest length scale (in SPH this is the smoothing length @xmath ).
This means that discontinuities on such scales are not resolved by the
numerical method. The simplest approach to this problem is to introduce
a small amount of viscosity into the simulation which acts to spread out
the shock front so that it can be sufficiently resolved (von Neumann and
Richtmyer, 1950 ; Richtmyer and Morton, 1967 ) . This is similar to the
way in which shock fronts are smoothed out by nature, although in the
latter case the effect occurs at a much finer level. The disadvantage of
using such an ‘artificial’ viscosity is that it can produce excess
heating elsewhere in the simulation. As such the use of artificial
viscosity is regarded by many numerical practitioners as outdated since
most finite difference schemes now rely on methods which either restrict
the magnitude of the numerical flux across a shock front in order to
prevent unphysical oscillations (such as total variation diminishing
(TVD) schemes) or by limiting the jump in the basic variables across the
shock front using the exact solution to the Riemann problem
(Godunov-type schemes). There remain, however, distinct advantages to
the use of an artificial viscosity, primarily that, unlike the
Godunov-type schemes, it is easily applied where new physics is
introduced (such as a more complicated equation of state than the ideal
gas law) and the complexity of the algorithm does not increase with the
number of spatial dimensions. In the case of magnetohydrodynamics,
artificial viscosity is commonly used even in standard finite-difference
codes ³ ³ 3 for example in the widely used ZEUS code for astrophysical
fluid dynamics (Stone and Norman, 1992 ) since the Riemann problem is
difficult to solve and computationally expensive. Furthermore,
dissipative terms are often still used even when a Riemann solver has
been implemented (e.g. Balsara 1998 ). For these reasons artificial
viscosity methods continue to find widespread usage, particularly in
simulations using unstructured or Lagrangian meshes (Caramana et al.,
1998 ) .

In recent years it has been shown that Godunov-type schemes can in fact
be used in conjunction with SPH by regarding interacting particle pairs
as left and right states of the Riemann problem (Cha and Whitworth, 2003
; Inutsuka, 2002 ; Parshikov and Medin, 2002 ; Monaghan, 1997 ) . In
this manner the implementation of Godunov-type schemes to
multidimensional problems is greatly simplified in SPH because the
one-dimensional Riemann problem is solved between particle pairs,
removing the need for complicated operator splitting procedures in
higher dimensions. The formalism presented by Cha and Whitworth ( 2003 )
is remarkably simple to incorporate into any standard SPH code. A
Godunov-type scheme for MHD in SPH would be extremely useful (although
not widely applicable), but it is well beyond the scope of this thesis.
We therefore formulate artificial dissipation terms using the
formulation of Monaghan ( 1997 ) which is generalised to the MHD case in
§ LABEL:sec:mhdav . The problem of excess heating is addressed by the
implementation of switches to turn off the dissipative terms away from
shock fronts, described in § 1.5.2 .

#### 1.5.1 Artificial viscosity and thermal conductivity

A variety of different formulations of artificial viscosity in SPH have
been used, however the most common implementation is that given by
Monaghan ( 1992 ) , where the term in equation ( 1.54 ) is given by

  -- -- -- ---------
           (1.101)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath (similarly for @xmath ), barred quantities refer to
averages between particles @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath refers to the
sound speed. This viscosity is applied only when the particles are in
compression (ie. @xmath ), is Galilean invariant, conserves total linear
and angular momentum and vanishes for rigid body rotation. The @xmath
term (quadratic in @xmath ) represents a form of viscosity similar to
the original formulation of von Neumann and Richtmyer ( 1950 ) and
becomes dominant in the limit of large velocity differences (ie. in high
Mach number shocks). The @xmath term is linear in @xmath and is dominant
for small velocity differences ⁴ ⁴ 4 The introduction of such a term
into artificial viscosity methods is generally attributed to Landshoff (
1955 ) (see, e.g. Caramana et al. 1998 ) . Most astrophysical SPH
implementations follow Monaghan ( 1992 ) in setting @xmath and @xmath
which provides the necessary dissipation near a shock front.

The term given by equation ( 1.101 ) was constructed to have the
properties described above, however in the relativistic case it was
unclear as to what form such an artificial viscosity should take. Chow
and Monaghan ( 1997 ) thus formulated an artificial viscosity for
ultra-relativistic shocks in SPH by analogy with Riemann solvers. This
is outlined by Monaghan ( 1997 ) in a discussion of SPH and Riemann
solvers. The essential idea is to regard the interacting particles as
left and right Riemann states and to construct a dissipation which
involves jumps in the physical variables. The dissipation term in the
force (giving artificial viscosity) therefore involves a jump in the
velocity variable and is similar to ( 1.101 ), taking the form (for
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a signal velocity and @xmath is a unit vector along the
line joining the particles. Note that this formalism differs from (
1.101 ) in that a factor of @xmath has been removed. Also the @xmath
term has been removed from the denominator since for variable smoothing
lengths it is unnecessary. The jump in velocity involves only the
component along the line of sight since this is the only component
expected to change at a shock front. In a similar manner, the
dissipative term in the specific energy equation ( 1.63 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the jump in specific energy. The specific energy used in
this term is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that is, where the specific kinetic energy has been projected along the
line joining the particles, since only the component of velocity
parallel to this vector is expected to jump at a shock front. Note that
in general we use a different parameter @xmath to control the thermal
energy term and that this term is applied to particles in both
compression and rarefaction.

The signal velocity represents the maximum speed of signal propagation
along the line of sight between the two particles. Whilst many
formulations could be devised, it turns out that the results are not
sensitive to the particular choice made. A simple estimate of the signal
velocity is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the speed of sound of particle @xmath and @xmath ,
such that @xmath is an estimate of the maximum speed for linear wave
propagation between the particles. The @xmath term, which acts as a von
Neumann and Richtmyer viscosity as in equation ( 1.101 ), arises
naturally in this formulation. Practical experience suggests, however,
that @xmath is a better choice. For a more general discussion of signal
velocities we refer the reader to Monaghan ( 1997 ) and Chow and
Monaghan ( 1997 ) .

The contribution to the thermal energy from the dissipative terms is
found using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this case we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is added to the non-dissipative term ( 1.58 ). The first term is
the positive definite contribution to the thermal energy from the
artificial viscosity (since the kernel gradient is always negative). The
second term (involving a jump in thermal energy) provides an artificial
thermal conductivity. Physically this means that discontinuities in the
thermal energy are also smoothed.

The artificial dissipation given by ( 1.102 )-( 1.107 ) is used as a
basis for constructing an appropriate dissipation for the MHD case in §
LABEL:sec:mhdav .

#### 1.5.2 Artificial dissipation switches

##### Artificial viscosity

In both ( 1.101 ) and ( 1.102 ) the artificial viscosity is applied
universally across the particles despite only being needed when and
where shocks actually occur. This results in SPH simulations being much
more dissipative than is necessary and can cause problematic effects
where this dissipation is unwanted (such as in the presence of shear
flows). A switch to reduce the artificial viscosity away from shocks is
given by Morris and Monaghan ( 1997 ) . Using this switch in
multi-dimensional simulations substantially reduces the problematic
effects of using an artificial viscosity in SPH.

The key idea is to regard the dissipation parameter @xmath (c.f.
equation 1.102 ) as a particle property. This can then be evolved along
with the fluid equations according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

such that in the absence of sources @xmath , @xmath decays to a value
@xmath over a timescale @xmath . The timescale @xmath is calculated
according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the particle’s smoothing length, @xmath is the maximum
signal propagation speed at the particle location and @xmath is a
dimensionless parameter with value @xmath . We conservatively use @xmath
which means that the value of @xmath decays to @xmath over @xmath
smoothing lengths.

The source term @xmath is chosen such that the artificial dissipation
grows as the particle approaches a shock front. We use (Rosswog et al.,
2000 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

such that the dissipation grows in regions of strong compression.
Following Morris and Monaghan ( 1997 ) where the ratio of specific heats
@xmath differs from 5/3 (but not for the isothermal case), we multiply
@xmath by a factor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The source term is multiplied by a factor @xmath as the standard source
term given by Morris and Monaghan ( 1997 ) was found to produce
insufficient damping at shock fronts when used in conjunction with the
Monaghan ( 1997 ) viscosity. The source term ( 1.110 ) is found to
provide sufficient damping on the Sod ( 1978 ) hydrodynamic shock tube
problem and in the MHD shock tube tests we describe in chapter §
LABEL:sec:1Dtests (ie. @xmath for these problems). In order to conserve
momentum the average value @xmath is used in equations ( 1.102 ), (
1.104 ) and ( 1.107 ). A lower limit of @xmath is used to preserve order
away from shocks (note that this is an order of magnitude reduction from
the usual value of @xmath everywhere).

The numerical tests in § LABEL:sec:1Dtests demonstrate that use of this
switch gives a significant reduction in dissipation away from shocks
whilst preserving the shock-capturing ability of the code.

##### Artificial thermal conductivity

A similar switch to that used in the artificial viscosity may therefore
be devised for the artificial thermal conductivity term, with the
parameter @xmath evolved according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the decay timescale @xmath is the same as that used in ( 1.108 )
and in this case we use @xmath . The corresponding source term is given
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is constructed to have dimensions of inverse time. The gradient
term is computed according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Use of this switch ensures that artificial thermal conductivity is only
applied at large gradients in the thermal energy. The need to do so in
dissipation-based shock capturing schemes is often concealed by
smoothing of the initial conditions in shock tube tests (§ 1.7.3 ). From
the first law of thermodynamics ( 1.50 ) we infer that gradients in the
thermal energy correspond to large gradients in the density. In a
hydrodynamic shock these occur either at the shock front or at the
contact discontinuity. Artificial viscosity is not required at the
contact discontinuity because the pressure is constant across it. Using
unsmoothed initial conditions and in the absence of artificial thermal
conductivity, a significant overshoot in thermal energy occurs at the
contact discontinuity (this phenomenon is known as ‘wall heating’ and is
illustrated in Figure 1.9 ). The resulting glitch in the pressure is
often ascribed to ‘starting errors’ due to the unsmoothed initial
conditions. However, applying smoothing to the initial conditions of a
shock-tube test means that gradients across the contact discontinuity
remain smoothed throughout the evolution (see e.g. Figure 1.9 ),
removing the need for artificial thermal conductivity which acts to
spread gradients in the thermal energy. Whilst there is also a gradient
in thermal energy at a shock front, this is smoothed out by the
application of artificial viscosity there and so the need for artificial
thermal conductivity can go unnoticed. In § 1.7.3 we present results of
the standard Sod ( 1978 ) shock tube test, showing the effectiveness of
the switch discussed above in applying the requisite amount of smoothing
at the contact discontinuity.

### 1.6 Timestepping

#### 1.6.1 Predictor-corrector scheme

We integrate the SPH equations in this thesis using a slight
modification of the standard predictor-corrector (Modified Euler) method
which is second order accuracy in time (Monaghan, 1989 ) . The predictor
step is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.116)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.117)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.118)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where in practice we use @xmath and @xmath to give a one-step method.
The rates of change of these quantities are then computed via the SPH
summations using the predicted values at the half step, ie.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The corrector step is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.120)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.121)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.122)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and finally

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.123)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.124)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.125)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Note that in this scheme the position updates in both the predictor and
corrector steps use the updated value of velocity. This effectively
means that the position is updated using both the first and second
derivatives. From numerical experiments we find that this scheme gives
much better stability properties. Where evolved, density, smoothing
length, magnetic field and the dissipation parameters follow the energy
evolution. The total energy @xmath is interchangeable for the thermal
energy @xmath .

#### 1.6.2 Reversible integrators

The simple predictor-corrector method given above is adequate for all
the problems considered in this thesis since the integration time is
quite short. For large simulations over long timescales, however, the
accuracy and stability of the integration method needs more careful
attention. In the past decade or so a substantial research effort has
been devoted to the development of high accuracy so-called ‘geometric’
integrators for Hamiltonian systems (e.g. Hut et al., 1995 ; Stoffer,
1995 ; Huang and Leimkuhler, 1997 ; Holder et al., 2001 ; Hairer et al.,
2002 ) . Since SPH in the absence of dissipative terms can derived from
a Hamiltonian variational principle, much of this work is applicable in
the SPH context. The primary condition for the construction of a
geometric integrator is time-reversibility (that is, particle quantities
should return to their original values upon reversing the direction of
time integration). It is fairly straightforward to construct a
reversible integrator for the SPH equations in the case of a constant
smoothing length, where the density summation is used and where the
pressure is calculated directly from the density (such that the force
evaluation uses only the particle co-ordinates). The standard leapfrog
algorithm is one such example. In general, however, the construction of
a reversible scheme is complicated by several factors. The first is the
use of a variable timestep (which immediately destroys the time-symmetry
in the leapfrog scheme, although see Holder et al. ( 2001 ) for recent
progress on this). The second complicating factor is that the
reversibility condition becomes more difficult when equations with rates
of change involving the particle velocity are used (such as the thermal
or total energy equation or the continuity equation for the density). In
this case the construction of a reversible integrator for SPH
necessarily involves the calculation of derivatives involving the
velocity in separate step to the force evaluation, leading to additional
computational expense. A third complicating factor is the use of
individual particle timesteps in large SPH codes, although symplectic
methods have also been constructed for this case (Hairer et al., 2002 )
.

#### 1.6.3 Courant condition

The timestep is determined by the Courant condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath is the maximum signal velocity between particle
pairs. This signal velocity is similar to that used in the artificial
dissipation terms (§ 1.5 ), except that we use

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath when @xmath (ie. where the dissipation terms are not
applied). The minimum in ( 1.126 ) is taken over all particle
interactions and typically we use @xmath .

Although this condition is sufficient for all of the simulations
described here, in general it is necessary to pose the additional
constraint from the forces

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the acceleration on particle @xmath and typically @xmath
.

### 1.7 Numerical tests

#### 1.7.1 Implementation

Unless otherwise indicated the simulations use the density summation (
1.42 ), the momentum equation ( 1.54 ) and the energy equation in the
form ( 1.63 ). The numerical tests presented throughout this thesis were
implemented using a code written by the author as a testbed for MHD
algorithms.

##### Neighbour finding

Since the code has been designed for flexibility rather than
performance, we take a simplified approach to neighbour finding using
linked lists. The particles are binned into grid cells of size @xmath
where @xmath is the maximum value of smoothing length over the
particles. Particles in a given cell then search only the adjoining
cells for contributing neighbours. This approach becomes very
inefficient for a large range in smoothing lengths such that for large
simulations it is essential to use a more effective algorithm. A natural
choice is to use the tree code used in the computation of the
gravitational force (Hernquist and Katz, 1989 ; Benz et al., 1990 ) .

##### Boundary conditions

Boundary conditions are implemented using either ghost or fixed
particles. For reflecting boundaries, ghost particles are created which
mirror the SPH particles across the boundary. These particles are exact
copies of the SPH particles in all respects except for the velocity,
which is of opposite sign on the ghost particle, producing a repulsive
force at the boundary. For periodic boundary conditions the ghosts are
exact copies of the particles at the opposite boundary. In the MHD shock
tube tests considered in § LABEL:sec:1Dtests involving non-zero
velocities at the boundaries, boundary conditions are implemented in one
dimension by simply fixing the properties of the 6 particles closest to
each boundary. Where the initial velocities of these particles are
non-zero their positions are evolved accordingly and a particle is
removed from the domain once it has crossed the boundary. Where the
distance between the closest particle and the boundary is more than the
initial particle spacing a new particle is introduced to the domain.
Hence for inflow or outflow boundary conditions the resolution changes
throughout the simulation.

#### 1.7.2 Propagation and steepening of sound waves

We initially consider the propagation of linear sound waves in SPH. This
test is particularly important in the MHD case (§ LABEL:sec:mwav ) since
it highlights the instability in the momentum-conserving formalism of
SPMHD. In this case we investigate the dependence of sound speed on
smoothing length and the damping due to artificial viscosity.

##### Particle setup

The particles are initially setup at equal separations in the domain
@xmath using ghost particles (§ 1.7.1 ) to create periodic boundary
conditions. The linear solution for a travelling sound wave in the
x-direction is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.129)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.130)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the angular frequency, @xmath is the sound speed in the
undisturbed medium and @xmath is the wavenumber. The initial conditions
therefore correspond to @xmath in the above. The perturbation in density
is applied by perturbing the particles from an initially uniform setup.
We consider the one dimensional perturbation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the perturbation amplitude. The cumulative total mass in
the x direction is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.132)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

such that the cumulative mass at any given point as a fraction of the
total mass is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For equal mass particles distributed in @xmath the cumulative mass
fraction at particle @xmath is given by @xmath such that the particle
position may be calculated using

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Substituting the expression for @xmath we have the following equation
for the particle position

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which we solve iteratively using a simple Newton-Raphson rootfinder.
With the uniform particle distribution as the initial conditions this
converges in one or two iterations.

##### One dimensional tests

Initially we consider one dimensional, isothermal simulations using a
fixed smoothing length (for which the results of the stability analysis
given in § 1.2.7 hold). The cubic spline kernel is used with @xmath
where @xmath is the initial particle spacing. This value of smoothing
length was chosen because in Figure 1.2 the cubic spline is seen to
significantly underestimate the sound speed at this value of @xmath .
The simulation is setup using 100 particles (corresponding to @xmath in
Figure 1.2 ) and a wave amplitude of @xmath to ensure that the wave
remains essentially linear throughout the simulation. No artificial
viscosity is used. For isothermal simulations, the pressure is
calculated directly from the density using @xmath . The sound speed
given by the SPH simulations is estimated from the temporal spacing of
minima in the total kinetic energy of the particles.

A representative example of these simulations is given in the left hand
side of Figure 1.4 after five crossings of the computational domain. The
amplitude is well maintained by the SPH scheme, however the wave lags
behind the exact solution, giving a significant phase error as expected
from the stability analysis (Figure 1.2 ). The sound speed obtained from
the numerical tests is plotted in Figure 1.5 for a range of smoothing
length values (solid points). In this case the results show excellent
agreement with the analytic results using the dispersion relation ( 1.41
) given by the solid line (this line corresponds to @xmath in Figure 1.2
). We observe that, depending on the value of @xmath the numerical sound
wave can both lag and lead the exact solution (in Figure 1.5 this
corresponds to sound speeds less than or greater than unity).

In § 1.3.4 it was noted that the variable smoothing length terms
normalise the kernel even in the case of a fixed smoothing length. The
results of the fixed smoothing length simulation with this correction
term are shown by the dashed line in Figure 1.5 , with a representative
example given in the right hand side of Figure 1.4 . The numerical wave
speed appears much closer to the theoretical value of unity.

Results using a smoothing length which varies with density according to
( 1.68 ) are given by the dot-dashed line in Figure 1.5 , with a
representative example shown in Figure 1.4 . The phase error is slightly
lower than either of the fixed smoothing length cases. Including the
normalisation of the kernel gradient from the variable smoothing lengths
(§ 1.3.4 ) gives numerical sound speeds very close to unity (dotted line
in Figure 1.5 ). A representative example of these simulations is given
in the right hand panel of Figure 1.4 after 5 periods. The results in
this case show excellent agreement with the exact (linear) solution,
with a small amount of steepening due to nonlinear effects.

The results of this test indicate that, whilst alternative kernels can
give slight improvements in accuracy over the standard cubic spline (§
1.2.7 ), a substantial gain in accuracy can be gained firstly by the use
of a variable smoothing length and secondly by self-consistently
accounting for @xmath terms in the formulation of the SPH equations.
These terms act as a normalisation of the kernel gradient which appear
to effectively remove the dependence of the numerical sound speed on the
smoothing length value.

##### Effects of artificial viscosity

In the absence of any switches, the artificial viscosity is specified
according to ( 1.102 ) with @xmath , @xmath everywhere. The results of
the sound wave propagation with artificial viscosity turned on are shown
in the left panel of Figure 1.6 . After 5 crossings of the computational
domain the wave is severely damped by the artificial viscosity term. The
effect is to reduce the order of the numerical scheme since convergence
to the exact solution is much slower. The results using the artificial
viscosity switch discussed in § 1.5.2 are shown in the right panel of
Figure 1.6 . The results show good agreement with the linear solution,
demonstrating that use of the artificial viscosity switch very
effectively restores the numerical schemes ability to propagate small
perturbations without excessive damping.

Finally, we demonstrate the usefulness of the artificial viscosity
switch by considering the steepening of a nonlinear sound wave. In this
case the initial amplitude is 0.05 and artificial viscosity is applied
using the switch. The wave profile at @xmath is shown in Figure 1.7 and
is significantly steepened compared to the initial conditions (solid
line). The use of the switch enables the steepening to be resolved,
however some oscillations are found to occur ahead of the steepened
wave.

#### 1.7.3 Sod shock tube

The standard shock tube test for any compressible fluid dynamics code is
that of Sod ( 1978 ) . The problem consists of dividing the domain into
two halves, one consisting of high pressure, high density gas whilst the
other is low pressure and low density. These two portions of gas are
allowed to interact at @xmath , resulting in a shock and rarefaction
wave which propagate through the gas. This test illustrates the shock
capturing ability of the 1D code and thus provides a good test of the
artificial viscosity formalism (§ 1.5 ). It is also the basis for the
MHD shock tube considered in § LABEL:sec:briowu . We set up the problem
using 450 SPH particles in the domain @xmath . The particles are setup
with uniform masses such that the density jump is modelled by a jump in
particle separation. Initial conditions in the fluid to the left of the
origin are given by @xmath whilst conditions to the right are given by
@xmath with @xmath . The particle separation to the left of the
discontinuity is @xmath .

Figure 1.9 shows the results of this problem at @xmath . The exact
solution, calculated using the exact Riemann solver given in Toro ( 1992
) is given by the solid line. In this case artificial viscosity has been
applied uniformly to particles in compression (ie. using @xmath ),
whilst no artificial thermal conductivity has been used (ie. @xmath ).
The results are generally good although there is significant deviation
in the slope of the rarefaction wave. This can be traced largely to the
smoothing applied to the initial conditions. Following Monaghan ( 1997 )
(although a similar procedure is applied in many published versions of
this test), the initial discontinuities in density and pressure were
smoothed over several particles according to the rule

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the uniform left and right states with
respect to the origin and @xmath is taken as half of the largest initial
particle separation at the interface (ie. the particle separation on the
low density side). Where the initial density is smoothed the particles
are spaced according to the rule

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the particle spacing to the far right of the origin with
density @xmath . Note that initial smoothing lengths are set according
to the rule @xmath and are therefore also smoothed. Where the total
energy @xmath is integrated we smooth the basic variable @xmath
construct the total energy from the sum of the kinetic and internal
energies.

Such smoothing of the initial conditions can be avoided altogether if
the density summation ( 1.42 ) is used, particularly if the smoothing
length is updated self-consistently with the density. The results of
this problem using unsmoothed initial conditions are shown in Figure 1.9
. The artificial viscosity is applied uniformly whilst no artificial
thermal conductivity has been used. In this case the rarefaction profile
agrees extremely well with the exact solution (solid line). The
unsmoothed initial conditions highlight the need for artificial thermal
conductivity since the thermal energy overshoots at the contact
discontinuity with a resulting glitch in the pressure profile. The
gradient in thermal energy at the shock front does not show this effect
due to the smoothing of the shock by the artificial viscosity term. The
results of this test with a small amount of artificial thermal
conductivity applied using the switch discussed in § 1.5.2 are shown in
Figure 1.11 . The variable smoothing length terms have also been used in
this case, although results are similar with a simple average of the
kernel gradients in the force equation ( 1.54 ). The contact
discontinuity is smoothed over several smoothing lengths by the thermal
conductivity term, removing the overshoot in the thermal energy. The
resulting profiles compare extremely well with the exact solution (solid
line).

Finally, the results of this test where both the artificial viscosity
and conductivity are controlled using the switches described in § 1.5.2
are shown in Figure 1.11 . The top row shows the velocity and thermal
energy profiles compared with the exact solution (solid line), whilst
the bottom row shows the time-varying co-efficients @xmath and @xmath of
the viscosity and thermal conductivity respectively. With the unsmoothed
initial conditions and the viscosity switch there is a slight
oscillation in the velocity profile at the head of the rarefaction wave.
The variable smoothing length terms have been used in this case
involving the consistent update of the smoothing length with density (§
1.3.4 ). If a simple average of the kernel gradients is used instead the
oscillations in the rarefaction wave are still present but slightly less
pronounced. In effect, the iterations of density and smoothing length
make the scheme much more sensitive to small perturbations, since a
small change in the smoothing length will be reflected in the density
profile and vice-versa. This means that structures in the simulation are
in general better resolved and is clearly advantageous. However alsos
mean that small errors in the density evolution are amplified where they
may otherwise have been smoothed out by the numerical scheme.

#### 1.7.4 Blast wave

In this test we consider a more extreme version of the shock tube test
considered previously. In this problem the initial conditions in the
fluid to the left of the origin are given by @xmath whilst conditions to
the right are given by @xmath with @xmath . The @xmath pressure ratio
across the initial discontinuity results in a strong blast wave which
propagates into the fluid to the right of the origin. The velocity of
the contact discontinuity is very close to that of the shock, producing
a sharp density spike behind the shock front. This test therefore
presents a demanding benchmark for any numerical code.

The results of this test at @xmath are shown in Figure 1.12 . The
agreement with the exact solution (solid line) is excellent. In this
simulation the density summation and the average of the kernel gradients
has been used and the artificial viscosity is applied using the
viscosity switch. The SPH results may be compared with those given in
Monaghan ( 1997 ) . Although we use the same formulation of the
dissipative terms as in Monaghan ( 1997 ) , in that paper the artificial
thermal conductivity is applied only for particles in compression,
resulting in a need to smooth the initial discontinuity in the pressure.
With the thermal conductivity term applied using the switch the contact
discontinuity is spread sufficiently in order to be resolved accurately
and smoothing of the initial conditions is therefore unnecessary. In the
SPH solution given by Monaghan ( 1997 ) the spike in density is observed
to overshoot the exact solution, which is not observed in this case.
This is due to the use of the density summation ( 1.42 ) rather than
evolving the continuity equation ( 1.43 ) as in Monaghan ( 1997 ) . Use
of the continuity equation is more efficient since it does not require
an extra pass over the particles in order to calculate the density.
Using alternative formulations of the pressure term in the momentum
equation (e.g. using equation ( 1.76 ) with @xmath ) gives similar
results (although the Hernquist and Katz ( 1989 ) formulation ( 1.92 )
appears to produce negative pressures on this problem). Using the
consistent alternative formulations of the continuity equation, however,
appears to worsen the overshoot observed in the density spike compared
to the usual continuity equation (for example in the @xmath case, the
density spike overshoots to @xmath when the continuity equation ( 1.86 )
is used).

#### 1.7.5 Cartesian shear flows

In a recent paper Imaeda and Inutsuka ( 2002 ) (hereafter II02) have
suggested that SPH gives particularly poor results on problems involving
significant amounts of shear. The simplest test considered by II02 is a
Cartesian shear flow. The setup is a two dimensional, uniform density
@xmath box in the domain @xmath and @xmath with a shear velocity field
@xmath and periodic boundary conditions in the @xmath and @xmath
directions. In general such flows are known (at least in the
incompressible case) to be unstable to Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities at
the inflection point in the velocity profile (e.g. Drazin and Reid, 1981
) . However, a straightforward stability analysis of this flow
demonstrates that it is indeed stable to small perturbations in the
@xmath direction (note, however that the application of viscosity can
significantly affect the stability properties for these types of
problems).

We setup the problem using 2500 (50 x 50) particles initially arranged
on a cubic lattice. The smoothing length we use is set according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we use @xmath , resulting in an initially uniform value of @xmath
. The smoothing length is allowed to change with density according to (
1.68 ), although this has little effect since the density remains close
uniform throughout the simulation. The equation of state is isothermal
such that the pressure is given in terms of the density via @xmath . As
in II02, we consider both the pressure-free case ( @xmath ) and also
using @xmath , in both cases using no artificial viscosity. The results
for the pressure-free case are shown in Figure 1.13 . After 50 dynamical
times (defined as one crossing of the computational domain at the
highest velocity, ie. in this case @xmath ) the density remains
extremely close to uniform ( @xmath ) and the particle positions remain
ordered. Results in II02 show large errors ( @xmath ) in the density in
less than 1 dynamical time. Similar results are obtained in the @xmath
case, shown after 20 dynamical times in Figure 1.14 . Again, the
amplitude of the density error is very small ( @xmath ). Some disruption
in the particle distribution is observed to occur at later times,
however in the absence of any artificial viscosity small compressible
modes are not damped in any way and in the absence of a high accuracy
timestepping algorithm such disorder might reasonably be expected. Also
it is well known that the particles initially arranged on a cubic
lattice will eventually move off the lattice and settle to a more
isotropic close packed distribution (e.g. Morris 1996 ).

The question is, therefore: Why do the results obtained in II02 show so
much error in the density evolution? The major factor appears to be the
particle setup. The details of the particle setup are not given in II02,
however by inspection of their figures it appears that the particles are
arranged in a quasi-random fashion. The density errors observed in their
paper may therefore be an amplification (by the shear flow) of initial
perturbations in the density distribution due to the particle setup. A
second contributing factor is that the value of smoothing length used by
II02 is very low (they use @xmath in equation ( 1.138 ), whereas typical
values for @xmath lie in the range @xmath in most multidimensional SPH
implementations). However, even with their choice of smoothing length
@xmath , we still find that the density remains essentially constant.

#### 1.7.6 Toy stars

A disadvantage of many of the test problems found in the astrophysical
fluid dynamics literature is that, being designed for grid-based codes,
they all involve some kind of boundary condition. For codes designed
ultimately to simulate self-gravitating gas it is useful to have
benchmarks based on a finite system. Secondly simple, exact, nonlinear
solutions to the equations of hydrodynamics are few and far between, and
this even more so in the case of magnetohydrodynamics. For this reason
we investigate benchmarks based on a simple class of exact solutions
which we call ‘Toy Stars’. The equations of hydrodynamics are modified
by the addition of a linear force term which is proportional to the
co-ordinates (which means that the particles move in a paraboloidal
potential centred on the origin). The one dimensional equation of motion
is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the angular frequency. In the following we rescale the
equations in units such that @xmath . The toy star force has many
interesting properties and was even considered by Newton as an example
of the simplest many-body force. The toy star equations with @xmath are
also identical in form to the shallow water equations.

Assuming a polytropic equation of state (ie. @xmath ) with constant of
proportionality @xmath and @xmath , the Toy Star static structure at
equilibrium is easily derived from ( 1.139 ) as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this thesis we will simply consider the most interesting toy star
problem which is the calculation of the fundamental oscillatory mode
since it turns out to be an exact, non-linear solution. However, a
perturbation analysis can be used to derive linear solutions to the Toy
Star equations which also present interesting benchmarks for numerical
codes. An investigation of the linear modes using SPH, together with a
detailed comparison of the oscillation frequencies with the linear
solution is given in Monaghan and Price ( 2004 ) . The non-linear
solution for arbitrary @xmath may be derived by considering velocity
perturbations in the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the density is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The exact solution (Monaghan and Price, 2004 ) for the parameters A, H
and C is given in terms of the ordinary differential equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.143)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.144)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.145)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which can be solved numerically with ease. The relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant which is determined from the initial values
of @xmath and @xmath . The exact solution equations ( 1.143 )-( 1.145 )
take particularly simple forms for the case @xmath .

##### Static structure

The simplest test with the toy star is to verify the static structure.
We setup 200 SPH particles equally spaced along the x axis with @xmath
with zero initial velocity and a total mass @xmath . The particles are
then allowed to evolve under the influence of the linear force, with the
velocities damped using the artificial viscosity. The particle
distribution at equilibrium is shown in Figure 1.15 and shows extremely
good agreement with the exact solution (eq. 1.140 ).

##### Non linear test cases

For the non-linear tests the one dimensional Toy star is initially set
up using 200 equal mass particles distributed along the x axis. Although
in principle we could use the particle distribution obtained in the
previous test as the initial conditions, it is simpler just to space the
particles according to the static density profile ( 1.140 ). The SPH
equations are implemented using the summation over particles to
calculate the density and the usual momentum equation with the linear
force subtracted. The equation of state is specified by using @xmath ,
where for the cases shown we set @xmath . The smoothing length is
allowed to vary with the particle density, where we take simple averages
of kernel quantities in the SPH equations in order to conserve momentum.

The exact (non-linear) solution is obtained by numerical integration of
equations ( 1.143 )-( 1.145 ) using a simple improved Euler method. We
use the condition ( 1.146 ) as a check on the quality of this
integration by evaluating the constant @xmath , which should remain
close to its initial value.

Results for the case where initially @xmath (and therefore @xmath ) are
shown in figure 1.17 at @xmath (corresponding to approximately one
oscillation period) alongside the exact solution shown by the solid
lines. No artificial viscosity is applied in this case. The agreement
with the exact solution is excellent. Note that the sound speed in this
case is @xmath such that using the parameter @xmath results in
supersonic velocities at the edges of the star (the solution is
therefore highly non-linear).

Figure 1.17 shows the SPH results for a simulation with @xmath and the
same initial parameters as Figure 1.17 . Velocity and density profiles
are shown at time @xmath corresponding to approximately three
oscillation periods. No artificial viscosity is used. The agreement with
the exact solution (solid lines) is again extremely good.

Results of simulations with artificial viscosity turned on are similar,
although with a small damping of the kinetic energy over time.

### 1.8 Summary

In this chapter we have thoroughly reviewed the SPH algorithm.
Alternatives to the standard cubic spline kernel were investigated in §
1.2.5 and § 1.2.6 , on the basis of their stability properties. Higher
order spline kernels giving closer approximations to the Gaussian were
found to give better stability properties although at the price of an
increase in computational expense due to the greater number of
contributing neighbours. The possibility of constructing kernels with
better stability properties based on smoother splines but retaining
compact support of size @xmath was investigated, with good results for
smoothing lengths @xmath (in units of the average particle spacing).
However, the gain in accuracy from the use of these alternative kernels
is very minor compared to the substantial improvements in accuracy
gained by the incorporation of the variable smoothing length terms (§
1.3.4 )

The discrete equations of SPH were formulated self-consistently from a
variational principle in § 1.3 , leading naturally to equations which
explicitly conserve momentum, angular momentum and energy. Artificial
dissipation terms used to capture shocks were then discussed, where in §
1.5.2 a new switch to control the application of artificial thermal
conductivity was considered (the importance of which is highlighted in
the numerical tests described in § 1.7 ). The consistent formulation of
the SPH equations incorporating a variable smoothing length was
discussed in § 1.3.4 , which are shown to lead to increased accuracy in
a wide range of problems (including linear waves (§ 1.7.2 ), shock tubes
(§ 1.7.3 ), Cartesian shear flows (§ 1.7.5 ) and toy stars (§ 1.7.6 )).
It was shown in § 1.4 that consistent formulations of SPH when
alternative formulations of the momentum equation are used can be
derived from a variational principle by modifying the form of the
continuity equation. Various timestepping algorithms were discussed in §
1.6 , particularly the need to perform a separate pass over the
particles to compute derivatives involving the velocity for a reversible
integration of the SPH equations. Finally several numerical tests were
presented.

The linear sound wave tests ( 1.7.2 ) demonstrated a phase error in the
SPH simulation of sound waves dependent on the value of the smoothing
length and related to the use of kernels with compact support. This
phase error was shown to be largely corrected for by allowing the
smoothing length to vary with density and self-consistently accounting
for the extra terms which arise in the SPH equations. Also the damping
of small perturbations induced by the artificial viscosity term was
found to be significantly reduced by use of the artificial viscosity
switch described in § 1.5.2 . In the second test problem, the standard
shock tube test of Sod ( 1978 ) , the importance of applying a small
amount of artificial thermal conductivity was highlighted, which avoids
the need to artificially smooth the initial conditions of such problems.
The SPH algorithm was also shown to give good results on a more extreme
version of this test (§ 1.7.4 ). Thirdly (§ 1.7.5 ), the Cartesian shear
flow tests given by Imaeda and Inutsuka ( 2002 ) were examined,
demonstrating that SPH gives good results on this problem for uniform
particle setups and does not show the large errors encountered by these
authors. Finally, the SPH algorithm was tested against several exact,
non-linear solutions derived for systems of particles, known as ‘Toy
Stars’ and was shown to give results in excellent agreement with theory.

## Appendix A SPH stability analysis

In this appendix we perform a stability analysis of the standard SPH
formalism derived in § 1.3 . Since the SPH equations were derived
directly from a variational principle, the linearised equations may be
derived from a second order perturbation to the Lagrangian ( 1.46 ),
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the perturbation to @xmath is to second order in the second term
and to first order in the third term. The density perturbation is given
by a perturbation of the SPH summation ( 1.42 ), which to second order
is given by ¹ ¹ 1 Note that the first order term may be decoded into
continuum form to give the usual expression

@xmath

where @xmath refers to the unperturbed quantity.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The derivatives of the thermal energy with respect to density follow
from the first law of thermodynamics, ie.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Lagrangian perturbed to second order is therefore

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The perturbed momentum equation is given by using the perturbed
Euler-Lagrange equation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.6)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

giving the SPH form of the linearised momentum equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.7)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Equation ( A.7 ) may also be obtained by a direct perturbation of the
SPH equations of motion derived in § 1.3.2 . For linear waves the
perturbations are assumed to be of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Assuming equal mass particles, the momentum equation ( A.7 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the continuity equation ( 1.43 ) the amplitude @xmath of the
density perturbation is given in terms of the particle co-ordinates by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, plugging this into ( A.14 ) and taking the real component, the
SPH dispersion relation (for any equation of state) is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.16)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For an isothermal equation of state this can be simplified further by
setting @xmath . An adiabatic equation of state corresponds to setting
@xmath .
