The coherent mixing of the current states in the superconducting weak link
subject to a Josephson phase difference $\phi$ and subject to an external
transport current in the banks is one of the aims of this work. At $\phi=\pi $
the nonlocal mixing of current states produces two vortices close to the
point-contact between superconducting bulks. The effect of point-contact
reflection in an impenetrable interface and effect of temperature on the
vortices have been studied. It is obtained that increasing the reflection of
the point-contact destroys the vortices while increasing the temperature
restore these vortices. The vortex state is a new version of the interference
between the macroscopic states and quantum tunnelling. Also, the weak link
between unitary triplet superconductors which have $f-$wave and $p+h-$wave
pairing symmetry has been studied from the spin and charge current-phase
relation point of view. The main result in the second part of this thesis, is
the polarization of the spin transport when a junction between triplet
superconductors is used. It is observed that the spin current is the result of
the misorientation between the gap vectors of two supercondcutors. In addition,
the weak link between two bipolar non-unitary triplet superconductors is
studied mathematically. The current-phase relations obtained in third part of
this thesis are totally different from the junctions between the unitary
spin-triplet superconductors and between the spin-singlet superconductors. The
current phase diagrams which have been obtained in this work can be used to
distinguish the symmetry of the order parameter in the crystals.