##### Contents

-    1 Flow equations
    -    1.1 Overview
    -    1.2 The role of @xmath
        -    1.2.1 Wegner’s choice
        -    1.2.2 @xmath
        -    1.2.3 The structure preserving generator
    -    1.3 Flow equations in infinite dimensions
-    2 Solving the flow equation
    -    2.1 Expansion in fluctuations
    -    2.2 Moyal bracket approach
-    3 The Lipkin Model
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 The model
    -    3.3 The flow equation approach
    -    3.4 Expansion method
        -    3.4.1 The flow equation in the @xmath limit.
        -    3.4.2 Finding the spectrum
        -    3.4.3 Calculating expectation values
    -    3.5 Moyal bracket method
        -    3.5.1 Probing the structure of eigenstates
    -    3.6 Numerical results
        -    3.6.1 Spectrum and expectation values
        -    3.6.2 Structure of the eigenstates
    -    3.7 Solution in the local approximation
-    4 The Dicke Model
    -    4.1 Introduction
    -    4.2 The model
    -    4.3 The flow equation approach
    -    4.4 Flow equations in the @xmath limit
        -    4.4.1 Variables and representations
        -    4.4.2 Solution in the local approximation
        -    4.4.3 Flow equation for the Hamiltonian
        -    4.4.4 Flow equation for an observable
    -    4.5 Perturbative solutions
    -    4.6 Diagonalizing @xmath
    -    4.7 Numeric results
-    A Representations by irreducible sets
-    B Calculating expectation values with respect to coherent states
-    C Scaling behaviour of fluctuations
-    D Decomposing operators in the Dicke model
-    E Dicke model flow coefficients

###### List of Figures

-    1.1 The structure of band block diagonal matrices.
-    3.1 The domain of @xmath .
-    3.2 The solutions of the Lipkin model flow equation ( 3.42 ).
-    3.3 Eigenvalues and gaps between successive states as functions of
    @xmath .
-    3.4 Expectation values as functions of @xmath .
-    3.5 Aspects of the phase structure of the Lipkin model.
-    3.6 Results obtained for the ground state wavefunction using the
    flow equation.
-    3.7 Results of the local approximation
-    4.1 A schematic representation of the basis states spanning the
    Dicke model Hilbert space.
-    4.2 Flow of the coupling constants @xmath and @xmath in the local
    approximation.
-    4.3 The eigenvalue @xmath and excitation energy @xmath as functions
    of @xmath .
-    4.4 Various excitation energies as functions of @xmath .
-    4.5 Eigenstates of the Dicke Hamiltonian obtained using different
    methods. Expectation values of @xmath as functions of @xmath .
-    4.6 Spectrum and expectation values of the RWA Hamiltonian

\specialhead

Introduction The renormalization group and its associated flow equations
[ 1 ] have become an indispensable tool in the study of modern physics.
Its applications range from the construction of effective theories to
the study of phase transitions and critical phenomenon. It also
constitutes one of the few potentially non-perturbative techniques
available for the treatment of interacting quantum systems. Our interest
lies with a recent addition to this framework proposed by Wegner [ 2 ]
and separately by Glazek and Wilson [ 3 ] , namely that of flow
equations obtained from continuous unitary transformations. The flow
equation in question describes the evolution of an operator, typically a
Hamiltonian, under the application of a sequence of successive
infinitesimal unitary transformations. These transformations are
constructed so as to steer the evolution, or flow, of the operator
towards a simpler, possibly diagonal, form. The major advantage of this
approach is that no prior knowledge of these transformations is needed
as they are generated dynamically at each point during the flow. These
attractive properties have led to applications to several diverse
quantum mechanical problems, including that of electron-phonon coupling
[ 2 ] , boson and spin-boson models [ 4 , 42 , 43 ] , the Hubbard model
[ 5 ] , the Sine-Gordon model [ 6 ] and the Foldy-Wouthuysen
transformation [ 7 ] . The Lipkin model has also been particularly
prominent among applications [ 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 ] . More recently
the flow equations have been used to construct effective Hamiltonians
which conserve the number of quasi-particles or elementary excitations
in a system [ 13 ] . Examples of quasi-particles treated in this manner
include triplet bonds on a dimerized spin chain [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 ]
and particle-hole excitations [ 18 , 19 ] in Fermi systems. Studies of
these equations in a purely mathematical context, where they are known
as double bracket flows, have also been conducted [ 20 , 21 ] .

The versatility of this approach should be clear from the references
above. Unfortunately the practical implementation is hampered by the
fact that the Hamiltonian typically does not preserve its form under the
flow, and that additional operators, not present in the original
Hamiltonian are generated [ 1 , 2 ] . In general we are confronted with
an infinite set of coupled nonlinear differential equations, the
truncation of which is a highly non-trivial task. Perturbative
approximations do allow one to make progress, although the validity of
the results is usually limited to a single phase.

It is the aim of this thesis to develop methods for the non-perturbative
treatment of the flow equations. We will do so via two routes, both of
which involve the representation of the flowing Hamiltonian as a scalar
function and a systematic expansion in @xmath , where @xmath represents
the system size. This allows the original operator equation to be
rewritten as a regular partial differential equation amenable to a
numeric or, in some instances, analytic treatment. The bulk of this work
comprises of the detailed application of these methods to two simple but
non-trivial models. These calculations are found to reproduce known
exact results to a very high accuracy.

The material is organized as follows. Chapter 1 provides a brief
overview of the flow equation formalism with particular emphasis on the
role of the generator. In Chapter 2 we present the two solution methods.
The first is based on an expansion in fluctuations controlled by the
system size, while the second makes use of non-commutative coordinates
to rewrite the flow equation in terms of the Moyal bracket [ 22 ] . The
application of these methods to the Lipkin model constitutes the third
chapter. We are able to calculate both eigenvalues and expectation
values non-perturbatively and in the thermodynamic limit. New aspects of
the phase structure, made apparent by the non-perturbative treatment,
are also investigated. These results, published in [ 23 ] , have
subsequently led to further studies of the phase structure in [ 24 ] .
In Chapter 4 the Dicke model is treated using a novel two-step
diagonalization procedure. Although we derive the flow equation
non-perturbatively its complexity necessitates a partially perturbative
solution. Despite this our approach serves as a valuable example of how
an effective Hamiltonian may be constructed and subsequently solved
within this framework.

## Chapter 1 Flow equations

### 1.1 Overview

The central notion in Wegner’s flow equations [ 2 ] is the
transformation of a Hamiltonian @xmath through the application of a
sequence of consecutive infinitesimal unitary transformations. It is the
continuous evolution of @xmath under these transformations that we refer
to as the flow of the Hamiltonian. These transformations are constructed
to bring about decoupling in @xmath , leading to a final Hamiltonian
with a diagonal, or block diagonal, form. The major advantage of this
approach is that the relevant transformations are determined dynamically
during the flow, and no a priori knowledge about them is required.

We are led to consider a family of unitary transformations @xmath which
is continuously parametrized by the flow parameter @xmath . @xmath
constitutes the net effect of all the infinitesimal transformations
applied up to the point in the flow labelled by @xmath . At the
beginning of the flow @xmath equals the identity operator. The evolution
of @xmath is governed by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the anti-hermitian generator of the transformation.
Applying @xmath to @xmath produces the transformed Hamiltonian @xmath
for which the flow equation reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

To be consistent in the calculation of expectation values the same
transformation needs to be applied to the relevant observables. An
eigenstate @xmath of @xmath transforms according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the flow of a general observable @xmath is governed by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expectation values in the original and transformed basis are related in
the usual way:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 1.2 The role of @xmath

Much of the versatility of the flow equation method stems from the
freedom that exists in choosing the generator @xmath . Several different
forms have been employed in the literature, and we will explore the
consequences of some of these next. For the moment we restrict ourselves
to the finite dimensional case.

#### 1.2.1 Wegner’s choice

In Wegner’s original formulation [ 2 ] @xmath was chosen as the
commutator of the diagonal part of @xmath , in some basis, with @xmath
itself, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

It was shown that in the @xmath limit @xmath converges to a final
Hamiltonian @xmath for which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We conclude that the effect of the flow is to decouple those states
which correspond to differing diagonal matrix elements. In general this
leads to a block-diagonal structure for @xmath .

We will not use this formulation as other choices exist which offer
greater control over both the type of decoupling present in @xmath (i.e.
the fixed point of the flow) and the form of @xmath during flow (i.e.
the path followed to the fixed point).

#### 1.2.2 @xmath

An alternative to Wegner’s formulation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a fixed ( @xmath -independent) hermitian operator of our
choice. It is straightforward to show that @xmath converges to a final
Hamiltonian which commutes with @xmath . The proof rests on the
observation that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the positivity of the trace norm has been used. It follows that
@xmath is a monotonically decreasing function of @xmath that is bounded
from below by @xmath , and so its derivative must vanish in the @xmath
limit. The right-hand side of ( 1.9 ) is simply the trace norm of @xmath
, and so we conclude that @xmath . Choosing a diagonal @xmath clearly
leads to a block-diagonal structure for @xmath where only states
corresponding to equal diagonal matrix elements of @xmath are connected.
Put differently, @xmath assigns weights to different subspaces through
its diagonal matrix elements. The flow generated by @xmath then
decouples subspaces with differing weights. In particular, a
non-degenerate choice of @xmath will lead to a complete diagonalisation
of @xmath . Furthermore, it can be shown [ 20 ] that the eigenvalues of
@xmath , as they appear on the diagonal of @xmath , will have the same
ordering as the eigenvalues (diagonal matrix elements) of @xmath . We
can summarize this by saying that the flow equation generates a
transformation that maps the eigenstates of @xmath onto the eigenstates
of @xmath in an order preserving fashion.

It is worth noting that this ordering can only take place within
subspaces that are irreducible under @xmath and @xmath . The reason for
this is that the flow equation clearly cannot mix subspaces that are not
connected by either @xmath or @xmath . We will see several examples of
this later on.

#### 1.2.3 The structure preserving generator

Whereas the formulation above provides a good deal of control over the
structure of @xmath , the form of @xmath at finite @xmath is generally
unknown. This is due to non-zero off-diagonal matrix elements appearing
at finite @xmath that are not present in either the initial or final
Hamiltonian. For example, a band-diagonal Hamiltonian may become dense ¹
¹ 1 A dense matrix is one of which the majority of elements is non-zero.
during flow and still converge to a diagonal form. From a computational
point of view it is clearly desirable that @xmath assumes as simple a
form as possible. Of particular interest in this regard are generators
which preserve a band diagonal, or more generally band block diagonal
structure present in the original Hamiltonian. These types of generators
have been applied to a wide range of models [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 ,
19 ] , and are particularly attractive in that they allow for a clear
physical interpretation of the transformed Hamiltonian @xmath .

First we introduce an operator @xmath with integer eigenvalues which
will serve as a labelling device for different subspaces in the Hilbert
space. Associated with each distinct eigenvalue @xmath of @xmath is the
corresponding subspace of eigenstates @xmath where @xmath . We also
assume, without loss of generality, that @xmath for all @xmath . The
Hamiltonian @xmath is said to possess a band block diagonal structure
with respect to @xmath if there exists an integer @xmath such that
@xmath for all @xmath and @xmath whenever @xmath . This selection rule
clearly places a bound on the amount by which @xmath can change @xmath .
The matrix representation of such an operator in the @xmath basis
typically has a form similar to that shown in Figure 1.1 (a). For the
cases we will consider, and for those treated in the literature, it is
possible to group terms in the Hamiltonian together based on whether
they increase, decrease or leave unchanged the value of @xmath . This
leads to the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath changes @xmath by @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Clearly @xmath is
hermitian, while @xmath and @xmath are conjugates. @xmath is responsible
for scattering within each @xmath -sector.

Flow equations are used to bring this Hamiltonian into a form which
conserves @xmath , i.e. for which @xmath . This effective Hamiltonian
will be block diagonal, similar to Figure 1.1 (b), with each block
containing new interactions generated during the flow. We require that
the band block diagonal structure of @xmath is retained at finite @xmath
, and so the flowing Hamiltonian should be of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The generator which achieves this is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding flow equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The combinations of @xmath and @xmath appearing in ( 1.13 ) clearly
cannot generate scattering between @xmath -sectors differing by more
than @xmath , and so the band block diagonal structure of @xmath is
preserved. It can be shown [ 14 ] that this generator guarantees
convergence to the desired form of @xmath which conserves @xmath .

Before proceeding, let us point out why the choice of the previous
section @xmath does not lead to a flow of the form ( 1.11 ), although it
does produce the correct fixed point. Using the form of @xmath we see
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Whereas commutators between terms which increase (decrease) @xmath
dropped out in ( 1.13 ) this is not the case in ( 1.15 ). In general
@xmath will contain terms which change @xmath by up to @xmath , thus
destroying the band block diagonal structure. This process will continue
until, at finite @xmath , @xmath will connect all possible @xmath
-sectors.

Although our treatment has dealt with @xmath largely in abstract terms,
this is not generally the case in the literature. Previous applications
of this method present a physical picture of @xmath as a counting
operator for the fundamental excitations describing the low energy
physics of a system. Examples of these include triplet bonds on a
dimerized spin chain [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 ] and quasi-particles
(particle-hole excitations) [ 18 , 19 ] in Fermi systems. The flow
equation is used to obtain an effective Hamiltonian that conserves the
number of these excitations. These “effective particle-conserving
models” [ 13 ] have been studied in considerable detail within a
perturbative framework.

Finally we point out that the approaches of Sections 1.2.2 and 1.2.3
coincide when @xmath only connects sectors for which @xmath differs by
some fixed amount @xmath , i.e. @xmath when @xmath .

### 1.3 Flow equations in infinite dimensions

Proofs concerning the convergence properties of the flow equations
discussed thus far rely on the invariance of the trace under unitary
transformations. In infinite dimensions the trace is not generally well
defined, and the question of convergence depends on special properties
of the Hamiltonian. The most important property in this regard is the
boundedness of the spectrum. It has been shown that all the methods
described above will converge provided that the Hamiltonian possesses a
spectrum bounded from below [ 2 , 14 ] . Aspects of the flow equations
in infinite dimensions were investigated in [ 25 ] and [ 26 ] using the
bosonic Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we digress for a moment to discuss this case in more depth. It is
well known that for @xmath this model possesses a harmonic spectrum
which can be found by applying the Bogoliubov transformation. When
@xmath the spectrum forms a continuum which is unbounded from both above
and below. We will contrast the behaviour of the flow equations
resulting from Wegner’s choice of @xmath and the choice @xmath . In both
these cases @xmath has the simple form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the flow equation closes on a coupled set of three differential
equations for @xmath and @xmath . When @xmath in the starting
Hamiltonian we find that both choices of @xmath lead to the fixed point

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ; a result matching that of the Bogoliubov transformation.

Next, consider the @xmath case. When we solve the flow equation for
@xmath we no longer find convergence. Surprisingly, Wegner’s choice for
the generator still produces a convergent flow, although not one leading
to a diagonal form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this does not contradict the assertion made earlier that
@xmath .

Admittedly this example does represent an extreme case. For physically
sensible Hamiltonians the spectrum is always bounded from below, as one
would expect in order to have a well-defined ground state. For the
models that we will consider the flow equations may be safely applied
without further modification.

## Chapter 2 Solving the flow equation

We have seen the theoretical capabilities of flow equations with regard
to the diagonalization of Hamiltonians and the construction of effective
operators. The practical implementation of this method is, however,
hampered by the difficulty of solving the resulting operator
differential equation. On the operator level this is due to the
generation of additional operators during the flow that were not present
in the original Hamiltonian. This leads to an extremely large set of
coupled differential equations for the coupling constants of these
terms. Generally some kind of approximation is required in order to
continue. The usual approach consists of replacing @xmath by a simpler
parametrized form for which the flow equation closes on a set of
equations of a tractable size. A particular parametrization is usually
selected on the basis of a perturbative approximation, or by using some
knowledge of the relevant degrees of freedom in the problem. In general
this approach is only valid for a limited range of the coupling
constant, and tends to break down when the system exhibits
non-perturbative features, i.e. non-analytic behaviour in the coupling
constant.

We will introduce two new approaches to this problem which allow us to
treat the flow equation in a non-perturbative way. The first involves a
systematic expansion in fluctuations, which is controlled by the size of
the system rather than the coupling constant. The second makes use of
non-commutative variables to recast the flow equation as a regular
partial differential equation. This approach also involves an expansion
controlled by the system size. Although there are similarities between
these two methods we will treat them separately and then show how they
produce the same results in specific cases.

### 2.1 Expansion in fluctuations

We consider the flow of a time reversal invariant hermitian operator
@xmath which acts on a Hilbert space @xmath . We assume @xmath to be
finite dimensional since the expansion ( 2.1 ) below is easily proved in
this case (see Appendix A ). This restriction is, however, by no means
essential. If the Hilbert space is infinite dimensional the expansion (
2.1 ) still applies to bounded operators [ 27 ] and subsequently one may
approach the infinite dimensional case by studying the flow of a bounded
function of the Hamiltonian, instead of the Hamiltonian itself.
Alternatively one can introduce a cut-off in some basis, e.g., a
momentum cut-off and study the behaviour of the system as a function of
the cut-off.

The aim of this section is to develop a parameterization of the flowing
Hamiltonian which allows for a systematic expansion controlled by the
fluctuations, rather than the coupling constant. This is in the same
spirit as the semi-classical expansion of quantum mechanics, based on an
expansion in orders of @xmath , and corresponds to resumming certain
classes of diagrams in the perturbation series of the coupling constant.

Let @xmath and @xmath be hermitian operators acting on @xmath which
together form an irreducible set. What follows holds for any irreducible
set, however, the case of two operators appears naturally in flow
equations as the Hamiltonian can usually be written in the form @xmath
where the spectrum and eigenstates of @xmath are known. Note that if
@xmath and @xmath are reducible on @xmath , but irreducible on a proper
subspace of @xmath , the problem can be restricted to this smaller
subspace making the irreducibility of @xmath and @xmath a very natural
requirement. In Appendix A it is shown that any operator acting on
@xmath can be written as a polynomial in @xmath and @xmath . In
particular this holds for @xmath , and so we may write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where each @xmath coefficient is a function of @xmath and repeated
indices indicate sums over @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is both
hermitian and real it follows that the @xmath ’s are invariant under the
reversal of indices:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now define @xmath as the fluctuation of @xmath around the expectation
value @xmath , where @xmath is some arbitrary state. By setting @xmath
in equation ( 2.1 ) we obtain @xmath as an expansion in these
fluctuations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and so forth. Note that @xmath , when viewed as a function of @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , encodes information about all the expansion
coefficients @xmath appearing in equation ( 2.1 ). A natural strategy
that presents itself is to set up an equation for @xmath as a function
of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in some domain @xmath of the @xmath –
@xmath plane, determined by the properties of the operators @xmath and
@xmath . In particular we require that this domain includes values of
@xmath ranging from the largest to the smallest eigenvalues of @xmath .
For this purpose we require a family of states @xmath , parameterized by
a continuous set of variables @xmath , such that as @xmath is varied
over the domain @xmath , @xmath and @xmath range continuously over the
domain @xmath . A very general set of states that meets these
requirements are coherent states [ 28 ] . In this representation we may
consider @xmath and @xmath as continuous variables with each @xmath a
function of @xmath , @xmath and the following relations hold generally:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Coefficients with three or more indices cannot be written in this way,
since, for example, @xmath need not be equal to @xmath . The general
relationship between the true coefficients and derivatives of @xmath are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the sum over @xmath is over all the distinct ways of ordering
@xmath zeros and @xmath ones. For example

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Replacing @xmath by the left-hand side of the equation above is
equivalent to approximating @xmath by the average of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . In general this amounts to approximating @xmath by the average
of the coefficients corresponding to all the distinct reorderings of
@xmath .

To set up an equation for @xmath we insert the expansion ( 2.3 ) into
the flow equation with @xmath and take the expectation value with
respect to the state @xmath . The left-and right-hand sides become a
systematic expansion in orders of the fluctuations @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that writing @xmath or @xmath in the first position of the double
commutator on the right-hand side of equation ( 2.1 ) is a matter of
taste. The expectation values appearing above are naturally functions of
@xmath and may be written as functions of @xmath and @xmath by inverting
the equations @xmath to obtain @xmath . With an appropriately chosen
state, such as a coherent state, the higher orders in the fluctuation
can often be neglected, as the expansion is controlled by the inverse of
the number of degrees of freedom (see Appendix C for an explicit
example). A useful analogy is the minimal uncertainty states in quantum
mechanics which minimizes the fluctuations in position and momentum. The
choice of state above aims at the same goal for @xmath and @xmath .
Clearly it is difficult to give a general algorithm for the construction
of these states and this property has to be checked on a case by case
basis. If this is found to be the case we note that replacing the @xmath
’s with more than two indices by a derivative will introduce corrections
in ( 2.1 ) of an order higher than the terms already listed, or, on the
level of the operator expansion, corrections higher than second order in
the fluctuations. Working to second order in the fluctuations we can
therefore safely replace @xmath by the derivatives of a function @xmath
and write for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath denotes the anti-commutator and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This turns the flow equation ( 2.1 ) into a nonlinear partial
differential equation for @xmath , correct up to the order shown in (
2.1 ). The choice of coherent state, the corresponding calculation of
the fluctuations appearing in equation ( 2.1 ) and the identification of
the parameter controlling the expansion are problem specific. There are,
however, a number of general statements that can be made about the flow
equation and the behaviour of @xmath . The first property to be noted is
that since @xmath is diagonal in the eigenbasis of @xmath it should
become a function of only @xmath , provided that the spectrum of @xmath
is non-degenerate. This is reflected in the behaviour of @xmath by the
fact that @xmath should be a function of @xmath only. This is indeed
borne out to high accuracy in our later numerical investigations. This
function in turn provides us with the functional dependence of @xmath on
@xmath . Keeping in mind the unitary connection between @xmath and
@xmath this enables us to compute the eigenvalues of @xmath
straightforwardly by inserting the supposedly known eigenvalues of
@xmath into the function @xmath .

A second point to note is that the considerations above apply to the
flow of an arbitrary hermitian operator with time reversal symmetry. It
is easily verified that the transformed operator @xmath satisfies the
flow equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the same choice of @xmath as for the Hamiltonian has to be made,
i.e., @xmath . The expansion ( 2.11 ) can be made for both operators
@xmath and @xmath . Denoting the corresponding function for @xmath by
@xmath the flow equation ( 2.13 ) turns into a linear partial
differential equation for @xmath containing the function @xmath , which
is determined by ( 2.1 ). The expectation value of @xmath with respect
to an eigenstate @xmath of @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.14)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath . In the limit @xmath the states @xmath are simply the
eigenstates of @xmath , which are supposedly known. In this way the
computation of the expectation value @xmath can be translated into the
calculation of expectation values of the operator @xmath , obtained by
solving the flow equation ( 2.13 ), in the known eigenstates of @xmath .

### 2.2 Moyal bracket approach

Next we present an approach based on the Moyal bracket formalism [ 22 ]
. Let @xmath denote the @xmath -dimensional Hilbert space of the
Hamiltonian under consideration. We define two unitary operators @xmath
and @xmath that act irreducibly on @xmath and satisfy the exchange
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is unitary its eigenvalues are simply phases. Let @xmath be
one such eigenvalue, and consider the action of @xmath on the
corresponding eigenstate @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that @xmath is again an eigenstate of @xmath with eigenvalue
@xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath act irreducibly on @xmath all the
eigenstates of @xmath can be obtained by the repeated application of
@xmath to @xmath . Furthermore, we may scale @xmath so that it has an
eigenvalue equal to one.

It follows that the eigenvalues and eigenstates of @xmath take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

while @xmath acts as a ladder operator between these states:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The allowed values of @xmath are found by taking the trace on both sides
of @xmath , which leads to the requirement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This fixes @xmath at an integer multiple of @xmath . We choose @xmath as
this ensures that @xmath is non-degenerate, which is crucial for the
construction that follows.

In similar fashion to the previous section, we wish to represent flowing
operators in terms of @xmath and @xmath . The main result in this regard
is that the set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

forms an orthogonal basis for the space of linear operators acting on
@xmath . The orthogonality of @xmath follows from applying the trace
inner product in the @xmath -basis to two members of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath equals one if @xmath and is zero otherwise. This, together
with the observation that the dimension of the linear operator space
equals @xmath , proves the claim.

Consider two arbitrary operators @xmath and @xmath expressed in the
@xmath basis as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are scalar coefficients. We use the convention
of always writing the @xmath ’s to the right of the @xmath ’s. The
product of @xmath and @xmath then gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note the similarity in form between this product and the product of
functions of regular commuting variables. Only the phase factor, the
result of imposing our ordering convention on the product, distinguishes
the two. In fact, we may treat @xmath and @xmath as regular scalar
variables provided that we modify the product rule to incorporate this
phase. Convenient variables for this procedure are @xmath and @xmath ,
which are related to @xmath and @xmath (now treated as scalars) through
@xmath and @xmath . Having replaced operators by functions of @xmath and
@xmath the modified product rule reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath and @xmath derivatives act to the right and left
respectively. This is seen to be of the required form by using the fact
that both @xmath and @xmath are eigenfunctions of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which agrees with ( 2.23 ).

The @xmath -operation is known as the Moyal product [ 22 ] , while the
corresponding commutator @xmath is the Moyal bracket. When @xmath and
@xmath are represented in this manner the flow equation becomes a
partial differential equation in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In its exact form this formulation is not of much practical value, since
the operator exponent involved in the Moyal product is very difficult to
implement numerically. A significant simplification is achieved by
expanding the operator exponent to first order in @xmath , which is
known to scale like one over the dimension @xmath of the Hilbert space.
We expect this to be a very good approximation provided that the
derivatives do not bring about factors of the order of @xmath . This
translates into a smoothness condition: we require that the derivatives
of the relevant functions remain bounded in the thermodynamic limit as
@xmath goes to infinity.

Using this approximation the Moyal product becomes, to leading order,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the Moyal bracket reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Partial derivatives are indicated by the subscript shorthand. The form
of the flow equation is now largely fixed, up to the specific choice of
the generator. As an example, consider the generator @xmath which we
will use later on. In this case the flow equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The remaining problem is that of constructing the initial conditions,
i.e. @xmath , in terms of @xmath and @xmath (or equivalently @xmath and
@xmath ) in such a way that the smoothness conditions are satisfied. The
reader may have noticed that we have not specified how the realization
of @xmath and @xmath should be constructed on @xmath . Put differently,
there is no obvious rule which associates a specific basis of @xmath
with the eigenstates of @xmath . It seems reasonable that this freedom
may allow us to construct smooth initial conditions through an
appropriate choice of basis, whereas a malicious choice could produce
very poorly behaved functions. We know of no way to proceed on such
general terms, and we will instead tackle this problem on a case-by-case
basis. In all of these we will use the algebraic properties of operators
appearing in the Hamiltonian to reduce this problem to one of
representation theory.

Although two operators are clearly the minimum required to construct a
complete operator basis, it is also possible to introduce multiple such
pairs. This would be a natural choice when @xmath is a tensor product of
Hilbert spaces @xmath @xmath , each of which is of a high dimension. We
can introduce @xmath pairs of operators @xmath which satisfy @xmath and
@xmath for all @xmath . In the same way as before this leads to @xmath
pairs of scalar variables @xmath for which the product rule, to first
order in the @xmath ’s, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath are analogous to conjugate position and momenta
coordinates representing the independent degrees of freedom of the
system. The Moyal bracket acts like the Poisson bracket for these
coordinates:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formulation strongly suggests an analogy with semi-classical
approximation schemes. Our approach to solving the flow equation is
indeed very closely related to the Wigner-Weyl-Moyal [ 22 , 29 ]
formalism, which describes the construction of a mapping between quantum
operators and functions of classical phase space coordinates. This
allows for the description of a quantum system in a form formally
analogous to classical dynamics. When applied to the flow equations this
formalism produces results similar to those obtained before. The central
approximation again involves a non-perturbative expansion, but which is
now controlled by @xmath , and so is semi-classical in nature. Let us
formalize some of these notions in the context of a single particle in
@xmath dimensions. The relevant Hilbert space is @xmath and the position
and momentum operators satisfy the standard commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We first introduce the characteristic operator [ 30 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and similar for @xmath and @xmath . Varying the
arguments of @xmath over their domains produces a set of operators
analogous to @xmath (equation ( 2.20 )), where the discrete powers
@xmath and @xmath correspond to the continuous labels @xmath and @xmath
. We again find both completeness and orthogonality with respect to the
trace norm:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using this, an operator @xmath can be represented as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a scalar function. Now consider the product of two operators
represented in this manner:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-commutativity of @xmath and @xmath gives rise to the scalar
factor @xmath , which is the only element distinguishing this product
from one of regular scalar functions. We conclude, as before, that the
position and momentum operators may be treated as scalar variables
provided that we modify the product rule to incorporate this phase. This
leads to the Moyal product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Note that an expansion of the exponential is
now controlled by @xmath instead of @xmath . To leading order the Moyal
bracket is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscripts denote partial derivatives.

We conclude that in a semi-classical approximation the Hamiltonian and
generator may be replaced by scalar functions @xmath and @xmath , and
that the flow equation is given in terms of the Moyal bracket by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

When solved to leading order in @xmath this equation describes the
renormalization of the Hamiltonian within a semi-classical
approximation. Further quantum corrections can be included by simply
expanding the Moyal bracket to higher orders in @xmath .

## Chapter 3 The Lipkin Model

### 3.1 Introduction

Since its introduction in 1965 as a toy model for two shell nuclear
interactions the Lipkin-Meshov-Glick model [ 31 ] has served as a
testing ground for new techniques in many-body physics. Here we will use
it to illustrate both the working of the flow equations and the solution
methods presented in the previous chapter. While the simple structure of
the model will allow many calculations to be performed exactly, its
non-trivial phase structure will provide a true test for our
non-perturbative approach.

We begin with an overview of the model, its features and the quantities
we are interested in calculating. After pointing out some specific
aspects of the flow equations for the Lipkin model we proceed to treat
the equations using the methods developed earlier. Finally we present
the results obtained from the numerical solutions of the resulting PDE’s
and compare them with some known results. New aspects of the model,
brought to the fore by this treatment, will also be discussed.

### 3.2 The model

The Lipkin model describes @xmath fermions distributed over two @xmath
-fold degenerate levels separated by an energy of @xmath . For
simplicity we shall take @xmath to be even. Fermi statistics require
that @xmath , and accordingly the thermodynamic limit should be
understood as @xmath followed by @xmath . The interaction @xmath
introduces scattering of pairs between levels. Labelling the two levels
by @xmath , the Hamiltonian reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the indices @xmath and @xmath run over the level degeneracy @xmath
. A spin representation for @xmath can be found by introducing the
@xmath generators

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Together with the second order Casimir operator @xmath , these satisfy
the regular @xmath commutation relations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We divide @xmath by @xmath and define the dimensionless coupling
constant @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where all energies are now expressed in units of @xmath . The factor of
@xmath in the definition of @xmath brings about the @xmath in front of
the second term, which ensures that the Hamiltonian as a whole is
extensive and scales like @xmath . Since @xmath the Hamiltonian acts
within irreducible representations of @xmath where states are labelled
by the eigenvalues of @xmath and @xmath , i.e., @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath . The Hamiltonian thus assumes a block diagonal structure of
sizes @xmath . The low-lying states occur in the multiplet @xmath , and
we fix @xmath at this value throughout, using the shorthand @xmath for
the basis states. The Hamiltonian can be reduced further by noting that
it leaves the subspaces of states with either odd or even spin
projection invariant. States belonging to one of these subspaces are
referred to as having either odd or even parity. We denote the
eigenstate of @xmath with energy @xmath by @xmath , where @xmath . When
@xmath the ground state is simply @xmath which is written as @xmath in
the spin basis. Non-zero values of @xmath cause particle-hole
excitations across the gap, and at @xmath the model exhibits a phase
transition from an undeformed first phase to a deformed second phase. To
distinguish the two phases we use the order parameter @xmath where
@xmath is the expectation value of @xmath in the ground state. As we
will show, @xmath is non-zero only within the second phase.

The phases can be characterized further by the energy gap @xmath which
is positive in the first phase and vanishes like @xmath as @xmath
approaches @xmath . In the second phase the ground states of the odd and
even parity subspaces become degenerate, causing the parity symmetry to
be broken and the corresponding energy gap to vanish. Further discussion
of this model and its features can be found in [ 31 ] .

### 3.3 The flow equation approach

We will follow the formulations of Sections 1.2.2 and 1.2.3 and choose
the generator as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us consider the consequences of this choice. Firstly, since @xmath
is non-degenerate, we expect the final Hamiltonian @xmath to be diagonal
in the known spin basis. Furthermore the eigenvalues of @xmath appear on
the diagonal of @xmath in the same order as in @xmath , i.e. increasing
from top to bottom. Secondly, note that @xmath possesses a band diagonal
structure with respect to @xmath , which plays the role of @xmath in
Section 1.2.3 . Based on our earlier discussion we expect this structure
to be conserved during flow, and so @xmath will only connect states of
which the spin projection differs by two.

Let @xmath denote the transformed eigenstates of @xmath . From the
ordering property of eigenvalues in @xmath we conclude that @xmath , and
so a general expectation value may be calculated through

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Before continuing we mention some of the previous applications of flow
equations to the Lipkin model. The first of these was by Pirner and
Friman [ 8 ] , who dealt with newly generated terms by linearizing them
around their ground state expectation values. This yielded good results
in the first phase but lead to divergences in the second; a common
ailment of these types of approximations. Subsequent work by Mielke [ 10
] relied on an ansatz for the form of @xmath ’s matrix elements, while
Stein [ 9 ] followed a bosonization approach. Dusuel and Vidal [ 11 , 12
] used flow equations together with the Holstein-Primakoff boson
representation to compute finite-size scaling exponents for a number of
physical quantities. Their approach was also based on a @xmath
expansion. A method which produced reliable results in both phases was
that of [ 32 ] . This method also relied on the linearization of newly
generated operators but, in contrast with [ 8 ] , did so around a
dynamically changing (“running”) expectation value taken with respect to
the flowing ground state. This “running” expectation value could be
solved for in a self consistent manner, and then used in the flow
equation for @xmath . This lead to non-perturbative results for the
ground state, excitation gap and order parameter in both phases.
Although it described the low energy physics well, this method failed to
produce the correct spectrum for the higher energy states.

### 3.4 Expansion method

In order to apply the method of Section 2.1 we require an irreducible
set of operators @xmath in terms of which the flowing Hamiltonian will
be constructed. For the purposes of the Lipkin model we will choose
@xmath and @xmath , i.e. the diagonal and off-diagonal parts of the
Hamiltonian respectively. The reader may well remark that this does not
constitute an irreducible set on the entire Hilbert space, since the
subspaces of odd and even spin projection are left invariant, as pointed
out in Section 3.2 . Indeed, it is only within a subspace of definite
parity (i.e. odd or even spin projection) that this set is irreducible.
However, we note that the flow equation will never mix these odd and
even subspaces, and so the flow will proceed independently within each
subspace. This ensures that our representation of @xmath will never
require an operator which connects odd and even states, and it turns out
that this choice of @xmath is indeed sufficient. The same conclusion
extends to @xmath by equation ( 1.1 ), and then to any flowing operator
@xmath , provided that @xmath can be represented in this way.

We will calculate the averages of @xmath and @xmath with respect to the
coherent state [ 28 , 33 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . See Appendix B for details on the properties of these
states and the method by which the averages are calculated. We find
that:

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.8)
  -- -- -- -------

This constitutes a mapping of the complex plane onto the domain shown in
Figure 3.1 .

With these definitions in place we conclude that the flowing Lipkin
Hamiltonian may be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath respectively the diagonal and off-diagonal parts
of the original Hamiltonian. By definition @xmath and so @xmath is
defined on the domain pictured in Figure 3.1 . The initial condition
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the coherent nature of the state ( 3.7 ) one might expect that
terms corresponding to high order fluctuations in ( 3.9 ) will
contribute less significantly to @xmath than the scalar term @xmath .
This statement can be made precise as follows: since the flowing
Hamiltonian is extensive @xmath should be proportional to @xmath , as is
the case with @xmath and @xmath . To keep track of the orders of @xmath
we introduce the scaleless variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . When
taking the inner-product with respect to @xmath on both sides of ( 3.9 )
the linear terms fall away and we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each term is, up to a constant factor, of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes some arbitrary product of @xmath fluctuations.
Using the results of Appendix C we see that such a term is at most of
order @xmath . The leading order term corresponds to @xmath , i.e. the
scalar term @xmath . We conclude that @xmath is the leading order
contribution to @xmath , expressed not as a function of @xmath and
@xmath , but rather of the averages @xmath and @xmath .

#### 3.4.1 The flow equation in the @xmath limit.

We consider the flow of the Hamiltonian and an arbitrary observable
@xmath . Since @xmath determines @xmath one would expect a one-way
coupling between the equations. It is assumed that @xmath is a hermitian
operator constructed in terms of @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore @xmath
must be a rational function of @xmath , which ensures that when taking
derivatives of @xmath no additional factors of @xmath are generated.
First we summarize the equations concerned

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is just @xmath up to leading order in @xmath .
Next we substitute the expansion of @xmath into the flow equation ( 3.15
) and take the expectation value on both sides with respect to the
coherent state. Arguing as before we identify the leading order term on
the left as being @xmath . A general term on the right is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

By transforming to scaleless variables and using the result of Appendix
C it is seen to be at most of order @xmath , where @xmath . Since the
@xmath and @xmath terms are zero (they involve commutators of scalars)
the leading order contributions come from the @xmath terms. These are
exactly the terms found by considering the expansion of @xmath up to
second order in the fluctuations. The expectation values of the double
commutators may be calculated and expressed as functions of @xmath and
@xmath using the method outlined in Appendix B . It is found that, due
to cancellations, only four of the potential fifteen terms make leading
order contributions. The corresponding expectation values are, to
leading order

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . When keeping only the leading order
terms on both sides the flow equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where superscripts denote derivatives to the rescaled averages @xmath
and @xmath . For further discussion it is convenient to use the
variables @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are related by @xmath . The
square domain of these variables also simplifies the numerical solution
significantly. We note that the arguments above can be applied,
completely unchanged, to the flow equation of @xmath as well. We obtain,
now for both @xmath and @xmath , the coupled set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, in contrast to the equation for @xmath , the equation for
@xmath is a linear equation that can be solved once @xmath has been
obtained from ( 3.23 ).

In Section 3.3 it was mentioned that @xmath retains its band diagonal
structure during flow, which means that @xmath only appears linearly in
the representation of @xmath . This implies that @xmath should be linear
in @xmath , or, in the new variables, linear in @xmath . When the form
@xmath is substituted into ( 3.23 ) this is indeed seen to be the case,
and we obtain a remarkably simple set of coupled PDE’s for @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The initial conditions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.4.2 Finding the spectrum

From @xmath it is possible to obtain the entire spectrum of @xmath . For
this discussion it is convenient to use the original @xmath variables.
Recall that in the @xmath limit @xmath flows toward a diagonal form and
that the eigenvalues appear on the diagonal in the same order as in
@xmath , i.e. increasing from top to bottom. This implies that the
@xmath eigenvalue of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath corresponds to the ground state energy. As @xmath flows
towards a diagonal form the terms of expansion ( 3.13 ) containing
@xmath will disappear and eventually @xmath and @xmath will become
functions only of @xmath and @xmath respectively. The eigenvalues of
@xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has been set to zero. This can be understood in two ways.
Looking at equations ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.1 ) we see that the functional
dependence of @xmath on @xmath is the same as that of @xmath (now called
@xmath ) on @xmath . Since taking the expectation value of @xmath with
respect to @xmath is equivalent to substituting @xmath for @xmath , the
result follows. Alternatively, consider equation ( 2.11 ) and note that
setting @xmath makes the ( @xmath diagonal element of @xmath zero. Since
@xmath does not appear we see that when taking the inner product with
@xmath only the scalar term, @xmath , will survive.

#### 3.4.3 Calculating expectation values

Next we return to the arbitrary operator @xmath introduced earlier. The
aim is to calculate @xmath where @xmath is the (unknown) eigenstate of
@xmath corresponding to the energy @xmath . We can formulate this
calculation in terms of a flow equation by noting that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the unitary operator associated with
the flow of @xmath . This equation holds for all @xmath , and
particularly in the @xmath limit. Since @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we conclude that the expectation value of @xmath in the @xmath
eigenstate of @xmath is simply the @xmath diagonal element of @xmath in
the @xmath basis. Furthermore @xmath has the character of a generating
function in the sense that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus knowing @xmath , which is just @xmath up to leading order in @xmath
, is sufficient to obtain all the matrix elements of @xmath with high
accuracy. However, unless an analytic solution for @xmath is known, we
are limited to numerical calculations for the low lying states. In
particular, the ground state expectation value is found by setting
@xmath .

### 3.5 Moyal bracket method

In Section 2.2 the Moyal Bracket method was used to obtain a simple, but
general, realization of the flow equation as a partial differential
equation in the variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For the present
case this equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Moyal bracket to leading order in @xmath . Here
@xmath and so an expansion in @xmath is indeed controlled by the size of
the system. As was mentioned earlier the model specific information
enters through the initial condition, which we need to construct in
terms of @xmath and @xmath . We will not perform this construction for
the Hamiltonian directly, but rather follow the more general route of
constructing an irreducible representation of @xmath , in terms of which
both the Hamiltonian and observables can be readily obtained.

We wish to find three functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath which satisfy
the @xmath commutation relations with respect to the Moyal bracket
@xmath . Note that the Moyal formalism has allowed an essentially
algebraic problem, that of constructing a specific representation, to be
reduced to that of solving a set of differential equations. We also
remind ourselves that, since we use the Moyal bracket in a first order
approximation, our representation can only be expected to be correct up
to this same order.

We begin the construction by making the following ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which clearly requires the representation to be unitary. This ansatz is
based on the interpretation of @xmath as a ladder operator which
connects states labelled by the eigenvalues of @xmath . Substituting
these forms into the required commutation relations @xmath and @xmath
produces the set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is easily solved to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath are integration constants that we fix by
requiring that the second order Casimir operator assumes a constant
value corresponding to the @xmath -irrep:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can satisfy this constraint to leading order in @xmath by setting
@xmath and @xmath . Finally we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before continuing we define some more suitable variables. Consider the
operator @xmath which, according to equation ( 2.17 ), has eigenvalues
@xmath and is represented by @xmath . This suggests that the natural
domain of @xmath is @xmath . We will use the scaleless variable @xmath
in what follows. The representation now becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We remark that this construction is by no means unique, although it is
expected that other examples are related to this one by a similarity
transformation. For example, complex non-unitary representation such as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

may be constructed. In fact, this is an exact representation to all
orders in @xmath , since @xmath (and thus @xmath ) only occurs linearly
and the Moyal bracket truncates after the first derivative. This
illustrates the important role of the association between the
eigenstates of @xmath and the particular basis of the Hilbert space. For
our purposes the unitary representation ( 3.38 ) will be sufficient,
although it is straightforward to check that the same results can be
obtained using ( 3.39 ).

By substituting the representation ( 3.38 ) into the Lipkin model
Hamiltonian, and being careful to use the Moyal product in calculating
the squares of @xmath , we obtain the initial condition, to leading
order, as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The flow equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again it is expected that the band diagonality of @xmath will be
manifested as a constraint on the form of the solutions of the flow
equation. We note that scattering between states of which the spin
projection differ by two is associated with the @xmath term also
appearing in the initial condition. Motivated by this we try the form
@xmath . Note that a factor of @xmath , responsible for the extensivity
of the Hamiltonian, has been factored out. Upon substituting this form
into the flow equation we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which agrees with the equations of ( 3.25 ) in the previous section. For
this form the flow of an observable is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have seen that the governing equations obtained using the Moyal
bracket method agrees with those of the previous section, although the
interpretation of the constituents do differ. Next we turn to the matter
of extracting the spectrum and expectation values from the solutions of
these equations. As this procedure is largely similar to that of the
previous section we will remain brief. First, note that through the
representation ( 3.39 ) we may consider @xmath , and thus @xmath itself,
to be a function only of @xmath . We arrive at the familiar result that
@xmath for @xmath . Expectation values are given by the diagonal
elements of the flowed hermitian observable @xmath . The forms of @xmath
suggest that in general @xmath may be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath corresponds to an off-diagonal term proportional to @xmath
. (We only expect even powers since there is no mixing between the odd
and even subspaces.) Importantly the @xmath term contains the desired
information about the diagonal entries. We can isolate @xmath by
integrating over @xmath , which projects out the off-diagonal terms.
Thus, in summary,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 3.5.1 Probing the structure of eigenstates

The ability to calculate expectation values for a large class of
operators enables us to probe the structure of the eigenstates in a
variety of ways. For this purpose we consider diagonal operators of the
form @xmath where @xmath is a smooth, @xmath -independent function
defined on @xmath . Since @xmath , the initial condition for the flow
equation is simply @xmath . Suppose @xmath is the eigenstate under
consideration, in which case

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.46)
  -- -- -- --------

This leads to the interpretation of the expectation value as the average
of the expansion coefficients squared @xmath , weighted by the function
@xmath . Ideally we would like to choose @xmath as the projection
operator onto some basis state @xmath , as this would provide the most
direct way of calculating the contributions of individual states.
However, the projection operator does not fall within the class of
operators corresponding to smooth initial conditions since there is no
continuous function @xmath for which @xmath in the large @xmath limit.
Instead we choose @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . This weight function
focuses on the contribution of those basis states @xmath for which
@xmath lies in a narrow region centered around @xmath . Considered as a
function of @xmath , it is expected that @xmath would approximate @xmath
up to a constant factor, provided that the latter varies slowly on the
scale of @xmath in the region of @xmath . Clearly @xmath controls the
accuracy of this method, and also determines the scale on which the
structure of the eigenstates can be resolved.

### 3.6 Numerical results

In this section we analyze the results obtained by solving the equations
derived in the previous two sections. We will mainly use the terminology
of the Moyal bracket approach in what follows. See [ 23 ] for a
treatment in terms of the expansion method. For compactness the @xmath
argument of functions will occasionally be suppressed, in which case
@xmath should be assumed.

#### 3.6.1 Spectrum and expectation values

First, we consider some structural properties of @xmath and @xmath . It
is known that the matrix elements of the Lipkin Hamiltonian possess the
symmetry @xmath , which implies that the spectrum is anti-symmetric
around @xmath . This symmetry is respected by the flow equation and
manifests itself through an invariance of equations ( 3.42 ) under the
substitutions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This implies that @xmath and
@xmath , and so we may restrict ourselves to the interval @xmath in the
@xmath dimension. This will be seen to correspond to the negative half
of the spectrum, from which the entire spectrum can easily be obtained.
We also note that @xmath , and that this remains the case at finite
@xmath since @xmath is proportional to @xmath . Applying the same
argument to @xmath seems to suggest that no flow occurs for @xmath at
@xmath and that @xmath for all @xmath . This conclusion is, however,
incorrect since it is found that in the second phase @xmath develops a
square root singularity at @xmath , which allows @xmath to flow away
from @xmath . Numerically this can be handled easily by solving for
@xmath , instead of @xmath . We made use of the well established fourth
order Runge-Kutta method [ 34 ] to integrate the PDE’s to sufficiently
large @xmath -values.

It was shown that the eigenvalues of @xmath are given by @xmath .
Furthermore, for sufficiently large @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.47)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Figures 3.2 (a) and (b) show @xmath and @xmath at @xmath for three
values of @xmath . At this point in the flow @xmath , which represents
the off-diagonal part of @xmath , is already of the order of @xmath ,
and may be neglected completely. As a comparison with exact results we
calculated the spectrum for @xmath using direct diagonalization and
plotted the pairs @xmath for @xmath as dots. We observe an excellent
correspondence for all states and in both phases, with an average error
of about @xmath . This small discrepancy can be attributed to numerical
errors and finite size effects, since we are comparing exact results
obtained at finite @xmath with those of the flow equation which was
derived in the @xmath limit. This is again illustrated in Figure 3.2 (d)
which shows the relative error in the first five eigenvalues as a
functions of @xmath for @xmath . The lines fall almost exactly on one
another, so no legend is given. The log-log inset shows a set of
straight lines with gradients equal to one, clearly illustrating the
@xmath behaviour of the errors.

Next we consider the dependence of the eigenvalues on the coupling
@xmath . Figure 3.3 (a) shows the ground state energy as a function of
@xmath together with the exact result for @xmath . We see that @xmath is
fixed at @xmath in the first phase and begins to decrease linearly with
@xmath at large coupling. The phase transition in the Lipkin model is
known to be of second order, and is characterized by a large number of
avoided level crossings [ 35 ] . This brings about complex non-analytic
behaviour in the gaps between energy levels. The non-perturbative
treatment of the flow equation enables us to reproduce much of this
behaviour correctly. As examples we display the gaps @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath in Figure 3.3 . One quantity that is not reproduced correctly are
the gaps between successive states belonging to subspaces of differing
parity. (Recall that subspaces of odd and even spin projection (parity)
are not mixed by the Hamiltonian, as was shown in Section 3.2 .) As a
definite case consider the gap @xmath which is known to vanish like
@xmath in the second phase, while the flow equation produces a gap which
grows linearly with @xmath . This can be attributed to the fact that the
gaps are not extensive quantities and so they depend on higher order
corrections in @xmath , which were neglected in our derivation.

The function @xmath found by solving equations ( 3.42 ) can now be
substituted into equation ( 3.43 ) to obtain the flow equation for a
general observable @xmath . On a technical note, we found it
advantageous to use expansion ( 3.44 ) to write the flow equation for
@xmath as a coupled set of @xmath dimensional equations for the @xmath
’s, rather than treating it as a general @xmath dimensional PDE. First
we consider the flow of @xmath , which corresponds to the initial
condition @xmath . Figure 3.4 (a) shows the results obtained for the
order parameter together with exact results for @xmath . We again find
excellent agreement in both phases. Other observables can be considered
by a simple modification of the initial conditions. For example @xmath
produces the second moment of @xmath in the ground state, as shown in
Figure 3.4 (b). The solution to equation ( 3.43 ) provides us with
expectation values corresponding to excited states as well, which we
find by evaluating @xmath , as defined in ( 3.44 ), at the values @xmath
for @xmath . Figure 3.4 (c) shows @xmath for @xmath at different values
of the coupling strength.

The non-perturbative application of the flow equation method to the
Lipkin model has provided some interesting new insights into aspects of
the phase transition. We will investigate some of these next. First we
fix some notation. In the large @xmath limit we may label states with
the continuous label @xmath through the association @xmath . In this way
a state is labelled according to its fractional position in the
spectrum, for example @xmath always corresponds to the ground state,
while @xmath denotes the state lying one quarter way up the spectrum.
Now consider the behaviour of @xmath and @xmath depicted in Figures 3.2
(a) and (c) respectively. We note that for @xmath there always exists a
value of @xmath , denoted by @xmath , where the derivative of @xmath
very nearly vanishes. Furthermore, @xmath must be a point of inflection
of @xmath since the derivative of @xmath to @xmath cannot change sign.
If @xmath were to become negative the flow equation would become
unstable and cause @xmath to grow exponentially, contradicting the
results of Section 1.2.2 concerning the form of @xmath . This explains
why we only observe a plateau at @xmath , and no more drastic behaviour.
At @xmath this happens precisely at the ground state, i.e. @xmath ,
while in the first phase no such point exists. In [ 36 ] it was found
that the energies of the low-lying states obey the scaling law

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

at @xmath . This can be confirmed using the flow equations by
considering the behaviour of @xmath close to @xmath . Figure 3.5 (d)
shows a log-log plot of @xmath versus @xmath together with a linear fit
which reproduces the power of @xmath to within @xmath . Earlier a direct
link was established between the gaps separating successive eigenvalues
and the derivative of @xmath . This suggests that @xmath corresponds to
a point in the spectrum with a very high density of states, brought
about by a large number of avoided level crossings. Interestingly this
point always occurs at the same absolute energy, namely @xmath ,
although this corresponds to increasingly highly excited energies
relative to the ground state. We believe that in the thermodynamic
limit, contrary to Figure 3.2 (c), the derivative of @xmath , and the
corresponding gap, should vanish completely at this point. This has been
confirmed in [ 36 ] where it was shown that the gap is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . That our solution does not reflect this can be attributed
to numerics, as this concerns a single point which is effectively
“invisible” to the finite discretization used in the numerical method.
The off-diagonal part of the Hamiltonian, represented by @xmath , also
exhibits striking behaviour at @xmath . In fact, upon returning to the
flow equation ( 3.42 ) we make the interesting observation that at the
point where the derivative of @xmath vanishes, @xmath is not forced to
flow to zero, but may in fact attain a non-trivial fixed point value.
This is shown in Figure 3.2 (b) which shows @xmath as a function of
@xmath . One clearly sees a sharp peak at the point where the derivative
of @xmath nearly vanishes. The peak only occurs for @xmath and moves to
the right as @xmath is increased. This is also consistent with the known
result [ 2 ] that an off-diagonal element @xmath of @xmath decays
roughly as @xmath at large @xmath . This suggests a connection between
quantum phase transitions, the corresponding disappearance of an energy
scale (gap) [ 35 ] in the thermodynamic limit and the absence of
decoupling in the Hamiltonian, also in the thermodynamic limit.

The occurrence of this point in the second phase lends itself to the
interesting interpretation of a “quantum phase transition” at higher
energies. Indeed, apart from possessing some notable properties itself,
it separates regions of the spectrum with markedly different
characteristics. It is well known that states alternate between odd and
even parity as one moves up in the spectrum. In the first phase these
odd-even pairs are separated by a finite gap. In the second phase one
finds a degeneracy between these successive odd and even states
developing below the @xmath point. In particular this implies a
degenerate ground state with broken symmetry in the second phase,
although, as we have seen, this description may be applied to all states
below @xmath . Figure 3.5 (c) shows a subset of eigenvalues as a
function of the coupling, clearly illustrating this coalescing of pairs.
Turning to Figure 3.4 (d), which shows the expectation value @xmath as a
function of the state label @xmath , we see a sharp local minimum
occurring at @xmath which separates the two phases. At the point @xmath
itself the corresponding state @xmath is characterized by sharp
localization around the @xmath basis state, also noted by [ 36 ] . This
is clearly illustrated by Figure 3.4 (d) which shows a pronounced
decrease in the spread of the state @xmath in the @xmath basis occurring
at the point where @xmath . We end this section with two “phase
diagrams” which we hope will further clarify the discussion above.
Figure 3.5 (a) shows the @xmath dependency of a subset of the negative,
even eigenvalues. For @xmath the eigenvalues are confined between @xmath
and @xmath . As @xmath increases first the ground state (shown in bold)
and then the excited states begin to cross the @xmath phase boundary
until eventually, in the large coupling limit, only the @xmath state
retains its first phase character. For finite @xmath successive
eigenvalues show avoided level crossings on the phase boundary. In the
thermodynamic limit one would, however, expect that successive
eigenvalues will coalesce as they cross the phase boundary; signaling a
vanishing gap. A similar diagram, based in the label @xmath rather than
the energy itself, is shown in Figure 3.5 (b). Keeping in mind the
symmetries @xmath and @xmath this discussion can easily be adapted to
apply to the positive half of the spectrum as well.

These findings, published in [ 23 ] , have stimulated further
investigation of these phenomenon in the contexts of exceptional points
[ 24 ] and semi-classical approximations [ 36 ] . These have shed light
on the origins of the high density of states and localization occurring
at @xmath , as well as the mechanism responsible for the degeneracy
between states of differing parity.

#### 3.6.2 Structure of the eigenstates

In Section 3.5.1 we outlined a strategy whereby the structure of the
eigenstates could be probed using the expectation values of a class of
specially constructed operators. In this manner it is possible to
approximate the modulus of the expansion coefficients of the state in
the @xmath basis. Here we present the numeric results of this procedure
using the operators @xmath with @xmath . We will consider the ground
state at @xmath and hope to find that @xmath . Figure 3.6 shows that
this is indeed the case. As expected larger values of @xmath produce a
more accurate reproduction of the form of the absolute wavefunction.

### 3.7 Solution in the local approximation

The numeric treatment of the previous section, although very effective
as a computational tool, obscures some of the more subtle properties of
the flow equation. In this regard an analytic approach provides some
valuable insights, and we consider one such treatment next.

At @xmath the eigenstates of the Lipkin Hamiltonian are simply the
@xmath basis states. Of course, this is no longer the case at non-zero
coupling, although we expect that, in the first phase at least, the
eigenstates will remain localized in the spin basis. The unitary
transformation diagonalising @xmath will reflect this by mainly mixing
states of which the spin projections differ only slightly. This is
manifested in the flow equations through the locality of the evolution
of @xmath . By this we mean that the flow at a point @xmath is very
weakly affected by the values of @xmath at points far from @xmath . We
first consider the low lying states which can be investigated by solving
@xmath within a neighbourhood of @xmath . Since @xmath (from
representation ( 3.38 )) this is equivalent to restricting the
calculation to states for which @xmath ; an approximation commonly used
in this context. We begin by linearizing the initial condition about the
point @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The form of @xmath is chosen to coincide with the parametrization of
@xmath we introduce next. From equation ( 3.42 ) it is clear that the
linearity of @xmath is preserved during flow, which allows for the
simple parametrization of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The flow of the coefficients is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has been rescaled by a factor of four. These equations
leave @xmath invariant, and since @xmath we conclude that @xmath . This
correctly predicts the characteristic square root behaviour of the gap
@xmath , as well as the low lying spectrum within a harmonic
approximation.

The natural question arising here is whether this approach can be
extended to allow for the treatment of the highly excited states as
well. Indeed, if the flow at a point @xmath exhibits this locality
property it seems reasonable that a local solution about @xmath would
provide a good result for the corresponding energy eigenvalue @xmath .
We will show how this local solution can be found analytically, and that
by combining the solutions at various points an approximation for @xmath
may be constructed. The first step is again the linearization of @xmath
, now about an arbitrary point @xmath . The linearity of @xmath in
@xmath is conserved during flow, allowing for the parametrization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the flow of the coefficients are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The initial conditions are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These
equations leave @xmath invariant, and since @xmath we conclude that
@xmath . The presence of @xmath in this equation is significant, as it
indicates that the validity of the local approximation is a function
both of the coupling and the specific point under consideration. The
stability condition of the local solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

which holds for all @xmath in the first phase. In the second phase the
stable domain is restricted to the interval @xmath . This is reminiscent
of the discussion in the previous section concerning the transition
appearing at higher energies in the second phase. It was seen that there
exists points @xmath which separate regions of the spectrum for which
the states exhibit either first or second phase behaviour. In fact, all
the states lying within @xmath have a first phase character, as @xmath
is always found to be greater than @xmath . This suggests a connection
between the phase structure, the properties of eigenstates, and the
locality, or lack thereof, exhibited by the flow equation.

Continuing with the derivation, we find that the flow equations can be
solved exactly:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath ’s are integration constants that can be fixed as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                                
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The value of @xmath at @xmath is expected to provide a good
approximation for the exact solution @xmath . We find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Figure 3.7 shows this analytic result together with the exact
eigenvalues. While it reproduces the spectrum of the first phase well,
the local solution fares progressively worse at stronger coupling. This
does not signal a lack of locality in the flow, but simply reflects the
low order to which the flow equation was solved. The inclusion of higher
order terms @xmath in the solution leads to much improved results, as is
clear from the figure. Note that the point of breakdown for the fourth
order solution in (b) has moved closer to the actual phase boundary at
@xmath which separates regions of first and second phase character.

In conclusion, we have seen that the local approximation provides
non-perturbative results for states which possess a first phase
character. In particular, the linear case can be solved analytically and
reproduces the entire spectrum of the normal phase to good accuracy; the
first such result that we are aware of.

## Chapter 4 The Dicke Model

### 4.1 Introduction

Since its introduction in 1954 in the study of collective phenomenon in
quantum optics, the Dicke model [ 37 ] has received considerable
attention in a wide range of fields, including that of quantum chaos and
quantum phase transitions. We refer the reader to [ 38 ] for an
extensive list of references to these and related studies. Here we
present a flow equation treatment of the Dicke model. Other boson and
spin-boson problems have been considered in this context [ 39 , 4 ] ,
and a special case of the Dicke model was treated perturbatively in [ 40
] . Vidal and Dusuel [ 41 ] have calculated finite-size scaling
exponents for various quantities in the context of the Dicke model using
flow equations. Compared to the Lipkin model this case presents a
greater challenge to the flow equation approach, mainly due to the
presence of two independent degrees of freedom. In order to keep the
equations manageable we implement a two step procedure, first bringing
the Hamiltonian into a block diagonal form before diagonalizing it
completely. Unfortunately the complexity of the resulting PDE still
prevents us from performing the first step exactly, and so a
perturbative approach will be followed.

We begin with an overview of the model and its structure relevant to the
flow equation treatment. After introducing the necessary variables and
representations we digress briefly to first treat a special case
analytically before proceeding with the derivation of the full flow
equation. Using this equation we will construct an effective form of
Hamiltonian in which certain degrees of freedom have been decoupled.
Finally the different approaches to diagonalizing this effective form
are introduced and compared using numerical results.

### 4.2 The model

The Dicke model describes the interaction of @xmath two-level atoms with
a number of bosonic fields via a dipole interaction. For simplicity we
will take @xmath to be even; the odd case requires only minor
modifications. Following [ 38 ] , we consider one such bosonic mode with
frequency @xmath and coupling strength @xmath . The corresponding
bosonic creation and annihilation operators are @xmath and @xmath .
Associated with each atom are the spin-1/2 operators @xmath which obey
the standard @xmath commutation relations. All @xmath atoms have equal
level splitting @xmath . The Dicke Hamiltonian reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath factor ensures that the Hamiltonian remains extensive when
the bosonic mode is macroscopically occupied, i.e. when @xmath . By
introducing the collective spin operators @xmath and @xmath we obtain
the simplified form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

A natural basis for the Hilbert space @xmath is given by the eigenstates
of the total collective spin operator @xmath together with @xmath and
the boson number operator @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath the Hamiltonian does not
mix different @xmath -sectors of the total spin representation. The
relevant sector for the low-lying states is @xmath , and we fix @xmath
at this value throughout, dropping the @xmath label in the basis states.
We will focus on the resonant case where @xmath . As before, other cases
simply correspond to different initial conditions for the equations we
will derive. For these parameter values the model undergoes a quantum
phase transition at @xmath from the normal to the so-called
super-radiant phase. The second phase is characterized by the
macroscopic occupation of the bosonic mode in the ground state, i.e.
@xmath .

Next we consider the structure of @xmath relevant to our application of
the flow equations. Central to this discussion is the operator @xmath .
With each distinct eigenvalue @xmath of @xmath we associate the
corresponding subspace of eigenstates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we refer to as a @xmath -sector. The dimension of @xmath increases
linearly from a minimum of one at @xmath to a maximum value of @xmath at
@xmath , from where it remains constant. A schematic representation of
the basis states and @xmath -sectors appears in Figure 4.1 . Grouping
the terms in the Hamiltonian according to equation ( 1.10 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which makes it clear that @xmath possesses a band block diagonal
structure with respect to @xmath , as defined in Section 1.2.3 . Since
@xmath only changes @xmath by two it leaves the subspaces corresponding
to odd or even @xmath invariant. This implies a parity symmetry, similar
to that of the Lipkin model, which may be compactly expressed in terms
of the operator @xmath as @xmath . This symmetry gets broken in the
second phase where the ground states of the odd and even sectors become
degenerate.

Early studies [ 44 , 45 ] of the model’s thermodynamic properties were
performed in the rotating wave approximation (RWA) which amounts to
dropping the @xmath term. We will consider this case in more detail
later on, as it reappears as the first order contribution to the
solution of the flow equation.

### 4.3 The flow equation approach

We have seen that the Hamiltonian contains interactions responsible for
scattering both between different @xmath -sectors and within a fixed
sector. A complete diagonalization of @xmath would require a
transformation which eliminates both these interactions. Although the
flow equation is certainly capable of generating such a transformation
in a single application, it is conceptually clearer and technically much
simpler to perform this diagonalization in two separate steps. As
suggested in the previous section we will first eliminate interactions
which connect different @xmath -sectors through the structure preserving
flow generated by @xmath . As before this is done in the thermodynamic
or large @xmath limit. A physical interpretation of @xmath is that of a
counting operator for the elementary excitations or energy quanta
present in the system. The flow will produce an effective Hamiltonian
@xmath which conserves the number of these excitations. We expect there
to be new terms, both diagonal and off-diagonal, appearing in @xmath .
Apart from the provision that they conserve @xmath there is no obvious
constraint on these newly generated interactions, and so no band (block)
diagonal structure need be present within the @xmath -sectors.

Having brought @xmath into a block diagonal form there are two ways in
which to proceed. We may construct, for large but finite @xmath , the
matrices corresponding to each @xmath -sector and then apply direct
diagonalization. Although still numerically intensive this is a greatly
reduced problem compared to diagonalizing the original fully interacting
Hamiltonian, as the submatrices are at most of size @xmath .
Alternatively we may remain at infinite @xmath and apply the flow
equations to each sector separately using, for example, the generator
@xmath . For a fixed value of @xmath the problem now becomes effectively
one dimensional as we may eliminate either the bosonic or spin degree of
freedom in favor of @xmath , which acts as a scalar parameter. Both
these methods will be demonstrated later on.

Finally, a remark on the ordering of eigenvalues. When applying the flow
equations to each sector in the second step we expect complete
diagonalization and that the eigenvalues will appear on the diagonal in
increasing order [ 20 ] . For the first step, which ends in a block
diagonal form, the situation is no longer so clear, as the ordering
proof in [ 20 ] is only valid for the case of complete diagonalization.
In short, it is generally unknown in which sector a certain eigenstate
of @xmath will be found when we diagonalize @xmath . In the first phase
we expect the same locality encountered in the Lipkin model (Section 3.7
) and so the low-lying states should belong to the sectors with @xmath .
In numerical investigations for small @xmath values we have observed
this ordering in both phases. In particular, the ground state is mapped
to the single basis state of the @xmath subspace. As this ordering is a
non-perturbative phenomenon we do not expect to observe it in our
perturbative treatment.

### 4.4 Flow equations in the @xmath limit

In the subsections that follow we derive the flow equation for the first
step of the diagonalization process using the Moyal bracket method. We
begin by introducing the relevant variables and representations.

#### 4.4.1 Variables and representations

To account for the model’s two independent degrees of freedom we
introduce two pairs of operators @xmath and @xmath as described in
Section 2.2 . These satisfy the exchange relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

while operators coming from different pairs commute. The pair @xmath is
used to represent the spin degree of freedom through the representation
constructed in Section 3.5 in terms of @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In similar fashion we wish to construct a representation for the boson
algebra @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath . Two new issues, not
encountered in the @xmath case, arise here. Firstly, it is well known
that only infinite dimensional representations of the boson algebra
exist, whereas @xmath and @xmath are finite dimensional. The second
point concerns the scale we should associate with the bosonic operators.
If @xmath and @xmath were naively assumed to be scaleless with respect
to @xmath (or @xmath ), only the @xmath term in the Hamiltonian would
survive when working to leading order in @xmath . We will address these
issues in the context of our proposed approximate representation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is the dimension of the space. Denoting the
eigenstates of @xmath by @xmath we see that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
. (See equations ( 2.17 ) and ( 2.18 ).) The creation operator @xmath
maps the highest state @xmath to zero, since @xmath . This amounts to a
truncation of the boson Fock-space, and the operators in ( 4.8 ) agree
with the truncated forms of the exact infinite-dimensional operators.
Proceeding as before, we treat @xmath and @xmath as scalars and define
@xmath and @xmath through @xmath and @xmath . The representation now
becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which satisfies, to leading order in @xmath , the desired commutation
relation with respect to the bosonic Moyal bracket @xmath . For the
moment we set @xmath , and return to the role of @xmath later. The
second issue concerns the scale of @xmath to be associated with @xmath
and @xmath . This is really a question of which values of @xmath are
relevant to the low energy physics of the system. In the Dicke model it
is known [ 38 ] that ground state occupation of the bosonic mode is
microscopic, i.e. @xmath , in the first phase and macroscopic, i.e.
@xmath , in the second. We can describe both these cases by considering
@xmath . A natural choice of variables is @xmath which is scaleless and
analogous to @xmath of the @xmath case. The @xmath -scale now becomes
explicit in both the representation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and bosonic Moyal bracket

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also observe that the dimension @xmath , which controls the
Fock-space cutoff, does not appear explicitly. For practical purposes we
may safely assume @xmath to be much larger than the interval of @xmath
under consideration.

Combining the two representations we obtain the initial condition to
leading order in @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the terms are ordered as in equation ( 4.5 ).

#### 4.4.2 Solution in the local approximation

Before proceeding with the derivation of the general flow equation,
which will involve significant behind-the-scenes numeric and symbolic
computation, let us consider a case amenable to an analytic treatment.
Using the same locality argument put forth for the Lipkin model in
Section 3.7 we assert that for the low-lying states only the flow within
a small region around @xmath is relevant, and that the evolution of
@xmath in this region is governed by its local properties. This is
equivalent to the assumption that @xmath for the low-lying states. A
similar approximation is made in the bosonization treatment of [ 38 ] ,
the results of which will be reproduced here using the flow equations.
In practice we implement this approximation by simply replacing @xmath
by @xmath in the initial condition ( 4.12 ); the result of a Taylor
expansion to leading order in @xmath . First we consider the flow
generated by @xmath . As with the Lipkin model the local approximation
leads to a very simple form for @xmath , with only two new terms,
proportional to @xmath and @xmath , being generated. As required the
band block diagonal structure of @xmath is conserved. The flowing
Hamiltonian may be parametrized as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath @xmath are scalar coefficients. In operator language this
amount to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Observables linear in @xmath and @xmath may be parametrized in a similar
fashion. We will consider @xmath for which @xmath is of the form ( 4.4.2
) with the flowing coefficients denoted by @xmath for @xmath .

Substituting these forms into the flow equations ( 4.31 ) and ( 4.35 )
and then matching the coefficients on both sides yield

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The initial conditions for @xmath and @xmath are @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath respectively.

First we consider @xmath . In the @xmath limit @xmath and @xmath is
expected to vanish, while @xmath and @xmath will assume new,
renormalized values. The initial and final values of the @xmath ’s may
be related using the flow invariants @xmath and @xmath . By combining
these with the initial conditions we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The renormalized values of @xmath and @xmath correspond to a point where
the circle and hyperbole described by these equations intersect. For
@xmath no such point exists, and the solution breaks down. For @xmath
the fixed point is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is illustrated in Figure 4.2 which shows the flow of @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath . Next we consider the flow of @xmath . To fix the
final values of the @xmath coefficients we require four invariants, some
of which must involve the coefficients of @xmath . One such set is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining @xmath and @xmath with the initial conditions lead to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The values of @xmath and @xmath can now be solved for using @xmath and
@xmath . Note that for the purposes of calculating expectation values
with respect to the eigenstates of @xmath only @xmath and @xmath are
relevant. This follows from the observation that @xmath and @xmath
correspond to terms that change @xmath by two, whereas the eigenstates
of @xmath are also eigenstates of @xmath . For simplicity we drop these
“between-sector” scattering terms in what follows, keeping only those
terms relevant to the calculation of expectation values.

The successful construction of the effective @xmath -preserving
Hamiltonian @xmath and the observable @xmath marks the end of the first
step. We now apply the flow equation a second time, using the generator
@xmath . When restricted to a single @xmath -sector @xmath is clearly
non-degenerate, and so we expect complete diagonalization in the final
Hamiltonian. The local approximation again allows for a simple
parametrization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The flow equations for the coefficients are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leave @xmath and @xmath invariant. Combining these with the
initial conditions and using the fact that @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Turning to @xmath we find that its parametrized form is again similar to
that of @xmath , and we denote the flowing coefficients by @xmath . The
flow equations are found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leave @xmath and @xmath invariant. Proceeding as before we find
that @xmath and @xmath . Since the eigenstates of @xmath are also
eigenstates of @xmath we drop the @xmath term.

In summary, we have seen that within the local approximation the two
step diagonalization procedure can be performed exactly. The final
Hamiltonian and transformed observable @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which agrees with the result of [ 38 ] obtained using bosonization. This
clearly constitutes a harmonic approximation of the spectrum in terms of
two oscillators with frequencies @xmath and @xmath . Only the parts of
@xmath which commute with both @xmath and @xmath are shown. Note that
the gap between the ground state @xmath and first excited state @xmath
exhibits the characteristic square root behaviour @xmath .

#### 4.4.3 Flow equation for the Hamiltonian

We proceed with the derivation of the general flow equation for the
Hamiltonian, beginning with a more in depth study of the structure of
@xmath . In Section 1.2.3 it was shown that the flow generated by @xmath
will preserve the band block diagonal structure present in @xmath , thus
restricting the terms in @xmath to those changing @xmath by either zero
or two ¹ ¹ 1 In this equation, and in some that follow, we treat
operators as commuting scalars. Since reordering can only bring about
@xmath corrections this is sufficient for our purposes, and it
simplifies the notation considerably.

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.27)
  -- -- -- --------

A simpler and much more convenient form can be found by introducing the
operators @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We interpret @xmath as the fundamental @xmath -preserving interaction
while the elements of @xmath constitute the fundamental interactions
which change @xmath by two. As shown in Appendix D we can rewrite all
the operators appearing in ( 4.27 ) in terms op @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and the elements of @xmath which only appear linearly. For example:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This results in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor of @xmath responsible for the extensivity of @xmath has been
factored out explicitly, and so each @xmath is a scaleless function. The
initial condition is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We proceed by inserting this form into the flow equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the full Moyal bracket

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The resulting algebra is easily handled using a symbolic processor such
as Mathematica . Matching the coefficients of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
on both sides of ( 4.31 ) produces a set of equations of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we sum over repeated indices. The superscripts of the @xmath ’s
denote derivatives to the scaleless variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. The @xmath indices run over the set @xmath where @xmath corresponds to
no derivative being taken. Governing the flow of @xmath is the @xmath
matrix @xmath of which the entries are simple polynomials of the
rescaled variables. The non-zero entries of these, typically sparse
matrices appear in Appendix E . Due to the obvious complexity of these
non-perturbative equations we have been unsuccessful in finding an exact
numerical solution. A perturbative solution can be found, and we present
this in Section 4.5 .

#### 4.4.4 Flow equation for an observable

Next we derive the flow equation for an observable @xmath . This case is
complicated by the lack of structure present in @xmath at non-zero
@xmath . For example, we do not generally expect band block diagonality
to be present, and so @xmath may contain interactions connecting distant
@xmath -sectors. In general we are confronted by the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath label indicates the amount by which
the term changes @xmath , and similar for @xmath with respect to @xmath
. We define the index set @xmath . Inserting this form into the flow
equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

yields the coupled set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We sum over the repeated indices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is
a @xmath dimensional matrix containing polynomial functions of the
scaleless variables. Note that at @xmath only the @xmath function is of
interest for the calculation of expectation values. This follows from
the observation that eigenvalues of @xmath are also eigenvalues of
@xmath , and that @xmath is the only term leaving @xmath invariant.

Again it is clear that a direct numerical approach is intractable, and
we instead try to find perturbative solutions.

### 4.5 Perturbative solutions

We wish to construct solutions to equations ( 4.33 ) and ( 4.36 ) of the
forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The forms given in ( 4.29 ) and ( 4.34 ) are still valid, as they apply
separately to each @xmath and @xmath . When working to finite order in
@xmath the functional dependence of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath are
constrained to be polynomial and of finite order. This also limits the
type of interactions that can be generated in @xmath since terms for
which @xmath is at least of order @xmath , and so only @xmath with
@xmath are relevant. This is true at @xmath , provided that @xmath and
@xmath , and continues to hold at @xmath since @xmath is always at least
of order @xmath and contains only @xmath terms. As all the relevant
functions are simple polynomials we may proceed by constructing a set of
coupled differential equations for the scalar coefficients appearing in
these polynomials as functions of @xmath . The extensive algebraic
manipulations involved in this step can be automated for arbitrary
@xmath using Mathematica . The resulting set of ordinary differential
equations is then solved using the standard Runge-Kutta algorithm [ 34 ]
. Solutions were obtained for @xmath up to @xmath and for the
observables @xmath and @xmath up to @xmath . These transformed operators
will be denoted by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We only state the
results up to fourth order here:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where, to aid interpretation, we temporarily abuse notation by writing
@xmath for the scaleless variables @xmath . The rationality of the
coefficients, apart from the @xmath factors, have been verified to very
high numerical accuracy. In similar fashion the observables are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where only the @xmath -preserving terms relevant to the calculation of
expectation values are shown. Looking at the results for @xmath we see
the “in-sector” scattering interaction @xmath appearing in the higher
order terms. As the power to which @xmath can occur is limited by the
perturbation order a band diagonal structure is present in each @xmath
-sector with respect to @xmath (or equivalently @xmath ). We expect
@xmath to provide a good description of the Dicke model at weak
coupling, and possibly throughout the first phase. At strong coupling
there is no guarantee of the accuracy or stability of @xmath , even when
working to arbitrarily high orders in the perturbation. In fact, from
the terms given in ( 4.38 ) two things become apparent which signal a
breakdown of this approximation at @xmath . Firstly, the matrix element
of the one-dimensional @xmath subspace is found to be @xmath for all
@xmath and orders of the perturbation considered. As is known from
non-perturbative numerical studies the flow equation maps the ground
state to precisely this @xmath state. However, it is also known that the
ground state energy is only equal to @xmath in the first phase, and that
it decreases linearly with @xmath in the second [ 38 ] , contradicting
the prediction of @xmath . Secondly @xmath is found to become unstable
at large coupling for perturbation orders higher than one. For example,
consider the expectation value of @xmath to second order with respect to
a simple variational state: @xmath . We note that for @xmath this
expectation value is unbounded from below. Together with the variational
principle this implies that the spectrum of @xmath becomes unbounded
from below at some @xmath . For the fourth order case this instability
occurs at a @xmath . We have observed that this point of breakdown
continues to move closer to the critical point @xmath as higher order
corrections are included. This agrees with the general notion that a
perturbation series, even when summed up completely, may produce
divergent results beyond the series’ radius of convergence.

Finally we point out that to first order the effective Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is equivalent to the RWA approximation in which the model was
originally studied [ 44 , 45 ] . To this order we also observe that the
@xmath -preserving parts of @xmath and @xmath are left unchanged by the
transformation generated by the flow equation.

### 4.6 Diagonalizing @xmath

The flow equation treatment of the preceding sections has brought the
Dicke Hamiltonian into a block diagonal form by eliminating interactions
which connect different @xmath -sectors. What remains is to diagonalize
@xmath within each @xmath -sector at a time.

One approach, valid for large but finite @xmath , is to apply direct
diagonalization to each @xmath -block (submatrix) of @xmath . This is
done by first constructing the matrix representations of @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath for the @xmath -sector under consideration. Finding the
desired submatrix of @xmath is simply a matter of replacing @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath by the properly scaled matrix representations of
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively. One need not be concerned about
the precise ordering of operators in products, as different orderings
only bring about @xmath corrections. The result of these substitutions
is a matrix @xmath , the size of which ranges from @xmath to @xmath
depending on the value of @xmath . Generally @xmath will not be
Hermitian, and so we consider the symmetrized form @xmath . Results of
the subsequent numeric diagonalization appear in the next section.

Alternatively we may remain in the large @xmath limit and apply the flow
equation again, this time non-perturbatively, to diagonalize each
submatrix. Within each @xmath -sector the problem is effectively
one-dimensional as we may eliminate either the bosonic or spin degree of
freedom in favor of the scalar parameter @xmath . We choose to work with
the spin degree of freedom, which has the natural basis

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

By writing @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the effective Hamiltonian can be rewritten purely in terms of spin
operators.

Let us clarify this last step. Since @xmath and @xmath together fix the
number of bosons there is no @xmath label in @xmath . In fact, we
completely eliminate the bosonic degree of freedom through the
correspondence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the operators on the right act on @xmath and are equivalent to the
operators on the left acting within a fixed @xmath -sector of the
original tensor product space @xmath .

For concreteness we consider the fourth order case for the rest of the
section. The results can be easily extended to higher orders. The form
of the spin-only Hamiltonian is @xmath , which clearly possesses a
double band diagonal structure with respect to @xmath . To preserve this
form during flow we use the generator of Section 1.2.3 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the numerical treatment of the flow equation it is convenient to
transform to the variables of the @xmath representation in terms of
which @xmath and @xmath become

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we write @xmath for @xmath and the initial conditions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , which is now a continuous scalar parameter labelling the
relevant sector. The flow of these functions are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The corresponding flow equation for an observable @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we treat using a similar approach to that of equations ( 3.44 )
and ( 3.45 ). In the @xmath limit we expect @xmath and @xmath to vanish,
as they represent the off-diagonal parts of the flowing Hamiltonian.
Using the correspondence between @xmath and @xmath we may consider
@xmath , and thus @xmath itself, to be a function of @xmath . It follows
that the eigenvalues of the particular @xmath -sector are given by
@xmath for @xmath .

There is a subtle issue regarding the domain of these functions that
still needs to be addressed. Looking back at the definition of the
@xmath basis we see that the maximum value of the spin label @xmath is
@xmath which is less than @xmath when @xmath . Correspondingly we need
to restrict the domain of the @xmath functions to reflect this. Since
@xmath the relevant domain is @xmath . Indeed, outside this region the
initial conditions are complex, causing the flow to become unstable as
@xmath .

### 4.7 Numeric results

During the course of this chapter we have encountered a number of
different treatments of the Dicke model. In this section we present the
results obtained using these methods and compare their ranges of
applicability. First we summarize the different approaches:

-    Direct Diagonalization : By introducing a cut-off in the maximum
    value of @xmath we can numerically diagonalize the full Dicke
    Hamiltonian on a truncated Hilbert space. This generally leads to
    very large matrices, especially in the second phase where an
    extensive number of @xmath -sectors must be included in order to
    describe the low-lying states. For sufficiently large values of the
    cut-off this method does provide very accurate results for the
    low-lying states, and we will use these as a benchmark for the flow
    equation results.

-    Local Approximation : This analytic method was derived in Section
    4.4.2 and constitutes a harmonic approximation of the first phase,
    low-lying spectrum in terms of two oscillators.

-    Direct Diagonalization of @xmath : In Section 4.5 we derived the
    effective @xmath -preserving Hamiltonian @xmath in a perturbative
    approximation. For finite @xmath the submatrices comprising the
    block-diagonal structure of @xmath may be constructed and
    diagonalized numerically. Since these submatrices are maximally of
    size @xmath this is a greatly reduced problem compared to
    diagonalizing the original Hamiltonian in some large truncated
    space.

-    Flow Equation Diagonalization of @xmath : As described in Section
    4.6 the individual @xmath -sectors may be diagonalized in the @xmath
    limit using a flow equation equipped with an appropriate generator.
    The continuous variable @xmath appearing in the initial condition
    labels the relevant @xmath -sector.

-    The Rotating Wave Approximation (RWA) : Within this approximation
    the Dicke Hamiltonian is equivalent to the first order form of
    @xmath . In this sense the RWA is already included in the two
    previous cases. However, due to its prevalence in the literature we
    will treat it separately as a reference case.

Throughout this section only the subspace corresponding to even values
of @xmath , as discussed in Section 4.2 , will be considered. The first
results we present are those obtained by diagonalizing @xmath at finite
@xmath . The flow equation treatment of the second step will be dealt
with later on. Figure 4.3 (a) shows the energy of the third excited
state @xmath as a function of @xmath at @xmath . Also shown are the
exact values obtained using direct diagonalization, and the RWA result.
Although the result of @xmath is a marked improvement over that of the
RWA, we still see @xmath errors present at larger values of @xmath .
This simply the reflects the order to which the Moyal bracket was
expanded in our derivation of the flow equation. However, it quickly
becomes apparent that this is a systematic error and largely independent
of the particular state. We attribute this to the scalar part of the
higher order @xmath -corrections that were neglected in our derivation.
This only serves to shift the entire spectrum by some fixed amount
relative to the exact results. For a more meaningful comparison we
eliminate this shift by considering the excited energies relative to the
ground state, i.e. we consider the excitation energy (or gap) @xmath
rather than @xmath itself. As seen in Figures 4.3 (b) and 4.4 (a), (b)
there is indeed a very good correspondence between the exact results for
@xmath and those obtained from @xmath . From previous studies [ 38 ] it
is known that the critical point @xmath is characterized by the
vanishing of the gap between the ground state and first excited state.
This agrees with the result of the local approximation that @xmath .
Figure 4.4 (c) shows this gap together with those obtained using @xmath
.

Whereas the local approximation provides reasonable results for the
low-lying states, it fails to do so for the highly excited states, as is
clear from Figure 4.4 (d). For these states the assumption that @xmath
is no longer valid. This means that the local solution within a
neighbourhood of @xmath is insufficient since the flow relevant to these
states occur at points distant from @xmath .

Figure 4.5 (a)-(d) provides a global view the spectra obtained using the
different methods. The qualitative properties of the exact result and
that of @xmath are clearly very similar. In particular we note the level
repulsion among the low-lying states, which leads to the vanishing of
the gap @xmath at the critical point. This behaviour is clearly absent
in the RWA case, where there appears to be no correlation between levels
belonging to different sectors. As expected the local approximation
predicts the correct behaviour for the low-lying states but fails at
higher energies. In fact, the local approximation predicts a continuous
spectrum at @xmath .

The @xmath -preserving parts of @xmath and @xmath may be constructed in
the same way as we did for the individual submatrices of @xmath . The
calculation of the expectation values is now a straight forward
procedure, the results of which appear in Figure 4.5 (e)-(h). We again
find good agreement with the exact results. To eliminate any constant
shift owing to higher order scalar corrections we consider the
expectation values relative to the ground state, i.e. @xmath where
@xmath .

In the final part of this section we present the results obtained by
diagonalizing the @xmath -sectors through a second application of the
flow equation. All the results obtained thus far can be reproduced using
this method, and we will not restate them here. Instead we focus on the
RWA case, particularly with respect to the phase structure. The RWA
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

exhibits a phase transition at @xmath [ 38 ] , in contrast to critical
value of @xmath for the full Dicke Hamiltonian. The two phases are
distinguished by the order parameter @xmath that becomes non-zero only
in the second phase. This signals a macroscopic occupation of the
bosonic mode which is responsible for the phenomenon of super-radiance.
We proceed by solving the flow equation ( 4.48 ) for a range of @xmath
and @xmath values. In the @xmath limit the off-diagonal part @xmath
vanishes and we obtain a set of functions @xmath . Figure 4.6 (a) shows
a typical example for @xmath at @xmath , together with the exact result
for @xmath . Due to the ordering of the eigenvalues at @xmath we expect
each @xmath to be an increasing function with @xmath corresponding to
the lowest eigenvalue. The overall ground state energy is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The result of this calculation appears in Figure 4.6 (b). Once it is
known to which sector the ground state belongs for a certain @xmath we
solve the flow equation for the observables @xmath and @xmath within
this sector. Figures 4.6 (c) and (d) show the ground state expectation
values calculated in this manner.

\specialhead

Conclusion and outlook

We hope that our presentation has convinced the reader that flow
equations obtained from continuous unitary transformations present a
versatile and potentially very powerful technique for the treatment of
interacting quantum systems. Our results for the Lipkin and Dicke models
have clearly illustrated the myriad of information yielded by a
non-perturbative solution of the flow equations. This approach is not
without its difficulties however. As discussed in Section 2.2 , the
construction of smooth initial conditions, although relatively simple
for the models considered here, are generally non-trivial and in some
cases possibly on par in difficulty with diagonalizing the Hamiltonian
itself. Although the introduction of additional variables may aid in
this construction, the resulting high dimensional PDE presents its own
challenges, as was encountered in the Dicke model. Further studies into
these issues are needed if the flow equations are to become a truly
general and robust framework for non-perturbative calculations. It also
seems inevitable that the treatment of realistic models would require
further model-specific approximations which were largely absent in our
approach. One possibility is the generalization of the local
approximation scheme of Sections 3.7 and 4.4.2 . The flow equation would
be solved locally around an appropriate point, possibly determined by a
variational method, and using a specialized generator. This may allow
for a treatment of the system by considering fluctuations of the degrees
of freedom around their classical values.

The flow equation is one example of a non-linear operator equation of
which there are numerous others appearing in virtually all branches of
physics. Although our focus has been on a small subclass of these, the
solution methods developed here are much more general in nature and may
in future find application in other fields as well.

## Appendix A Representations by irreducible sets

In Section 2.1 we made use of the fact that any flowing operator may be
expressed in terms of operators coming from an irreducible set which
contains the identity. Now we show why this is the case, using a result
by von Neumann. First we establish some notation. Let @xmath be a finite
dimensional Hilbert space and denote by @xmath the set of all matrix
operators acting on it. The commutant @xmath of a set @xmath is defined
as the set of operators which commute with all the elements of @xmath .
The double commutant of @xmath is defined by @xmath . The following
theorem [ 46 ] provides the key:

The Double Commutant Theorem: If @xmath is a subalgebra of @xmath which
contains the identity and is closed under hermitian conjugation then
@xmath .

Now suppose @xmath is an irreducible set of hermitian operators, one of
which is the identity, and @xmath the subalgebra of @xmath spanned by
all the products of operators from @xmath . By Schur’s lemma @xmath and
thus @xmath . It follows from the theorem above that @xmath , i.e. any
operator acting on @xmath may be written in terms of operators coming
from @xmath .

## Appendix B Calculating expectation values with respect to coherent
states

Define @xmath where @xmath is the unnormalized coherent state. These
states are known to provide a basis for the Hilbert state through the
resolution of unity

  -- -- -- -------
           (B.1)
  -- -- -- -------

where the integral ranges over the entire complex plane. Furthermore,
for any @xmath the state @xmath has non-zero overlap with every state in
the Hilbert space. The action of the @xmath generators on these states
may be expressed in terms of differential operators [ 33 ] with respect
to @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
     @xmath      (B.3)
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will always consider @xmath and @xmath to be distinct variables, and
that @xmath is a function of @xmath only. When calculating expectation
values of the double commutators in Section 2.1 , one encounters
expressions of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . These can easily be computed by replacing each operator
by its differential representation to obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the orders of the operators have been reversed. As a result these
expectation values can be expressed as some rational function of @xmath
and @xmath . Applying this method to @xmath and @xmath , as defined in
Section 2.1 , we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using these equations to express @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath we
may consider expectation values of the form of equation ( B.5 ) as
functions of these averages. For example

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath .

## Appendix C Scaling behaviour of fluctuations

We wish to show that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

From direct calculation this is found to hold for @xmath , and we employ
induction to obtain the general result. Assuming that this holds for all
products of @xmath fluctuations, the induction step consists of adding
either @xmath or @xmath to a general product @xmath and then proving the
result for @xmath .

First we add an extra @xmath . Using the results from the previous
section we may write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.3)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where ( B.7 ) and @xmath were used. It should be remembered that @xmath
contains a @xmath dependency through the average appearing in each
@xmath . Dividing by @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The last term can be rewritten using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is just the product rule, to obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note the important cancellation of terms proportional to @xmath . From
the induction hypothesis, and the fact that @xmath is polynomial in
@xmath , the first term in ( C.6 ) will be of order @xmath . The second
term becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking into account the expressions for @xmath and @xmath , we conclude
that each term in equation ( C.7 ) will have order @xmath , which
reduces to @xmath in both the cases where @xmath is odd and even. Thus,
for any product @xmath of @xmath fluctuations we arrive at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which concludes the induction step.

Exactly the same procedure is followed when adding a @xmath , although
more algebra is required as @xmath now contains second order derivatives
to @xmath . The final result remains unchanged:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this case these results make exact the general notion that relative
fluctuations scale like powers of one over the system size. Finally we
mention that when calculating the expectation values of a double
commutator there is often a cancellation of leading order terms. This
can be seen in equation ( B.8 ), where the sum of terms of order @xmath
turns out to be of order @xmath .

## Appendix D Decomposing operators in the Dicke model

We define two classes of operators: @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath
changes @xmath by @xmath while @xmath does so by @xmath . We wish to
find an algorithm for writing a given @xmath in terms of @xmath and
@xmath ’s for which @xmath . Central to this procedure are the relations

  -- -- -- -------
           (D.1)
  -- -- -- -------

which follows directly from the definitions and basic properties of spin
and boson operators. Given a @xmath we apply these relation repeatedly,
until finally only @xmath ’s and @xmath appear. Note that the former can
only appear linearly. Furthermore, any @xmath appearing in intermittent
steps has @xmath equal to @xmath , and any @xmath has @xmath .

## Appendix E Dicke model flow coefficients

The non-zero entries of the @xmath matrix. For clarity the subscript
indices have been raised.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The non-zero entries of the @xmath matrix.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The non-zero entries of the @xmath matrix.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The non-zero entries of the @xmath matrix.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

\specialhead

BIBLIOGRAPHY