There are two distinct phenomena where quantum coherence has been
observed on the macroscopic scale: the laser and Bose Einstein
condensation. Although the physics underlying these processes is
fundamentally different, they both could potentially be observed in the
same microcavities, and both would be a source of a coherent light.

In the first part of this thesis I study the intermediate regime between
ordinary lasing and a BEC of exciton polaritons. I take into account the
fermionic structure of polaritons, treating the excitons as two-level
systems coupled to a single mode in a microcavity. I introduce
decoherence and dissipation processes to this system. Employing
many-body Green function techniques, similar to those used by Abrikosov
and Gorâ€™kov in their theory of gapless superconductivity, I provide a
mathematical structure that unifies models of lasers with models of
condensates. This allows me to study the stability of the polariton
condensate with respect to decoherence processes and the crossover
between the polariton condensate and the laser. I give detailed
indications of a regime in which the condensate should be observed to
guide experimental work and show how to distinguish the Bose condensate
from a laser.

The second part of this thesis is concerned with properties of excitons
and modelling of excitonic lasing in quasi-one-dimensional quantum
wires. I develop a very general numerical method of calculating the
properties of wires with different shapes and materials. Using this
method I study the properties of very wide range of T-shaped quantum
wires. I also develop an analytical model for the two-mode laser. Using
my theory I explain the detailed issues raised by experiments. The
method is being used in designing a high performance 1D wire laser in
collaboration with Bell Laboratories.
