The work in this thesis concerns the split of Einstein field equations
(EFE’s) with respect to nowhere-null hypersurfaces, the GR Cauchy and
Initial Value problems (CP and IVP), the Canonical formulation of GR and
its interpretation, and the Foundations of Relativity.

I address Wheeler’s question about the why of the form of the GR
Hamiltonian constraint “from plausible first principles”. I consider
Hojman–Kuchar–Teitelboim’s spacetime-based first principles, and
especially the new 3-space approach (TSA) first principles studied by
Barbour, Foster, Ó Murchadha and myself. The latter are relational, and
assume less structure, but from these Dirac’s procedure picks out GR as
one of a few consistent possibilities. The alternative possibilities are
Strong gravity theories and some new Conformal theories. The latter have
privileged slicings similar to the maximal and constant mean curvature
slicings of the Conformal IVP method.

The plausibility of the TSA first principles are tested by coupling to
fundamental matter. Yang–Mills theory works. I criticize the original
form of the TSA since I find that tacit assumptions remain and Dirac
fields are not permitted. However, comparison with Kuchař’s hypersurface
formalism allows me to argue that all the known fundamental matter
fields can be incorporated into the TSA. The spacetime picture appears
to possess more kinematics than strictly necessary for building
Lagrangians for physically-realized fundamental matter fields. I debate
whether space may be regarded as primary rather than spacetime. The
emergence (or not) of the Special Relativity Principles and 4-d General
Covariance in the various TSA alternatives is investigated, as is the
Equivalence Principle, and the Problem of Time in Quantum Gravity.

Further results concern Elimination versus Conformal IVP methods, the
badness of the timelike split of the EFE’s, and reinterpreting
Embeddings and Braneworlds guided by CP and IVP knowledge.
