# Part I Quantum Electrodynamic Bound–State Calculations

### Chapter 1 Numerical Calculation of the One–Loop Self Energy (Excited
States)

#### 1.1 Orientation

A nonperturbative numerical evaluation of the one-photon electron self
energy for the K- and L-shell states of hydrogenlike ions with nuclear
charge numbers @xmath to 5 is described. Our calculation for the @xmath
state has a numerical uncertainty of 0.8 Hz in atomic hydrogen, and for
the L-shell states ( @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ) the numerical
uncertainty is 1.0 Hz. The method of evaluation for the ground state and
for the excited states is described in detail. The numerical results are
compared to results based on known terms in the expansion of the self
energy in powers of @xmath .

#### 1.2 Introduction to the Numerical Calculation of Radiative
Corrections

The nonperturbative numerical evaluation of radiative corrections to
bound-state energy levels is interesting for two reasons. First, the
recent dramatic increase in the accuracy of experiments that measure the
transition frequencies in hydrogen and deuterium [ 35 , 41 , 42 ]
necessitates a numerical evaluation (nonperturbative in the binding
Coulomb field) of the radiative corrections to the spectrum of atomic
systems with low nuclear charge @xmath . Second, the numerical
calculation serves as an independent test of analytic evaluations which
are based on an expansion in the binding field with an expansion
parameter @xmath .

In order to address both issues, a high-precision numerical evaluation
of the self energy of an electron in the ground state in hydrogenlike
ions has been performed [ 9 , 12 , 43 ] . The approach outlined in [ 9 ]
is generalized here to the L shell, and numerical results are obtained
for the ( @xmath ) states @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Results are
provided for atomic hydrogen, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

It has been pointed out in [ 9 , 43 ] that the nonperturbative effects
(in @xmath ) can be large even for low nuclear charge and exceed the
current experimental accuracy for atomic transitions. For example, the
difference between the sum of the analytically evaluated terms up to the
order of @xmath and the final numerical result for the ground state is
roughly 27 kHz for atomic hydrogen and about 3200 kHz for @xmath . For
the @xmath state the difference is @xmath kHz for atomic hydrogen and
412 kHz for @xmath . The large difference between the result obtained by
an expansion in @xmath persists even after the inclusion of a result
recently obtained in [ 44 ] for the logarithmic term of order @xmath .
For the ground state, the difference between the all-order numerical
result and the sum of the perturbative terms is still 13 kHz for atomic
hydrogen and 1600 kHz for @xmath . For the @xmath state, the difference
amounts to @xmath kHz for atomic hydrogen and to 213 kHz for @xmath .

These figures should be compared to the current experimental precision.
The most accurately measured transition to date is the 1S–2S frequency
in hydrogen; it has been measured with to a relative accuracy of @xmath
parts in @xmath or @xmath [ 42 ] . This experimental progress is due in
part to the use of frequency chains that bridge the range between
optical frequencies and the microwave cesium time standard. The accuracy
of the measurement is likely to be improved by an order of magnitude in
the near future [ 42 , 45 ] . With trapped hydrogen atoms, it should be
feasible to observe the 1S–2S frequency with an experimental linewidth
that approaches the @xmath natural width of the 2S level [ 46 , 47 ] .

The apparent convergence of the perturbation series in @xmath is slow.
Our all-order numerical calculation presented here essentially
eliminates the uncertainty from unevaluated higher-order analytic terms,
and we obtain results for the self energy remainder function @xmath with
a precision of roughly @xmath for the ground state of atomic hydrogen
and @xmath for the @xmath state.

In the evaluation, we take advantage of resummation and convergence
acceleration techniques. The resummation techniques provide an efficient
method of evaluation of the Dirac-Coulomb Green function to a relative
accuracy of @xmath over a wide parameter range [ 43 ] . The convergence
acceleration techniques remove the principal numerical difficulties
associated with the singularity of the relativistic propagators for
nearly equal radial arguments [ 23 ] .

The one-photon self energy is about two orders of magnitude larger than
the other contributions to the Lamb shift in atomic hydrogen.
Comprehensive reviews of the various contributions to the Lamb shift in
hydrogenlike atoms in the full range of nuclear charge numbers @xmath –
@xmath have been given in Refs. [ 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 ] .

#### 1.3 Method of Evaluation

##### 1.3.1 Status of Analytic Calculations

The (real part of the) energy shift @xmath due to the electron self
energy radiative correction is usually written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a dimensionless quantity. In the following, the natural
unit system with @xmath and @xmath is employed. Note that @xmath is a
dimensionless function which depends for a given atomic state with
quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath and @xmath on only one argument (the
coupling @xmath ). For excited states, the (nonvanishing) imaginary part
of the self energy is proportional to the (spontaneous) decay width of
the state. We will denote here the real part of the self energy by
@xmath , exclusively. The semi-analytic expansion of @xmath about @xmath
for a general atomic state with quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath gives rise to the expression,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.2)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

For particular states, some of the coefficients may vanish. Notably,
this is the case for P states, which are less singular than S states at
the origin [see Eq. ( 1.4 ) below]. For the @xmath state ( @xmath ,
@xmath ), none of the terms in Eq. ( 1.2 ) vanishes, and we have,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.3)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The @xmath coefficients have two indices, the first of which denotes the
power of @xmath [including those powers implicitly contained in Eq. (
1.1 )], while the second index denotes the power of the logarithm @xmath
. For P states, the coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath vanish, and
we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

For S states, the self energy remainder function @xmath can be expanded
semi-analytically as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the “order” symbols o and O we follow the usual convention [ 52 , 53
] : the requirement is @xmath as @xmath , whereas @xmath fulfills the
weaker requirement @xmath as @xmath . For example, the expression @xmath
is @xmath but not @xmath . Because logarithmic terms corresponding to a
nonvanishing @xmath -coefficient must be expected in Eq. ( 1.5 ), the
symbol @xmath should be used to characterize the remainder, not @xmath .

For P states, the semi-analytic expansion of @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fact that @xmath vanishes has been pointed out in [ 44 ] . We list
below the analytic coefficients and the Bethe logarithms relevant to the
atomic states under investigation. For the ground state, the
coefficients @xmath and @xmath were obtained in [ 33 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57
, 58 , 59 ] , the correction term @xmath was found in [ 60 , 61 , 62 ] ,
and the higher-order binding corrections @xmath and @xmath were
evaluated in [ 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 32 ] . The
results are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The Bethe logarithm @xmath has been evaluated in [ 72 ] and [ 73 , 74 ,
75 , 76 , 77 ] as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the 2S state, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The Bethe logarithm @xmath has been evaluated (see [ 72 , 73 , 74 , 75 ,
76 , 77 ] , the results exhibit varying accuracy) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

It might be worth noting that the value for @xmath given in [ 78 ]
evidently contains a typographical error. Our independent re-evaluation
confirms the result given in Eq. ( 1.10 ), which was originally obtained
in [ 72 ] to the required precision. For the @xmath state we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that a general analytic result for the logarithmic correction
@xmath as a function of the bound state quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath can be inferred from Eq. (4.4a) of [ 68 , 69 ] upon
subtraction of the vacuum polarization contribution implicitly contained
in the quoted equation. The Bethe logarithm for the 2P states reads [ 72
, 79 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because the Bethe logarithm is an inherently nonrelativistic quantity,
it is spin-independent and therefore independent of the total angular
momentum @xmath for a given orbital angular momentum @xmath . For the
@xmath state the analytic coefficients are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We now consider the limit of the function @xmath as @xmath . The
higher-order terms in the potential expansion (see Fig. 1.3 below) and
relativistic corrections to the wavefunction both generate terms of
higher order in @xmath which are manifest in Eq. ( 1.2 ) in the form of
the nonvanishing function @xmath which summarizes the effects of the
relativistic corrections to the bound electron wave function and of
higher-order terms in the potential expansion. For very soft virtual
photons, the potential expansion fails and generates an infrared
divergence which is cut off by the atomic momentum scale, @xmath . This
cut-off for the infrared divergence is one of the mechanisms which lead
to the logarithmic terms in Eq. ( 1.2 ). Some of the nonlogarithmic
terms in relative order @xmath in Eq. ( 1.2 ) are generated by the
relativistic corrections to the wave function. The function @xmath does
not vanish, but approaches a constant in the limit @xmath . This
constant can be determined by analytic or semi-analytic calculations; it
is referred to as the @xmath coefficient, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The evaluation of the coefficient @xmath has drawn a lot of attention
for a long time [ 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 32 ] . For the 2S state, there is
currently only one accurate analytic result available,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the @xmath state, the analytically obtained result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for the @xmath state, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The analytic evaluations essentially rely on an expansion of the
relativistic Dirac-Coulomb propagator in powers of the binding field,
i.e. in powers of Coulomb interactions of the electron with the nucleus.
In numerical evaluations, the binding field is treated
nonperturbatively, and no expansion is performed.

##### 1.3.2 Formulation of the Numerical Problem

Numerical cancellations are severe for small nuclear charges. In order
to understand the origin of the numerical cancellations it is necessary
to consider the renormalization of the self energy. The renormalization
procedure postulates that the self energy is essentially the effect on
the bound electron due to the self interaction with its own radiation
field, minus the same effect on a free electron which is absorbed in the
mass of the electron and therefore not observable. The self energy of
the bound electron is the residual effect obtained after the subtraction
of two large quantities. Terms associated with renormalization
counterterms are of order @xmath in the @xmath -expansion, whereas the
residual effect is of order @xmath [see Eq. ( 1.1 )]. This corresponds
to a loss of roughly @xmath significant digits at @xmath . Consequently,
even the precise evaluation of the one-photon self energy in a Coulomb
field presented in [ 80 ] extends only down to @xmath . Among the self
energy corrections in one-loop and higher-loop order, numerical
cancellations in absolute terms are most severe for the one -loop
problem because of the large size of the effect of the one-loop self
energy correction on the spectrum.

For our high-precision numerical evaluation, we start from the
regularized and renormalized expression for the one-loop self energy of
a bound electron,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.18)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath denotes the Dirac-Coulomb propagator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the @xmath -dependent (cutoff-dependent) one-loop
mass-counter term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The photon propagator @xmath in Eq. ( 1.18 ) in Feynman gauge reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The contour @xmath in Eq. ( 1.18 ) is the Feynman contour, whereas the
contour @xmath is depicted in Fig. 1.1 . The contour @xmath is employed
for the @xmath -integration in the current evaluation [see the last line
of Eq. ( 1.18 )]. The energy variable @xmath in Eq. ( 1.19 ) therefore
assumes the value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Dirac energy of the atomic state, and @xmath denotes
the complex-valued energy of the virtual photon. It is understood that
the limit @xmath is taken after all integrals in Eq. ( 1.18 ) are
evaluated.

The integration contour for the complex-valued energy of the virtual
photon @xmath in this calculation is the contour @xmath employed in [ 81
, 82 , 83 , 80 ] and depicted in Fig. 1.1 . The integrations along the
low-energy contour @xmath and the high-energy contour @xmath in Fig. 1.1
give rise to the low- and the high-energy contributions @xmath and
@xmath to the self energy, respectively. Here, we employ a further
separation of the low-energy integration contour @xmath into an infrared
contour @xmath and a middle-energy contour @xmath shown in Fig. 1.2 .
This separation gives rise to a separation of the low-energy part @xmath
into the infrared part @xmath and the middle-energy part @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the low- @xmath systems discussed here, all complications which
arise for excited states due to the decay into the ground state are
relevant only for the infrared part. Except for the further separation
into the infrared and the middle-energy part, the same basic formulation
of the self energy problem as in [ 81 ] is used. This leads to the
following separation,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Integration along these contours gives rise to the infrared, the
middle-energy, and the high-energy contributions to the energy shift.
For all of these contributions, lower-order terms are subtracted in
order to obtain the contribution to the self energy of order @xmath . We
obtain for the infrared part,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a dimensionless function of order one. The middle-energy
part is recovered as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and the high-energy part reads [ 81 , 82 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The infrared part is discussed in Sec. 1.4.1 . The middle-energy part is
divided into a middle-energy subtraction term @xmath and a middle-energy
remainder @xmath . The subtraction term @xmath is discussed in Sec.
1.4.2 , the remainder term @xmath is treated in Sec. 1.4.3 . We recover
the middle-energy term as the sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

A similar separation is employed for the high-energy part. The
high-energy part is divided into a subtraction term @xmath , which is
evaluated in Sec. 1.5.1 , and the high-energy remainder @xmath , which
is discussed in Sec. 1.5.2 . The sum of the subtraction term and the
remainder is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The total energy shift is given as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The scaled self energy function @xmath defined in Eq. ( 1.1 ) is
therefore obtained as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In analogy to the approach described in [ 81 , 83 , 80 ] , we define the
low-energy part as the sum of the infrared part and the middle-energy
part,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.31)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The limits for the functions @xmath and @xmath as @xmath were obtained
in [ 82 , 84 , 43 ] .

##### 1.3.3 Treatment of the divergent terms

The free electron propagator,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the full electron propagator @xmath defined in Eq. ( 1.19 ), fulfill
the following identity which is of particular importance for the
validity of the method used in the numerical evaluation of the all-order
binding correction to the Lamb shift,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

This identity leads naturally to a separation of the one-photon self
energy into a zero-vertex, a single-vertex and a many-vertex term. This
is represented diagrammatically in Fig. 1.3 .

All ultraviolet divergences which occur in the one-photon problem (mass
counter term and vertex divergence) are generated by the zero-vertex and
the single-vertex terms. The many-vertex term is ultraviolet safe. Of
crucial importance is the observation that one may additionally simplify
the problem by replacing the one-potential term with an approximate
expression in which the potential is “commuted to the outside”. The
approximate expression generates all divergences and all terms of lower
order than @xmath present in the one-vertex term. Unlike the raw
one-potential term, it is amenable to significant further simplification
and can be reduced to one -dimensional numerical integrals which can be
evaluated easily (a straightforward formulation of the self energy
problem requires a three -dimensional numerical integration). Without
this significant improvement, an all-order calculation would be much
more difficult at low nuclear charge, because the lower-order terms
would introduce significant further numerical cancellations.

Furthermore, the special approximate resolvent can be used effectively
for an efficient subtraction scheme in the middle-energy part of the
calculation. In the infrared part, such a subtraction is not used
because it would introduce infrared divergences.

We now turn to the construction of the special approximate resolvent,
which will be referred to as @xmath and will be used in this calculation
to isolate the ultraviolet divergences in the high-energy part (and to
provide subtraction terms in the middle-energy part). It is based on an
approximation to the first two terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (
1.34 ). The so-called one-potential term @xmath in Eq. ( 1.34 ) is
approximated by an expression in which the potential terms @xmath are
commuted to the outside,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the following identity is used,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In @xmath spinor space, this expression may be divided into a diagonal
and a non-diagonal part. The diagonal part is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The off-diagonal part is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define the resolvent @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

All divergences which occur in the self energy are generated by the
simplified propagator @xmath . We define the propagator @xmath as the
difference of @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath does not generate any divergences and leads to the middle-energy
remainder discussed in Sec. 1.4.3 and the high-energy remainder (Sec.
1.5.2 ).

#### 1.4 The Low-Energy Part

##### 1.4.1 The Infrared Part

The infrared part is given by

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (1.40)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

where relevant definitions of the symbols can be found in Eqs. ( 1.18 –
1.21 ), the contour @xmath is as shown in Fig. 1.2 , and the
unregularized version of the photon propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

may be used. The infrared part comprises the following integration
region for the virtual photon (contour @xmath in Fig. 1.2 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following Secs. 2 and 3 of [ 81 ] , we write @xmath as a
three-dimensional integral [see, e.g., Eqs. (3.4), (3.11) and (3.14)
ibid. ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the quantum number @xmath is the Dirac angular quantum number of
the intermediate state,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the orbital angular momentum quantum number and @xmath
is the total angular momentum of the bound electron. The functions
@xmath ( @xmath ) are the radial wave functions defined in Eq. (A.4) in
[ 81 ] for an arbitrary bound state (and in Eq. (A.8) in [ 81 ] for the
1S state). We define @xmath . The functions @xmath ( @xmath ) are the
radial Green functions, which result from a decomposition of the
electron Green function defined in Eq. ( 1.19 ) into partial waves. The
explicit formulas are given in Eq. (A.16) in [ 81 ] , and we do not
discuss them in any further detail, here.

The photon angular functions @xmath ( @xmath ) are defined in Eq. (3.15)
of Ref. [ 81 ] for an arbitrary bound state. In Eq. (3.17) in [ 81 ] ,
specific formulas are given for the 1S state. In Eqs. (2.2), (2.3) and
(2.4) of [ 83 ] , the special cases of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath states
are considered. Further relevant formulas for excited states can be
found in [ 85 ] . The photon angular functions depend on the energy
argument @xmath , but this dependence is usually suppressed. The
summation over @xmath in Eq. ( 1.44 ) extends over all negative and all
positive integers, excluding zero. We observe that the integral is
symmetric under the interchange of the radial coordinates @xmath and
@xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The following variable substitution,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

is made, so that @xmath and @xmath . The scaling variable @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Jacobian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath is given by,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.50)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the last line we define implicitly the terms @xmath for @xmath
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the definition ( 1.50 ), we obtain for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.52)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The specification of the principal value (P.V.) is necessary for the
excited states of the L shell, because of the poles along the
integration contour which correspond to the spontaneous decay into the
ground state. Here we are exclusively concerned with the real part of
the energy shift, as specified in Eq. ( 1.40 ), which is equivalent to
the specification of the principal value in ( 1.52 ). Evaluation of the
integral over @xmath is facilitated by the subtraction of those terms
which generate the singularities along the integration contour (for
higher excited states, there can be numerous bound state poles, as
pointed out in [ 85 , 2 ] ). For the 2S and @xmath states, only the pole
contribution from the ground state must be subtracted. For the @xmath
state, pole contributions originating from the 1S, the 2S and the @xmath
states must be taken into account. The numerical evaluation of the
subtracted integrand proceeds along ideas outlined in [ 83 , 85 ] and is
not discussed here in any further detail.

The scaling parameter @xmath for the integration over @xmath is chosen
to simplify the exponential dependence of the function @xmath defined in
Eq. ( 1.50 ). The main exponential dependence is given by the
relativistic radial wave functions (upper and lower components). Both
components [ @xmath and @xmath ] vary approximately as (neglecting
relatively slowly varying factors)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The scaling variable @xmath , expanded in powers of @xmath , is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.53)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, @xmath is just twice the inverse of the Bohr radius @xmath in
the nonrelativistic limit. The product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

[which occurs in Eq. ( 1.50 )] depends on the radial arguments
approximately as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the main dependence as given by the term @xmath is exactly the
weight factor of the Gauß-Laguerre integration quadrature formula. The
deviation from the exact @xmath –type behavior becomes smaller as @xmath
. This is favorable because the region near @xmath gives a large
contribution to the integral in ( 1.52 ).

The sum over @xmath in Eq. ( 1.50 ) is carried out locally, i.e. for
each set of arguments @xmath . The sum over @xmath is absolutely
convergent. For @xmath , the convergence of the sum is governed by the
asymptotic behavior of the Bessel functions which occur in the photon
functions @xmath ( @xmath ) [see Eqs. (3.15) and (3.16) in [ 81 ] ]. The
photon functions contain products of two Bessel functions of the form
@xmath where @xmath stands for either @xmath or @xmath , the index
@xmath is in the range @xmath . The argument is either @xmath or @xmath
. The asymptotic behavior of the two relevant Bessel functions for large
@xmath (and therefore large @xmath ) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This implies that when @xmath , the function @xmath vanishes with
increasing @xmath approximately as @xmath . This rapidly converging
asymptotic behavior sets in as soon as @xmath [see Eqs. ( 1.22 ) and (
1.4.1 )]. Due to the rapid convergence for @xmath , the maximum angular
momentum quantum number @xmath in the numerical calculation of the
infrared part is less than @xmath . Note that because @xmath in the
infrared part, @xmath .

The integration scheme is based on a crude estimate of the dependence of
the integrand @xmath defined in Eq. ( 1.50 ) on the integration
variables @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The main contribution to the
integral is given by the region where the arguments of the Whittaker
functions as they occur in the Green function [see Eq. (A.16) in [ 81 ]
] are much larger than the Dirac angular momentum,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see also p. 56 of [ 82 ] ). We assume the asymptotic form of the Green
function given in Eq. (A.3) in [ 82 ] applies and attribute a factor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to the radial Green functions @xmath as they occur in Eq. ( 1.50 ). Note
that relatively slowly varying factors are replaced by unity. The
products of the radial wave functions @xmath and @xmath , according to
the discussion following Eq. ( 1.53 ), behave as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for large @xmath . The photon functions @xmath in Eq. ( 1.50 ) give rise
to an approximate factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore [see also Eq. (2.12) in [ 82 ] ], we base our choice of the
integration routine on the approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . The three-dimensional integral in ( 1.52 ) is evaluated by
successive Gaussian quadrature. Details of the integration procedure can
be found in [ 43 ] .

In order to check the numerical stability of the results, the
calculations are repeated with three different values of the fine
structure constant @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

These values of the fine-structure constant are close to the 1998 CODATA
recommended value of @xmath [ 86 ] . The calculation was parallelized
using the Message Passing Interface (MPI) and carried out on a cluster
of Silicon Graphics workstations and on an IBM 9276 SP/2 multiprocessor
system. The results for the infrared part, @xmath defined in Eq. ( 1.24
), are given in Table 1.1 for a value of @xmath . This value of @xmath
will be used exclusively in the numerical evaluations presented here.
For numerical results obtained by employing the values of @xmath and
@xmath [see Eq. ( 1.58 )] we refer to [ 43 ] .

##### 1.4.2 The Middle-Energy Subtraction Term

The middle-energy part is given by

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (1.59)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

where relevant definitions of the symbols can be found in Eqs. ( 1.18
)–( 1.21 ) and in Eq. ( 1.41 ). The middle-energy part comprises the
following integration region for the virtual photon (contour @xmath in
Fig. 1.2 ),

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.60)
  -- -- -- --------

The numerical evaluation of the middle-energy part is simplified
considerably by the decomposition of the relativistic Dirac-Coulomb
Green function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined in ( 1.38 ) and represents the sum of an
approximation to the so-called zero- and one-potential terms generated
by the expansion of the Dirac-Coulomb Green function @xmath in powers of
the binding field @xmath . We define the middle-energy subtraction term
@xmath as the expression obtained upon substitution of the propagator
@xmath for @xmath in Eq. ( 1.59 ). The propagator @xmath is simply
calculated as the difference of @xmath and @xmath [see Eq. ( 1.39 )]. A
substitution of the propagator @xmath for @xmath in Eq. ( 1.59 ) leads
to the middle-energy remainder @xmath which is discussed in Sec. 1.4.3 .
We provide here the explicit expressions

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (1.62)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (1.63)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

Note that the decomposition of the Dirac-Coulomb Green function as in (
1.61 ) is not applicable in the infrared part, because of numerical
problems for ultra-soft photons (infrared divergences). Rewriting ( 1.62
) appropriately into a three-dimensional integral [ 81 , 82 , 43 ] , we
have

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (1.64)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

The function @xmath is defined in analogy to the function @xmath defined
in Eq. ( 1.44 ) for the infrared part. Also, we define a function @xmath
in analogy to the function @xmath given in Eq. ( 1.50 ) for the infrared
part, which will be used in Eq. ( 1.67 ) below. We have,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.65)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The expansion of the propagator @xmath into partial waves is given in
Eqs. (5.4) and (A.20) in [ 81 ] and in Eqs. (D.37) and (D.42) in [ 43 ]
. This expansion leads to the component functions @xmath . The terms
@xmath in the last line of Eq. ( 1.65 ) read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these definitions, the middle-energy subtraction term @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The subtracted lower-order terms yield,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The three-dimensional integral ( 1.67 ) is evaluated by successive
Gaussian quadrature. Details of the integration procedure can be found
in [ 43 ] . The numerical results are summarized in the Table 1.2 .

##### 1.4.3 The Middle-Energy Remainder

The remainder term in the middle-energy part involves the propagator
@xmath defined in Eq. ( 1.39 ), @xmath , where @xmath is defined in (
1.19 ) and @xmath is given in ( 1.38 ). In analogy to the middle-energy
subtraction term, the middle-energy remainder can be rewritten as a
three-dimensional integral,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.70)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we implicitly define the terms @xmath in analogy with the infrared
part Eq. ( 1.50 ). The functions @xmath are obtained as the difference
of the expansion of the full propagator @xmath and the simplified
propagator @xmath into angular momenta,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are listed in Eq. (A.16) in [ 81 ] and in Eq. (D.43) in
[ 43 ] , and the @xmath have already been defined in Eqs. (5.4) and
(A.20) in [ 81 ] and in Eqs. (D.37) and (D.42) in [ 43 ] . There are no
lower-order terms to subtract, and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The three-dimensional integral ( 1.69 ) is evaluated by successive
Gaussian quadrature. Details of the integration procedure are provided
in [ 43 ] . Numerical results for the middle-energy remainder @xmath ,
are summarized in Table 1.2 for the K- and L-shell states.

For the middle-energy part, the separation into a subtraction and a
remainder term has considerable computational advantages which become
obvious upon inspection of Eqs. ( 1.68 ) and ( 1.72 ). The subtraction
involves a propagator whose angular components can be evaluated by
recursion [ 82 , 43 ] , which is computationally time-consuming. Because
the subtraction term involves lower-order components [see Eq. ( 1.25 )],
it has to be evaluated to high precision numerically (in a typical case,
a relative accuracy of @xmath is required). This high precision requires
in turn a large number of integration points for the Gaussian
quadratures, which is possible only if the numerical evaluation of the
integrand is not computationally time-consuming. For the remainder term,
no lower-order terms have to be subtracted, and the relative accuracy
required of the integrals is in the range of @xmath . A numerical
evaluation to this smaller level of precision is feasible although the
calculation of the Green function @xmath is computationally more
expensive than that of @xmath [ 81 , 82 , 43 ] . The separation of the
high-energy part into a subtraction term and a remainder term, which is
discussed in Sec. 1.5 , is motivated by analogous considerations as for
the middle-energy part. In the high-energy part, this separation is even
more important than in the middle-energy part, because of the occurrence
of infinite terms which need to be subtracted analytically before a
numerical evaluation can proceed [see Eq. ( 1.82 ) below].

We now summarize the results for the middle-energy part. The
middle-energy part is the sum of the middle-energy subtraction term
@xmath and the middle-energy remainder @xmath [see also Eq. ( 1.27 )].
Numerical results are summarized in Table 1.2 for the K- and L-shell
states. The low-energy part @xmath is defined as the sum of the infrared
contribution @xmath and the middle-energy contribution @xmath [see Eq. (
1.32 )]. The results for @xmath are provided in the Table 1.3 for the K-
and L-shell states. The limits for the low-energy part as a function of
the bound state quantum numbers can be found in Eq. (7.80) of [ 43 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.73)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The leadings asymptotics for the states under investigation are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These asymptotics are consistent with the numerical data in Table 1.3 .
For S states, the low-energy contribution @xmath diverges
logarithmically as @xmath , whereas for P states, @xmath approaches a
constant as @xmath . The leading logarithm is a consequence of an
infrared divergence cut off by the atomic momentum scale. It is a
nonrelativistic effect which is generated by the nonvanishing
probability density of S waves at the origin in the nonrelativistic
limit. The presence of the logarithmic behavior for S states
[nonvanishing @xmath -coefficient, see Eqs. ( 1.2 ) and ( 1.3 )] and its
absence for P states is reproduced consistently by the data in Table 1.3
.

#### 1.5 The High-Energy Part

##### 1.5.1 The High-Energy Subtraction Term

The high-energy part is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.75)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where relevant definitions of the symbols can be found in Eqs. ( 1.18
)–( 1.21 ), and the contour @xmath is as shown in Fig. 1.1 . The
high-energy part comprises the following integration region for the
virtual photon,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The separation of the high-energy part into a subtraction term and a
remainder is accomplished as in the middle-energy part [see Eq. ( 1.61
)] by writing the full Dirac-Coulomb Green function @xmath [Eq. ( 1.19
)] as @xmath . We define the high-energy subtraction term @xmath as the
expression obtained upon substitution of the propagator @xmath for
@xmath in Eq. ( 1.75 ), and a substitution of the propagator @xmath for
@xmath in Eq. ( 1.75 ) leads to the high-energy remainder @xmath which
is discussed in Sec. 1.5.2 . The subtraction term (including all
divergent contributions) is generated by @xmath , the high-energy
remainder term corresponds to @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.77)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.78)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The contribution @xmath corresponding to @xmath can be separated further
into a term @xmath , which contains all divergent contributions, and a
term @xmath , which comprises contributions of lower order than @xmath ,
but is convergent as @xmath . This separation is described in detail in
[ 81 , 84 ] . We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

We obtain for @xmath , which contains a logarithmic divergence as @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the contribution @xmath , an explicit analytic result is obtained in
Eq. (4.15) in [ 81 ] . This contribution is therefore not discussed in
any further detail, here. The contribution @xmath contains lower-order
terms,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Altogether we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.82)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The scaled function @xmath is given as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term @xmath falls naturally into a sum of four contributions [ 81 ]
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The functions @xmath ( @xmath ) are defined in Eqs. (4.18), (4.19) and
(4.21) in [ 81 ] (see also Eq. (3.6) in [ 83 ] ). The evaluation of the
high-energy subtraction term proceeds as outlined in [ 81 , 82 , 83 ] ,
albeit with an increased accuracy and improved calculational methods in
intermediate steps of the calculation in order to overcome the severe
numerical cancellations in the low- @xmath region. We recover @xmath as
the sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scaled function @xmath [see also Eqs. ( 1.26 ) and ( 1.28 )] is
obtained as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

The limits of the contributions @xmath and @xmath as @xmath have been
investigated in [ 81 , 84 , 83 ] . For the contribution @xmath , the
result can be found in Eq. (3.5) in [ 83 ] . The limits of the functions
@xmath ( @xmath ) as @xmath are given as a function of the atomic state
quantum numbers in Eq. (3.8) in [ 83 ] . For the scaled high-energy
subtraction term @xmath , the limits read (see Eq. (3.9) in [ 83 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.88)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Therefore, the explicit forms of the limits for the states under
investigation are,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Numerical results for @xmath , which are presented in Table 1.4 ,
exhibit consistency with the limits in Eq. ( 1.5.1 ).

##### 1.5.2 The High-Energy Remainder

The remainder term in the high-energy part involves the propagator
@xmath defined in Eq. ( 1.39 ), @xmath , where @xmath is defined in (
1.19 ) and @xmath is given in ( 1.38 ). The evaluation proceeds in
complete analogy to the calculation of the middle-energy remainder term
(Sec. 1.4.3 ). The only difference lies in the different integration
region for the photon energy, which is given – for the high-energy part
– in Eq. ( 1.76 ). The photon energy integration variable @xmath is
conveniently expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

The method of integration is described in [ 43 , 12 ] , and we do not
discuss any further details, here. We focus instead on the convergence
acceleration technique used in the evaluation.

In analogy with the middle-energy remainder, we may write the integrand
@xmath which is defined in complete analogy to ( 1.70 ) as a sum over
angular momenta (“partial waves”)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are defined in analogy to Eq. ( 1.70 ). Here, @xmath
represents the modulus of the Dirac angular momentum quantum number of
the virtual intermediate state. The asymptotic behaviour of the @xmath
for large @xmath is [see Eq. (4.7) in [ 82 ] ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

where “ @xmath ” is independent of @xmath . The series in Eq. ( 1.91 )
is slowly convergent for @xmath close to one, and the region near @xmath
is known to be problematic in numerical evaluations.

It is found that the convergence of the series ( 1.92 ) series near
@xmath can be accelerated very efficiently using the combined
nonlinear-condensation transformation (see [ 23 ] and Sec. 7.1.6 )
applied to the series @xmath where @xmath [see Eqs. ( 1.91 ) and ( 1.92
)]. The combined transformation (combination of the condensation
transformation and the Weniger transformation) was found to be
applicable to a wide range of slowly convergent monotone series (series
whose terms have the same sign), and many examples for its application
were given in Ref. [ 23 , 31 ] . For the numerical treatment of
radiative corrections in low- @xmath systems, the transformation has the
advantage of removing the principal numerical difficulties associated
with the slow convergence of angular momentum decompositions of the
propagators near their singularity for equal radial arguments.

All that remains to be discussed in the current section is the low-
@xmath limit of the energy shift

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the high-energy remainder @xmath , the limits as @xmath read [see
Eq. (4.15) in [ 83 ] ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.94)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For the atomic states under investigation, this leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.95)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### 1.5.3 Results for the High-Energy Part

The limit of the function @xmath as @xmath can be derived easily from
the Eqs. ( 1.88 ), ( 1.94 ) as a function of the bound state quantum
numbers. It reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.96)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For the atomic states investigated here, this expression yields the
numerical values,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.97)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Numerical results for the high-energy part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

are summarized in Table 1.4 . Note the apparent consistency of the
numerical results in Table 1.4 with their analytically obtained low-
@xmath limits in Eq. ( 1.5.3 ).

#### 1.6 Comparison to Analytic Calculations

The numerical results for the scaled function @xmath describing the self
energy defined in Eq. ( 1.1 ) are given in Table 1.5 , together with the
results for the nonperturbative function @xmath , which is implicitly
defined in Eq. ( 1.2 ). Results are provided for K and L shell states.
The numerical results for the remainder @xmath are obtained by
subtracting the analytic lower-order terms listed in Eq. ( 1.2 ) from
the complete numerical result for the scaled function @xmath . No
additional fitting is performed.

Analytic and numerical results at low @xmath can be compared by
considering the remainder function @xmath . Note that an inconsistency
in any of the analytically obtained lower-order terms would be likely to
manifest itself in a grossly inconsistent dependence of @xmath on its
argument @xmath ; this is not observed. For S states, the following
analytic model for @xmath is commonly assumed, which is motivated in
part by a renormalization-group analysis [ 87 ] and is constructed in
analogy with the pattern of the analytic coefficients @xmath in Eq. (
1.2 ) and ( 1.3 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.99)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The (probably nonvanishing) @xmath coefficient, which introduces a
triple logarithmic singularity at @xmath , hinders an accurate
comparison of numerical and analytic data for @xmath . A somewhat less
singular behavior is expected of the difference

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

because the leading logarithmic coefficients in any given order of
@xmath are generally assumed to be equal for all S states, which would
mean in particular

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we define @xmath as the difference of the values of the analytic
coefficients for the two lowest S states,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The function @xmath defined in Eq. ( 1.100 ) can be assumed to have the
following semi-analytic expansion around @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.104)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

In order to detect possible inconsistencies in the numerical and
analytic data for @xmath , we difference the data for @xmath , i.e., we
consider the following finite difference approximation to the derivative
of the function @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is perhaps not a priori obvious why this combination leads to a
sensible comparison of numerical and analytic data. This will be
explained in the sequel.

We denote the analytic and numerical limits of @xmath as @xmath as
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. Of course, we hope that these will
turn out to be equal. However, we temporarily leave open the possibility
of an inconsistency between numerical and analytic data by keeping
@xmath and @xmath as distinct variables. In order to illustrate how a
discrepancy could be detected by investigating the function @xmath , we
consider special cases of the function @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath ,
the exact result can be inferred exclusively and uniquely using the
analytic approach of Ref. [ 32 ] , and we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whereas for @xmath , which is determined by numerical data,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with a possibly different limit @xmath as @xmath , and for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we ignore higher-order analytic terms. Hence, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

A possible inconsistency (nonvanishing @xmath ) would influence the
value of @xmath . For @xmath , the value of @xmath is determined solely
by numerical data,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Of course, analogous relations hold for @xmath . This means that a
meaningful comparison of the analytic and numerical approaches can be
made by comparing the value @xmath , which is influenced by the term
@xmath , to the other values @xmath , which are independent of the
difference @xmath . We recall that the numerical data from Table 1.5
lead to the evaluation of the five values @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . A plot of the function @xmath serves two purposes:
(i) the values @xmath should exhibit apparent convergence to some
limiting value @xmath as @xmath , and this can be verified by inspection
of the plot, and (ii) a discrepancy between the analytic and numerical
approaches – as explained above – would result in a nonvanishing value
for @xmath , and it would introduce an inconsistency between the trend
in the values of @xmath , and the value of @xmath [see Eq. ( 1.109 )].

Among the different evaluations of @xmath for the ground state, the
result in [ 32 ] has the smallest quoted uncertainty. In Fig. 1.4 we
display a plot of @xmath for low nuclear charge @xmath . A value of
@xmath [ 32 , 9 , 88 ] is used in Fig. 1.4 . The results indicate very
good agreement between the numerical and analytic approaches to the Lamb
shift in the low- @xmath region up to the level of a few Hz in frequency
units for the low-lying atomic states (where @xmath is the principal
quantum number). The error bars represent the numerical uncertainty of
the values in Table 1.5 , which correspond to an uncertainty on the
level of @xmath in frequency units.

Analytic work on the correction @xmath has extended over three decades [
68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 32 ] . The complication arises that although the
calculations are in general analytic, some remaining one-dimensional
integrations could not be evaluated analytically because of the nature
of the integrals [see e.g. Eq. (6.96) in [ 32 ] ]. Therefore a
step-by-step comparison of the analytic calculations is difficult. An
additional difficulty is the isolation of those analytic terms which
contribute in a given order in @xmath , i.e. the isolation of only those
terms which contribute to @xmath . The apparent consistency of the
numerical and analytic data in Fig. 1.4 represents an independent
consistency check on the rather involved analytic calculations.

Our numerical results are not inconsistent with the analytic result [ 44
] for a higher-order logarithm,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

although they do not necessarily confirm it. As in [ 9 ] , we obtain as
an estimate @xmath (from the fit to the numerical data for both S
states). Logarithmic terms corresponding to the probably nonvanishing
@xmath coefficient should be taken into account for a consistent fit of
the corrections to @xmath . These highly singular terms are difficult to
handle with a numerical fitting procedure. The terms @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath furnish three more free parameters for the numerical fit, where
only five data points are available (in addition to the quantities
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which may also be regarded as free
parameters for the fitting procedure). The determination of @xmath by a
fit from the numerical data is much more stable than the determination
of the logarithmic correction @xmath . We briefly note that our
all-order evaluation essentially eliminates the uncertainty due to the
unknown higher-order analytic terms. It is interesting to note that the
same numerical methods are employed for both the S and P states in our
all-order (in @xmath ) calculation, whereas the analytic treatment of S
and P states differs [ 32 , 1 ] .

The comparison of numerical and analytic result is much less problematic
for P states, because the function @xmath is less singular [see Eqs. (
1.4 ) and ( 1.6 )]. For the 2P states, we observe that the function
@xmath has the same semi-analytic expansion about @xmath as the function
@xmath defined for S states in Eq. ( 1.100 ). We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.113)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Hence, we plot the function

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for @xmath in the region of low @xmath , with the notion that an
inconsistent analytic result for @xmath would lead to irregularity at
@xmath , in analogy with the S states. The numerical data shown in Fig.
1.5 appears to be consistent with the analytic results of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

obtained in [ 1 ] . For the @xmath state, see Fig. 6 of Ref. [ 12 ] . In
this context it may be interesting to note that analytic results
obtained in [ 1 , 2 ] for the higher-order binding corrections to 2P, 3P
and 4P states have recently been confirmed indirectly [ 89 ] .

### Chapter 2 Analytic Self–Energy Calculations for Excited States

#### 2.1 Orientation

Analytic calculations of the one-loop self energy in bound systems have
a long history, starting from Bethe’s seminal paper [ 33 ] , and have
meanwhile extended over more than five decades. The calculations are
based on an expansion of the effect into powers of the parameter @xmath
, where @xmath is the nuclear charge and @xmath is the fine-structure
constant (see e.g. [ 32 , 1 , 2 , 43 ] ). The expansion is
semi-analytic, i.e. it involves powers of @xmath and @xmath . Terms
which are of higher than leading order in @xmath are commonly referred
to as the binding corrections (see also Ch. 3 ). A certain
nonlogarithmic binding correction, known as the @xmath -coefficient, has
been of particular interest. For relevant formulas and definitions
regarding @xmath , we refer to Ch. 1 , especially to Eqs. ( 1.1 ) – (
1.6 ).

In this chapter, we present results of an analytic evaluation of
higher-order binding corrections to the one-loop self energy for excited
bound states of hydrogenlike systems. We focus on states with principal
quantum numbers @xmath and Dirac angular quantum numbers @xmath . The
current calculation represents a continuation of previous investigations
on the subject [ 1 , 2 ] .

The improved results for @xmath coefficients rely essentially on a more
compact code for the analytic calculations, written in the
computer-algebra package Mathematica [ 90 ] , which enables the
corrections to be evaluated semi-automatically. Intermediate expressions
with some 10,000 terms are encountered, and the complexity of the
calculations sharply increases with the principal quantum number @xmath
, and, as far as the complexity of the angular momentum algebra is
concerned, with the orbital angular momentum @xmath of the bound
electron. Calculations were performed, in part, on IBM RISC/6000
workstations, both at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
and at the Laboratoire Kastler–Brossel, and profited from the
availability of 2 GigaBytes of Random Access Memory.

Of crucial importance was the development of convergence acceleration
methods which were used extensively for the evaluation of remaining
one-dimensional integrals which could not be done analytically. These
integrals are analogous to expressions encountered in previous work [ 1
, 2 ] . The numerically evaluated contributions involve slowly
convergent hypergeometric series, and – in more extreme cases – infinite
series over partial derivatives of hypergeometric functions, and
generalizations of Lerch’s @xmath transcendent [ 91 , 92 ] . We have
found the Combined Nonlinear–Condensation Transformation [ 23 ] to be a
versatile method for the efficient numerical evaluation of the slowly
convergent series encountered in the evaluation of the @xmath
-coefficients.

Results are given below for the @xmath -coefficients with an absolute
precision of @xmath . As explained in detail in [ 32 , 1 , 2 ] , the
calculation of the one-loop self energy falls naturally into a high- and
a low-energy part ( @xmath and @xmath , respectively). In turn, the
low-energy part can be separated naturally into the nonrelativistic
dipole and the nonrelativistic quadrupole part, and into relativistic
corrections to the current, to the hamiltonian, to the wavefunction, and
to the energy of the bound state. For some states, severe numerical
cancellations are observed between these (low-energy) contributions to
the low-energy part of the self energy. In the final step of the
calculation, we observe additional numerical cancellations between the
high- and the low-energy part for the finite contributions to @xmath ,
beyond the necessary cancellation of the divergent contributions which
depend on the scale-separation parameter @xmath ; this parameter and the
mathematical method which is employed in the expansion of the self
energy are described and explained in Sec. 2.2 . For some of the
investigated atomic states, the absolute magnitude of the @xmath
-coefficients is as small as @xmath , although the largest single
contribution is always on the order of @xmath . This illustrates the
cancellations between the finite contributions to @xmath .

#### 2.2 The epsilon-Method

We discuss here, by way of example, the @xmath method employed in the
analytic calculation of the self energy in bound systems. This method is
very suitable [ 32 , 1 , 2 ] for the separation of the two different
energy scales for virtual photons: the nonrelativistic domain, in which
the virtual photon assumes values of the order of the atomic binding
energy, and the relativistic domain, in which the virtual photon assumes
values of the order of the electron rest mass. Different approximation
schemes and different asymptotic expansions are adequate for the two
different domains. Without these approximations and expansions, the
analytic evaluation of either the high- or the low-energy part would not
be feasible. Therefore, the @xmath method is also used for the treatment
of the highly excited atomic states which are the subject of (this part)
of the thesis. At the same time, the model example discussed here is
meant to illustrate the usefulness of the “ @xmath method” in a more
general context.

We will consider here a model problem with one “virtual photon”. The
separation into high-and low-energy photons necessitates the temporary
introduction of a parameter @xmath ; the dependence on @xmath cancels
when the high- and the low-energy parts are added together. We have,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
              @xmath               (2.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the fine structure constant, and @xmath is the nuclear
charge. The high-energy part is associated with photon energies @xmath ,
and the low-energy part is associated with photon energies @xmath .

In order to illustrate the procedure, we discuss a simple,
one-dimensional example: the evaluation of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the integration variable @xmath might be interpreted as the
“energy” of a “virtual photon”. The integral @xmath can be expressed in
terms of special functions,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind, and
@xmath denotes a hypergeometric function. An alternative integral
representation reads @xmath .

The purpose of the calculation is to derive a semi-analytic expansion of
@xmath in powers of @xmath and @xmath . The fine structure constant
@xmath takes the rôle of the expansion parameter @xmath in actual
calculations of the self energy. We discuss first the “high-energy part”
of the calculation. It is given by the expression

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For @xmath , we may expand

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

but this expansion is not applicable in higher orders to the domain
@xmath because of the appearance of inverse powers of @xmath (analogous
to an “infrared divergence” in QED).

The separation parameter @xmath acts an infrared regulator. After
expanding in @xmath [see Eq. ( 2.6 )], the resulting integrals in each
order of @xmath can be evaluated analytically. Subsequently, we expand
every term in the @xmath -expansion in powers of @xmath up to the order
@xmath , i.e. we keep only the divergent and constant terms in @xmath .
The result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here, the “ @xmath ”-symbol identifies a contribution for which @xmath
as @xmath , whereas the “ @xmath ”-symbol identifies the weaker
requirement @xmath as @xmath ; this is consistent with the standard
notation (see e.g. [ 53 ] ).

The contribution @xmath corresponds to the “high-energy part” in an
analytic calculation of the self energy, where the propagator of the
bound electron is explicitly expanded in powers of the fine structure
constant @xmath . Now we turn to the “low-energy part”. The expression
for the low-energy part ( @xmath ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The expansion ( 2.6 ) is not applicable in this energy domain; we
therefore have to keep the numerator of the integrand @xmath in
unexpanded form. However, we can expand the denominator @xmath of the
integrand in powers of @xmath ; because @xmath (with @xmath small), this
expansion in @xmath is in fact an expansion in @xmath – although the
situation is somewhat problematic in the sense that every term in the
@xmath -expansion gives rise to terms of arbitrarily high order in the
@xmath -expansion [see also Eq. ( 2.10 ) below].

The term @xmath is analogous to the Schrödinger–Coulomb propagator in
the evaluation of the self energy – it has to be kept in an unexpanded
form –, whereas the expansion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

corresponds to the expansion into the @xmath -expansion in the
low-energy part.

Every term in the expansion ( 2.9 ) gives rise to arbitrarily high-order
corrections in @xmath , but it starts with the power @xmath . For
example, we have for the leading term of order @xmath from Eq. ( 2.9 ),

  -- -- -- -- -------- --------
                       (2.10)
                       
              @xmath   
  -- -- -- -- -------- --------

Note that the terms generated in the orders @xmath and @xmath are needed
to cancel divergent contributions in respective orders of @xmath from
the high-energy part given in Eq. ( 2.6 ). The term of order @xmath from
( 2.9 ) results in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.11)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Altogether, we obtain for the low-energy part,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.12)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

When the high-energy part ( 2.7 ) and the low-energy part ( 2.12 ) are
added, the dependence on @xmath cancels, and we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In order to illustrate the analogy with the self energy calculation
presented here, we would like to point out that the dependence on @xmath
cancels out in the final result which is the sum of the high-energy part
@xmath given in Eq. ( 2.14 ) [for the two-loop case see Eq. ( 3.42 )]
and the low-energy part @xmath in Eq. ( 2.15 ) [for the two-loop case
see Eq. ( 3.58 )].

#### 2.3 Results for High– and Low–Energy Contributions

##### 2.3.1 P_1/2 states (kappa = 1)

Here and in the following subsections, we present results which have
been obtained for the high- and low-energy energy parts of the self
energy or all states with principal quantum number @xmath and orbital
angular quantum number @xmath . These results, combined with numerical
calculations for low-, intermediate and high nuclear charge, allow to
reliably estimate quantum electrodynamic (QED) radiative corrections for
any atomic state with principal quantum number @xmath . For the
definition of the scaled self energy function @xmath and of the analytic
@xmath -coefficients, see Eqs. ( 1.1 ) – ( 1.6 ). The results are given
in terms of the expansion parameter @xmath and the scale-separation
parameter @xmath , whose rôle in the calculation is explained in Sec.
2.2 .

For @xmath states, we obtain for the following results for the high- and
low-energy parts. The @xmath high-energy part is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here and in the following, @xmath is the Bethe logarithm for which very
accurate values are available [ 73 , 74 , 75 , 76 , 77 , 72 , 79 ] .

##### 2.3.2 P_3/2 states (kappa = -2)

The obtained results read as follows. The @xmath high-energy part reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 2.3.3 D_3/2 states (kappa = 2)

The results obtained for states with @xmath read as follows. @xmath
high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 2.3.4 D_5/2 states (kappa = -3)

For @xmath states with Dirac quantum number @xmath , the results read as
follows. For the @xmath high-energy part, we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 2.3.5 F_5/2 states (kappa = 3)

Now we turn our attention to @xmath states. We have for the @xmath
high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 2.3.6 F_7/2 states (kappa = -4)

States with @xmath yield the following results. We obtain for the @xmath
state (high-energy part):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath high-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath low-energy part:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 2.3.7 G_7/2 states (kappa = 4)

@xmath and @xmath states involve the most problematic angular momentum
algebra of all atomic states considered here. We obtain,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for the low-energy part,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 2.3.8 G_9/2 states (kappa = -5)

We conclude by investigating @xmath states, where the high-energy part
reads ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the low-energy part reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.4 Summary of Results

By adding the high- and low-energy parts given in Secs. 2.3.1 – 2.3.8 ,
we obtain the following results for the self energy. For all atomic
states, the dependence on the scale-separating parameter @xmath cancels
when the low- and the high-energy parts are added, in agreement with the
principal idea of the @xmath -method described in Sec. 2.2 . The
coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can then be read off according
to the definitions contained in Eqs. ( 1.1 ) – ( 1.6 ).

#### 2.5 Typical Cancellations

As already emphasized in Sec. 2.1 , severe numerical cancellations are
encountered in the calculation of the @xmath -coefficients. These
cancellations will be illustrated here in Tables 2.8 and 2.9 for the
@xmath state.

#### 2.6 Observations

It is hoped that the analytic calculations described in the previous
sections will be supplemented in the near future by a numerical
treatment of the problem, which follows the lines indicated in Ch. 1 .
Work performed recently on relevant angular functions [ 93 ] is expected
to become useful in that context. In order to facilitate the comparisons
and consistency checks which will be of relevance for the numerical
calculations, we report here on a number of observations which should
facilitate the comparison of numerical and analytic approaches to the
self energy problem. They are relevant for all atomic states under
investigation here.

(i) Our analytic calculations for the high-energy part establish the
structure of nonvanishing @xmath , @xmath and @xmath -coefficients for
the states under investigation.

(ii) For a given @xmath quantum number, the coefficients increase in
absolute magnitude with increasing principal quantum number @xmath .
This is the case for Bethe logarithms, for @xmath coefficients and also
for @xmath coefficients. This behavior is consistent with the phenomenon
that relativistic corrections to the self energy become more important
as @xmath increases.

(iii) For a given principal quantum number @xmath , the coefficients
decrease in absolute magnitude with increasing @xmath . As a function of
the nuclear charge number @xmath , the plots of @xmath against @xmath
should become “more flat” as @xmath increases for a given @xmath [ 94 ]
.

(iv) The @xmath coefficients, which represent the dominant relativistic
correction to @xmath , all have the same (positive) sign for states with
@xmath quantum numbers @xmath . This “same-sign” pattern is also true of
the @xmath coefficients. Because @xmath is the dominant correction in
the order @xmath due to the enhancement by the large logarithm, this
observation explains why, in general, the qualitative dependence (on the
nuclear charge number @xmath ) of the self energy correction for the
highly excited states is the same for the states with @xmath (see [ 94 ]
).

(v) @xmath -coefficients are different for @xmath and @xmath states, but
the spin dependence vanishes for higher orbital angular momentum @xmath
. Consequently, @xmath -coefficients are the same e.g. for @xmath and
@xmath states, or for @xmath and @xmath states etc. This can be easily
checked against numerical results.

Preliminary results indicate satisfactory consistency between the
analytic and numerical approaches to the self energy problem for highly
excited states [ 95 ] .

### Chapter 3 The Two–Loop Self–Energy

#### 3.1 Orientation

In the current Chapter, we investigate two-loop higher-order binding
corrections to the fine structure, which contribute to the
spin-dependent part of the Lamb shift. Our calculation focuses on the
so-called “two-loop self energy” involving two virtual closed photon
loops. For bound states, this correction has proven to be notoriously
difficult to evaluate. The calculation of the binding corrections to the
bound-state two-loop self energy is simplified by a separate treatment
of hard and soft virtual photons. The two photon-energy scales are
matched at the end of the calculation. We present results for the
fine-structure difference of the two-loop self energy through the order
of @xmath .

#### 3.2 Introduction to the Two–Loop Self–Energy

As already discussed in Secs. 1.3.1 and 2.1 – 2.3 , radiative
corrections can be described – for atomic systems with low nuclear
charge number – by a nonanalytic expansion in powers of the three
parameters (i) @xmath (the fine-structure constant), (ii) the product
@xmath ( @xmath is the nuclear charge number), and (iii) the logarithm
@xmath . The expansion in powers of @xmath , which is the perturbation
theory parameter in quantum electrodynamics (QED), corresponds to the
number of loops in the diagrams. The bound-state effects are taken into
account by the expansions in the two latter parameters (see also Ch. 2
). Higher-order terms in the expansions in powers of @xmath and @xmath
are referred to as the “binding corrections”. One of the historically
most problematic sets of Feynman diagrams in the treatment of the Lamb
shift for atomic systems has been the radiative correction due to two
closed virtual-photon loops shown in Fig. 3.1 .

Let us recall at this point that even the evaluation of higher-order
binding corrections to the one-loop self energy – see also Ch. 2 –,
which a priori should represent a less involved calculational challenge,
has represented a problem for analytic evaluations for over three
decades [ 96 , 70 , 71 , 32 , 1 , 2 , 9 ] . The energy shifts of the
bound states due to the radiative corrections are conveniently expressed
by expansion coefficients corresponding to the powers of @xmath and
@xmath ; the naming convention is that the power of @xmath and the power
of the logarithm are indicated as indices to the analytic
coefficients [see also Eq. ( 3.1 )] below. Because the expansion in both
the one-loop and the two-loop case starts with the fourth power of
@xmath , the non-vanishing coefficients carry indices @xmath and @xmath
for the one- and two-loop cases, respectively (with @xmath – see [ 97 ,
49 ] for comprehensive reviews).

Logarithmic corrections with @xmath can sometimes be inferred separately
in a much simplified approach, e.g. by considering infrared divergent
contributions to electron form factors. By contrast, the higher-order
non-logarithmic coefficients represent a considerable calculational
challenge. Realistically, i.e. with the help of current computer algebra
systems [ 90 ] , one can hope to evaluate non-logarithmic coefficients
of sixth order in @xmath . Complete results for the one-loop
higher-order correction @xmath for S and P states have only been
available recently [ 32 , 1 , 2 ] . Calculational difficulties have by
now precluded a successful evaluation of the corresponding coefficient
@xmath for the two-loop effect. Ground-work for the evaluation of @xmath
was laid in [ 98 ] . Here, we are concerned with the evaluation of the
fine-structure differences of the logarithmic and non-logarithmic
coefficients @xmath (where @xmath ), i.e. with the @xmath – @xmath
difference of these coefficients.

Using natural Gaussian units ( @xmath ), as it is customary for the
current type of calculation, we write the two-photon self energy in the
@xmath -expansion for P states in terms of @xmath -coefficients as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the remainder @xmath is of order @xmath . Relevant Feynman
diagrams are shown in Fig. 3.1 .

Here, @xmath denotes the electron mass (we write Eq. ( 3.1 ) in the
non-recoil limit, i.e. for an infinite nuclear mass). The double
logarithmic @xmath -coefficient is spin-independent, so that we have
@xmath . Here, we evaluate the fine-structure differences

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We follow the convention that @xmath denotes the “fine-structure part”
of a given quantity @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath , we provide complete
results. It is perhaps worth noting that the two-loop self energy for
bound states has represented a considerable challenge for theoretical
evaluations. Our investigation represents a continuation of previous
work on the two-loop problem (see e.g. [ 99 , 100 , 101 , 98 ] ). It is
probably a triviality to express that technical difficulties in the
calculation and its description in the following Sections cannot be
avoided.

For the description of the self energy radiative effects – mediated by
hard virtual photons –, we use the modified Dirac hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which approximately describes an electron subject to an external scalar
potential @xmath and an external vector potential @xmath . This modified
hamiltonian is still local in coordinate space. The Dirac matrices in (
3.3 ) are to be understood in the standard (Dirac) representation [ 34 ]
(in the sequel, we will also use the non-covariant notation @xmath and
@xmath ).

The argument @xmath of the electron form factors @xmath and @xmath in
Eq. ( 3.3 ) is to be interpreted as a Laplacian operator acting on all
quantities to the right (but not on the wave function of the bound
electron in evaluating @xmath ). In momentum space, the action of the
hamiltonian @xmath is described by the convolution @xmath . The form
factors – in momentum space – assume arguments according to the
replacement @xmath . In Eq. ( 3.3 ), radiative corrections are taken
into account in the sense of an effective theory via the inclusion of
the on-shell form factors @xmath and @xmath . Although the bound
electron is not an on-shell particle, the modified hamiltonian ( 3.3 )
can still approximately account for significant radiative systems with
low nuclear charge number @xmath . Of course, the hamiltonian ( 3.3 )
cannot offer a complete description of the bound electron. Recoil
effects cannot be described by a one-particle equation in principle ,
and vacuum-polarization effects are not contained in Eq. ( 3.3 ).
However, the effective description of self energy radiative corrections
mediated by hard virtual photons given by Eq. ( 3.3 ) will turn out to
be useful in the context of the current investigation of the two-loop
self energy.

Both of the form factors @xmath and @xmath entering in Eq. ( 3.3 ) are
infrared divergent, but this divergence is cut off in a natural way at
the atomic binding energy scale @xmath . The fact that on-shell form
factors can describe radiative corrections to the fine structure –
mediated by high-energy virtual photons – has been demonstrated
explicitly in [ 89 ] . The modified Dirac hamiltonian ( 3.3 ) and the
associated modified Dirac equation have been introduced – in the
one-loop approximation – in Ch. 7 of [ 34 ] [see for example Eqs. (7-77)
and (7-103) ibid. ]. The low-energy part of the calculation is carried
out using nonrelativistic approximations in the spirit of the simplified
treatment introduced in the previous one- and two-loop calculations [ 32
, 1 , 2 , 102 , 98 ] . This approach was inspired, in part, by various
attempts to formulate simplified low-energy (“nonrelativistic”)
approximations to quantum electrodynamics (“NRQED”), see e.g. [ 103 ,
104 ] . Both the high-energy and the low-energy contributions are
matched at the separation scale @xmath whose rôle in the calculation is
illustrated by the mathematical model example discussed in Sec. 2.2 .

In a two-loop calculation, either of the two virtual photons may have a
high or low energy as compared to the separation scale @xmath . A priori
, this necessitates [ 98 ] a separation of the calculation into three
different contributions: (i) both photon energies large, (ii) one photon
with a large and one with a small energy, and (iii) both photons with
small energies. For the particular problem at hand (the fine-structure
differences of @xmath and @xmath ), we are in the fortunate position
that effects caused by hard virtual photons (i) are described by the
modified Dirac hamiltonian ( 3.3 ), whereas the low-energy part
discussed in Sec. 3.5 below comprises both remaining contributions (ii)
and (iii).

We will continue by analyzing the two-loop form factors which enter into
Eq. ( 3.3 ); these will be treated in Sec. 3.3 . The calculation will be
split into two parts: the high-energy part discussed in Sec. 3.4 and the
low-energy part, which is treated along ideas introduced in [ 104 ] in
Sec. 3.5 .

#### 3.3 Two-loop Form Factors

In order to analyze the modified Dirac hamiltonian ( 3.3 ) through
two-loop order, we first have to investigate certain expansion
coefficients of the electronic @xmath and @xmath form factors which are
thoroughly discussed in the seminal papers [ 105 , 106 ] . For the
momentum transfer @xmath which is the argument of the two functions
@xmath and @xmath , we use the convention @xmath . The variable @xmath
in [ 105 , 106 ] is given as @xmath . When we evaluate radiative
corrections to the binding Coulomb field which is mediated by space-like
virtual photons, we have @xmath because for @xmath . We use the
conventions (see Eq. (1.2) in [ 105 ] ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

One and two-loop effects are denoted by upper indices 2 and 4,
respectively. This notation is motivated by the observation that
two-loop effects are of forth order in the quantum electrodynamic
interaction Lagrangian @xmath (in the Furry picture, which is used for
the description of bound states, the Coulomb interaction is taken out of
the interaction Lagrangian).

There are two different points of view regarding the choice of diagrams
to be included in the two-loop form factors, depending on whether the
self energy vacuum polarization diagram Fig. 3.2 is included in the
calculation or not. We will discuss both cases and give results with and
without the diagram shown in Fig. 3.2 taken into account.

First, we discuss results obtained for @xmath including the combined
self energy vacuum polarization diagram. In this case, the known results
for the slope @xmath and for @xmath , through two-loop order, read as
follows. From Eq. (1.11) of [ 105 ] , we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.5)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the forth-order coefficient has the numerical value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

According to Eq. (1.7) in [ 105 ] , the value of @xmath , through
two-loop order, reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the two-loop coefficient has the numerical value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now turn to the discussion of the slope @xmath . In view of
Eq. (1.20) of [ 105 ] (see also [ 107 ] ), we have (up to two-loop
order)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the coefficients @xmath are by definition infrared safe and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 3.9 ) and ( 3.10 ) uniquely determine the infrared divergent
contribution to @xmath . An analytic expressions for @xmath , @xmath
spacelike, has recently been obtained [ 108 , 109 , 110 , 111 ] in terms
of harmonic polylogarithms [ 112 , 113 ] . As a byproduct, an analytic
expression for the slope @xmath was found. The result reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A numerical result for @xmath , complementing the above analytic
expression, can easily be derived in combining Eq. (1.20), Eq. (1.30),
and Eq. (3.2) in [ 105 ] , as will be explained in the sequel. The
dispersion relation (1.30) in [ 105 ] reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the Cauchy principal value. Equation ( 3.12 )
applies also if we single out the two-loop effect and differentiate at
zero momentum transfer, and we obtain for the slope @xmath the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given in Eq. ( 3.8 ). The second term on the right-hand
side, denoted by @xmath , can be evaluated using the result for @xmath
presented in Eq. (3.2) in [ 105 ] ; it reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the last error is due to numerical integration, and use is made of
the natural variable [ 105 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In combining the result of Eq. ( 3.8 ) with Eqs. ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.14 ),
the result @xmath is obtained which is in agreement with ( 3.3 ).

Now we will provide results for the form factors obtained excluding the
self energy vacuum-polarization graph @xmath shown in Fig. 3.2 . These
results refer to the pure two-photon self energy diagrams shown in Fig.
3.1 . The two-loop self energy diagrams independently form a
gauge-invariant set. They represent a historically problematic
correction, and are the main subject of our investigation. The combined
self energy vacuum-polarization diagram, according to Eqs. (1.9) and
(1.10) in [ 106 ] – taking into account the subtracted dispersion
relation (1.30) of [ 105 ] – leads to the following corrections:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For the pure self energy graphs, which we would like to denote by the
symbol @xmath , we therefore obtain the following results,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the latter equality defines @xmath in analogy with Eqs. ( 3.9 )
and ( 3.3 ).

#### 3.4 High–Energy Part

Based on the modified Dirac hamiltonian ( 3.3 ), corrections to the
energy of the bound Dirac particle can be inferred. We will refer to the
energy corrections attributable to the @xmath and @xmath form factors as
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the index fs refers to the fine-structure terms, i.e. to the
result obtained by subtracting the value of the matrix element for a
@xmath state from the value of the same matrix element evaluated on a
@xmath state. A matrix element @xmath of a given operator @xmath is
evaluated as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that in evaluating these matrix elements, @xmath (the hermitian
conjugate of the Dirac wave function @xmath ) should be used (not the
Dirac adjoint @xmath ). The Dirac wave functions @xmath are expanded in
powers of @xmath up to the order relevant for the current investigation
of two-loop effects. This expansion avoids potential problems associated
with the logarithmic divergence of the Dirac wave function at the
origin.

For @xmath , up to the order of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

For P states, the nonrelativistic (Schrödinger) wave function – the
leading term in the @xmath -expansion of the Dirac wave function –
vanishes at @xmath , but the first relativistic correction gives a
finite contribution, resulting in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads – again up to the order of @xmath – to the following result
for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe that the derivative of the @xmath form factor has a physical
dimension of @xmath in natural units, giving the correct physical
dimension for @xmath . The correction due to @xmath in ( 3.3 ) reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

A particle in an external binding Coulomb field feels an electric field
@xmath – in momentum space – or @xmath in coordinate space. Vacuum
polarization corrections to @xmath lead to higher-order effects. The
correction @xmath splits up in a natural way into two contributions
@xmath and @xmath which are associated with @xmath and the slope @xmath
, respectively. @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The evaluation of the matrix element leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the purpose of the current investigation, the @xmath -component of
@xmath is selected only:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.27)
  -- -- -- --------

The matrix element @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

A transformation into coordinate space leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a function of the principal quantum number @xmath , the result for
@xmath reads:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.30)
  -- -- -- --------

This result involves the infrared divergent slope of the @xmath form
factor [see Eqs. ( 3.3 ) and ( 3.19 )]. We are thus faced with the
problem of matching the infrared divergence of the slope of the @xmath
form factor, expressed in terms of the fictitious photon mass @xmath ,
with the usual (energy matching parameter) @xmath introduced originally
in [ 32 ] . This can be done in two ways: (i) by matching the infrared
divergence of the rate of soft bremsstrahlung, calculated with a
fictitious photon mass @xmath , to a result of the same calculation,
carried out with an explicit infrared cut-off @xmath for the photon
energy. This way of calculation is described on pp. 361–362 of [ 34 ] .
It leads to the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matching procedure (ii) consists in a comparison of the result of
the application of the formalism considered above, and its application
to the high-energy part of the ground state Lamb shift, which is in
leading order given by the infrared divergence of the @xmath form
factor, and the result obtained by direct calculation of this
high-energy part in a non-covariant formalism with an explicit energy
cut-off @xmath , as it has been carried out in [ 32 ] . This second
matching procedure leads to the following result – in agreement with (
3.31 ) –,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, we are led to the replacement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

A comparison with the results in Eqs. ( 3.3 ), ( 3.19 ), and ( 3.36 )
reveals that the logarithmic divergence for the fine-structure
difference is given by a term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that we may anticipate at this stage the result for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Based on ( 3.30 ) and ( 3.33 ), we can express @xmath in terms of @xmath
and @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.36)
  -- -- -- --------

There is a third correction due to the effect of two one-loop
corrections on the electron vertices. Because we are only interested in
the fine structure, we isolate the terms which are proportional to the
spin-orbit coupling, and we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.37)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the nonrelativistic, spin-independent reduced
Schrödinger–Coulomb Green function [ 114 , 115 ] . The only
spin-dependence in ( 3.37 ) occurs in the coupling @xmath , and it can
be taken into account by an overall factor,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are therefore led to consider the “spin-independent version” of the
matrix element which occurs in Eq. ( 3.37 ) and obtain the following
result,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spin-dependence can be easily restored by considering Eq. ( 3.39 ).
The index “nP” in Eq. ( 3.40 ) means that the matrix element is
evaluated with the nonrelativistic, spin-independent (Schrödinger) wave
function. Alternatively, on may evaluate with either the @xmath or the
@xmath Dirac wave function and expand up to the leading order in @xmath
.

The evaluation of ( 3.40 ) can proceed e.g. by solving the differential
equation which defines the correction to the wave function induced by
@xmath , and subsequent direct evaluation of the resulting standard
integrals using computer algebra [ 90 ] . The final result for @xmath
reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This concludes the discussion of the high-energy part. The final result
for the high-energy part is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are given in Eqs. ( 3.23 ), (
3.27 ), ( 3.36 ), ( 3.41 ), respectively.

#### 3.5 Low–Energy Part

The low-energy part consists essentially of two contributions. Both
effects, denoted here @xmath and @xmath , can be obtained by a suitable
variation of the low-energy part of the one-loop self energy, by
considering the spin-dependent effects introduced by a further one-loop
electron anomalous magnetic moment interaction. The first of the two
terms, @xmath , is caused by spin-dependent higher-order effects in the
one-loop self energy, which receive additional corrections due to the
anomalous magnetic moment of the electron. The second term, @xmath , is
due to an anomalous magnetic moment correction to the electron
transition current, which can also be seen as a correction to the
radiation field of the electron due to its anomalous magnetic moment.

The leading-order low-energy part (see [ 32 ] ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to isolate the fine-structure effects, we should now consider
corrections to the wave function, to the current, to the hamiltonian and
to the energy of the bound state due to the spin-dependent relativistic
(spin-orbit) hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above hamiltonian @xmath is the last term in the modified Dirac
hamiltonian [right-hand side of Eq. ( 3.3 )], approximated for a
particle bound in a Coulomb field with the @xmath form factor evaluated
at zero momentum. The electric field in ( 3.44 ) corresponds to the
binding Coulomb interaction. The hamiltonian ( 3.44 ) describes the
modification of the spin-orbit interaction due to the anomalous magnetic
moment of the electron.

The nonrelativistic limit of @xmath is the spin-orbit coupling @xmath
given in Eq. ( 3.38 ), multiplied by a factor @xmath (the additional
factor 2 finds an explanation in [ 116 ] ). The resulting hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

takes into account magnetic vertex corrections in the framework of an
effective theory. Denoting the variation of the expression ( 3.43 )
mediated by @xmath with the symbol @xmath – in the spirit of the
notation introduced in [ 98 ] –, we obtain the contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the notation introduced in [ 1 , 2 ] , the contribution @xmath
is the sum of the fine-structure effects created by the
wave-function-correction @xmath , the first relativistic correction to
the energy @xmath , and the correction due to the relativistic
hamiltonian @xmath , each multiplied by a factor @xmath . The final
result for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

There is a further correction to the nonrelativistic effective coupling
to the radiation field due to the “anomalous spin-orbit hamiltonian” (
3.44 ). The correction, in the nonrelativistic limit, can be derived by
considering a Foldy–Wouthuysen transformation which by definition
diagonalizes the hamiltonian ( 3.44 ) in spinor space and also leads to
corrections to the current according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are standard Dirac matrices [ 34 ] , @xmath is a
spatial index, and @xmath is given in ( 3.44 ). The calculation is
carried out along ideas introduced in [ 1 ] and leads to the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

as a relativistic correction to the electron current which is simply
@xmath in the relativistic formalism and @xmath in the leading
nonrelativistic approximation. Again, following the notation introduced
in [ 1 , 2 ] , the resulting additional contribution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sum of ( 3.47 ) and ( 3.50 ) is just the @xmath –component of the
fine-structure difference of the one-loop self energy from [ 1 , 2 ] ,
multiplied by an additional factor @xmath . It can also be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath could be interpreted as a relativistic generalization of a
Bethe logarithm, which is @xmath -dependent. However, a significant
numerical fraction of the @xmath -dependence can be eliminated if the
factor @xmath is taken out of the final result. The evaluation of @xmath
has recently been performed in [ 117 ] with improved numerical methods
(see e.g. [ 23 ] ), and the following results have been obtained:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the uncertainty is due to numerical integration.

There is, as stated above, a further correction due to the explicit
modification of the transition current due to the anomalous magnetic
moment; it can be obtained through the replacement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

and must be considered in addition to the correction ( 3.48 ). A careful
consideration of the nonrelativistic limit of this correction to the
current, including retardation effects, leads to the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consequently, we find that the correction is effectively @xmath times
the retardation corrections to the transition current @xmath found in [
1 , 2 ] . We obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

In analogy with @xmath , this correction can favorably be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the basis of [ 1 , 2 , 117 ] , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The final result for the low-energy part is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath being given in Eqs. ( 3.51 ) and ( 3.56 ),
respectively.

We can now understand why it was possible to join the two contributions
with “mixed” and “low-and-low” energy virtual photons (ii) and (iii),
which were discussed in Sec. 3.2 , into a joint “low-energy part”. The
reason is simple: The effective hamiltonian ( 3.45 ) has no infrared
divergence, because it involves the low-energy limit of the magnetic
form factor @xmath , which is infrared safe in one-loop order according
to Eq. ( 3.9 ). Because the main contribution to the quantity @xmath is
caused by hard virtual photons, it is also justified to say that the
contribution of “low-and-low” energy virtual photons vanishes at the
order of interest for the current calculation (fine-structure
difference). In higher-loop order, the further infrared divergence
acquired by @xmath would lead to an infrared divergence in the effective
hamiltonian constructed in analogy with Eq. ( 3.45 ); this infrared
divergence would have to be attributed to a “mixed” contribution.

#### 3.6 Results for the Two–Loop Corrections

We have obtained analytic results for higher-order correction to the
two-loop self energy of P states in hydrogen-like systems. In our
calculation, we have analyzed the electron form factors through two-loop
order in Sec. 3.3 , and we have split the calculation into a high-energy
part with two hard virtual photons discussed in Sec. 3.4 , and a
low-energy part with at least one soft virtual photon analyzed in Sec.
3.5 . The final result for the contribution to the fine-structure energy
difference is obtained by adding the high-energy contributions @xmath –
@xmath given in Eqs. ( 3.23 ), ( 3.27 ), ( 3.36 ), ( 3.41 ), and the
low-energy effects @xmath and @xmath from Eqs. ( 3.51 ) and ( 3.56 ).
The dependence on @xmath cancels out in the final result which is the
sum of the high-energy part @xmath given in Eq. ( 3.42 ) and the
low-energy part @xmath defined in Eq. ( 3.58 ). This is also evident
when considering explicitly the Eqs. ( 3.36 ) and ( 3.51 ). The final
results for the analytic coefficients of order @xmath read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

[see also Eq. ( 3.35 )] and

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.60)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

where explicit numerical results for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be
found in Eqs. ( 3.17 ), ( 3.18 ) and ( 3.19 ), respectively. This result
refers to the pure self energy diagrams in Fig. 3.1 . The result reads
numerically for the principal quantum numbers @xmath –5,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.61)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.62)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.63)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

If it is desired to add in the combined self energy vacuum-polarization
diagram from Fig. 3.2 , then the form-factor results from Eqs. ( 3.6 ),
( 3.8 ) and ( 3.3 ) instead of the pure self energy results given in
Eqs. ( 3.17 ), ( 3.18 ) and ( 3.19 ) have to be used in evaluating (
3.60 ). When including the combined self energy vacuum-polarization
diagram from Fig. 3.2 , there is no further low-energy contribution, so
that the alternative set of numerical values for the form factors from
Eqs. ( 3.6 ), ( 3.8 ) and ( 3.3 ) fully takes into account the
additional effect of the diagram in Fig. 3.1 on the fine-structure in
the order of @xmath .

### Chapter 4 Spinless Particles in Bound–State Quantum Electrodynamics

#### 4.1 Orientation

We describe in this Chapter a simplified derivation of the relativistic
corrections of order @xmath for a bound system consisting of two
spinless particles. We devote special attention to pionium, the bound
system of two oppositely charged pions. The leading quantum
electrodynamic (QED) correction to the energy levels is of the order of
@xmath and due to electronic vacuum polarization. We analyze further
corrections due to the self energy of the pions, and due to recoil
effects, and we give a complete result for the scalar-QED leading
logarithmic corrections which are due to virtual loops involving only
the scalar constituent particles (the pions); these corrections are of
order @xmath for S states.

#### 4.2 Introduction to Spinless QED and Pionium

Exotic bound systems like pionium [ 118 , 119 ] (the bound system of two
oppositely charged pions) offer interesting possibilities for studies of
fundamental properties of quantum mechanical bound states: the interplay
between strong-interaction corrections and quantum electrodynamic
corrections is of prime interest, and the small length scales
characteristic of the heavy particles make it possible to explore
effects of the virtual excitations of the quantum fields in previously
unexplored kinematical regimes [ 4 , 3 , 6 ] . We do not wish to hide
the fact that any potential high-precision experiments in this area are
faced with various experimental difficulties. Our calculations address
QED corrections to the spectrum of bound systems whose constituent
particles are spinless; relativistic corrections to the decay lifetime
of pionium have recently been discussed in [ 120 ] in the context of the
DIRAC experiment at CERN.

Here, we report on results regarding the spectrum of a bound system
consisting of two spinless particles. We apply the simplified
calculational scheme employed in [ 40 ] for the relativistic and recoil
corrections to a bound system of two “non-Dirac” particles to the case
of two interacting spinless particles (see Sec. 4.3 ). We then recall
known results on leading-order vacuum polarization corrections in Sec.
4.4 and clarify the relative order-of-magnitude of the one- and two-loop
electronic vacuum polarization, the relativistic and recoil corrections
and the self energies in pionium (also in Sec. 4.4 ). We then provide an
estimate for the self energy in Sec. 4.5 , and we analyze the leading
recoil correction of order @xmath (the Salpeter correction) which leads
us to complete results for the scalar-QED logarithmic corrections of
order @xmath .

#### 4.3 Breit hamiltonian for Spinless Particles

We start from the Lagrangian for a charged spinless field coupled to the
electromagnetic field [see equations (6-50) – (6-51b) of [ 34 ] ],

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the field strength tensor @xmath reads @xmath . We use natural
Gaussian units with @xmath . The transition current for a free spinless
particle ( @xmath ) can be inferred from ( 4.1 ); it reads in momentum
space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This current now has to be expressed in terms of nonrelativistic wave
functions. Specifically, the @xmath -component has to reproduce the
normalization of the nonrelativistic (Schrödinger) wave function. By
contrast, according to Eq. ( 4.2 ) the zero-component of the current
reads @xmath in the nonrelativistic limit @xmath . The nonrelativistic
wave functions are normalized according to

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.3)
  -- -- -- -------

It is therefore evident that we cannot simply associate the relativistic
wave function @xmath with @xmath ; rather, we should define according to
Eqs. (13) – (14) of [ 40 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy of the free nonrelativistic particle (in
deriving low-energy effective interactions, one always expands about
free -particle amplitudes; all interactions are treated as
perturbations; note the analogy to nonrelativistic QED – NRQED – for
spinor particles [ 104 ] ). The Klein–Gordon current, in the presence of
external fields, reads in contrast to ( 4.2 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The zero-component of this current can be interpreted as a charge
density, which is not necessarily positive definite. Questions related
to the normalization of the Klein–Gordon wave functions in this case are
discussed in detail in [ 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 ] .

In terms of the Schrödinger wave function, the current is given as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mass of the particle. The atomic momenta @xmath and
@xmath in Eq. ( 4.7 ) are of order @xmath . As shown below, interactions
involving the spatial components @xmath of the transition current give
rise to relativistic contributions of order @xmath to the spectrum. This
is exactly the order of magnitude that is the subject of the current
investigation. Therefore, although Eq. ( 4.7 ) is only valid up to
corrections of relative order @xmath , these can be neglected because
the further corrections contribute to the energy levels at the order of
@xmath . Specifically, we can expect corrections proportional to @xmath
to the current @xmath when a systematic expansion of the nonrelativistic
current is performed; these terms are analogous to those obtained for
relativistic corrections to the current of spinor particles which can be
obtained via a Foldy–Wouthuysen transformation [ 1 , 125 ] .

In the following, the index S on the wave function will be dropped, and
the nonrelativistic amplitudes describing the two interacting particles
(with electric charges @xmath and @xmath ) will be denoted as @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. Following [ 40 ] , the Breit hamiltonian @xmath
in momentum space is related to the invariant scattering amplitude
@xmath and to the photon propagator @xmath in the following way [see
also equation (83,8) in [ 126 ] ]:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath . We employ a Coulomb-gauge photon propagator,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we can neglect the energy of the virtual photon in @xmath for the
derivation of next-to-leading order relativistic corrections. The
invariant scattering amplitude @xmath then reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We therefore identify

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We now transform to the center-of-mass frame in which @xmath , so that
the expression for @xmath becomes even simpler,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The formula (83,13) of [ 126 ] can now be employed in evaluating the
Fourier transform,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Breit hamiltonian, which we would like to denote by @xmath , is
obtained by adding to the Fourier transform of ( 4.12 ) the relativistic
correction to the kinetic energy. Denoting with @xmath the momentum
operator in the coordinate-space representation, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the order of @xmath , there is no contribution due to virtual
annihilation for spinless particles; corrections of this type would
enter only for positronium and dimuonium [ 6 ] because they are caused
by the spin-dependent part of the transition current [see Eqs. (83,20)
and (82,22) of [ 126 ] ], which is absent for spinless particles. For S
states, virtual annihilation is altogether prohibited by angular
momentum conservation.

The matrix elements of the Breit hamiltonian ( 4.14 ) for spinless
particles can be evaluated on nonrelativistic bound states via
computational techniques outlined in Sec. A3 of Ch. 1 of [ 116 ] . For
@xmath and @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the Breit energy for the energy levels of the bound system of two
spinless particles, including relativistic corrections of order @xmath .
Here, we keep @xmath as a parameter which denotes the nuclear charge
number in a bound system. Of course, for two particles each carrying an
elementary charge, @xmath has to be set to unity. The fine-structure
constant is denoted by @xmath . The result ( 4.15 ) agrees with previous
calculations [ 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 131 , 40 ] , notably with
Eq. (38) of [ 129 ] .

It is instructive to compare the result ( 4.15 ) with the known result
for a single-particle system of mass @xmath satisfying the Klein–Gordon
equation, bound to a nucleus with charge @xmath . According to
Eq. (2-86) of [ 34 ] , we obtain the “Klein–Gordon energy” (KG)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two results ( 4.15 ) and ( 4.16 ) are manifestly different in the
order of @xmath .

From ( 4.14 ) we conclude that the zitterbewegung term is absent for
spinless particles. However, this statement is in need of further
explanation because a considerable variety of physical interpretations
exists in the literature with regard to the zitterbewegung term. We
briefly expand: The Dirac @xmath -matrices fulfill @xmath ( @xmath is
the Dirac hamiltonian) as the relativistic generalization of the
velocity operator. By contrast, in the nonrelativistic formalism, we
have the analogous relation @xmath where @xmath is the Schrödinger
hamiltonian. Since the –matrices have eigenvalues @xmath , the magnitude
of the velocity of the electron – at face value – is equal to the
velocity of light at any given instant. On p. 106 of [ 132 ] , it is
argued that “the explanation for this fact is that the electron carries
out a fast irregular motion (“zitterbewegung”) – which is responsible
for the spin – whereas the mean velocity is given by the momentum @xmath
”. Note that the introduction of the Dirac matrix formalism is
necessitated by the need to describe the internal degrees of freedom of
the particle – the spin. On p. 71 of [ 34 ] , it is shown that the
zitterbewegung term can be traced back to the positional fluctuations
@xmath of the electron, and a connection is drawn to the Darwin term
which results naturally in the context of the Foldy–Wouthuysen
transformed Dirac hamiltonian. On pp. 117–118 of [ 133 ] and p. 62 of [
34 ] , it is argued that the momentum of a Dirac wave packet can be
associated in a natural way with the group velocity, but that in
addition to the group velocity term, there exist highly oscillatory
terms which represent the zitterbewegung. Similarly, on pp. 139–140 of [
133 ] , it is shown that the zitterbewegung term can also be interpreted
as arising from the interaction of the atomic electron with virtual
electron-positron pairs created in the Coulomb field of the nucleus.
This virtual electron-positron pair-creation is subject to the
uncertainty principle and can occur only for time intervals of the order
of @xmath (where we temporarily restore the factor @xmath ). At the time
the original atomic electron fills up the vacated negative-energy state
(the bound-electron wave-function has negative-energy components), the
escalated electron (which forms part of the virtual pair) is at most a
distance @xmath away from the original electron. This distance is
precisely of the order of magnitude of the fluctuations of the electron
coordinate and consistent with the discussion on p. 71 of [ 34 ] . All
these interpretations elucidate different aspects of the same problem.

In the context of the Breit hamiltonian, we would like to adhere to the
definition that the zitterbewegung term is the term of order @xmath in
the Breit hamiltonian generated by a contribution which is manifestly
proportional of @xmath in coordinate space (or a constant in momentum
space). Such a term is absent in the result ( 4.14 ). For spin- @xmath
particles, such a term is generated by the multiplication of the photon
propagator (proportional to @xmath ) with the zero-component of the
transition current which is given for a spin- @xmath particle as [see
equation (4) of [ 40 ] ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the bispinor amplitude for the bound particle, and
@xmath is the bound-state Schrödinger wave function related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

according to equation (3) of [ 40 ] . One might wonder why a term
proportional to @xmath , apparently generated by a @xmath -function in
coordinate space, prevails in the Breit energy ( 4.15 ). This term
arises naturally when evaluating a matrix element of the structure
@xmath (last term of equation ( 4.14 )) on the nonrelativistic wave
function @xmath and should not be associated with the zitterbewegung.

Vacuum polarization corrections and the self energy, as well as
corrections due to the strong interaction, are not included in ( 4.15 ).
These corrections will be discussed in the two following sections.

#### 4.4 Vacuum Polarization Effects

As pointed out by various authors (e.g. [ 134 , 135 , 136 , 137 , 138 ,
5 , 7 ] ), the electronic vacuum polarization enters already at the
order of @xmath [more precisely, @xmath ] in bound systems with spinless
particles, because the spinless particles are much heavier than the
electron, which means that the Bohr radius of the bound system is
roughly of the same order of magnitude as the Compton wavelength of the
electron. The Compton wavelength of the electron, however, is the
fundamental length scale at which the charge of any bound particle is
screened by the electronic vacuum polarization.

The vacuum polarization (VP) correction to energy levels has been
evaluated [ 134 , 136 , 137 , 5 , 6 , 138 ] with nonrelativistic wave
functions. We recall that the leading-order VP correction (due to the
Uehling potential) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the Schrödinger binding energy for a two-body system with two
particles each of mass @xmath [first term on the right-hand side of (
4.15 )]. For the @xmath coefficients, we recall the following known
results [ 136 , 137 , 6 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Two-loop vacuum polarization effects enter at a relative order @xmath in
pionium and are therefore of the same order of magnitude as the
relativistic corrections mediated by the Breit interaction (discussed in
Sec. 4.3 ). The self energy correction which is discussed in the
following section is even smaller, but of considerable theoretical
interest.

#### 4.5 Effects due to Scalar QED

As shown in [ 102 ] , the leading logarithmic correction to the self
energy can be obtained, in nonrelativistic approximation, from
second-order perturbation theory based on nonrelativistic quantum
electrodynamics [ 104 ] (see also [ 103 ] ). We will investigate here,
in a systematic way, the leading logarithms generated for S states by
self energy and relativistic-recoil effects (the so-called Salpeter
correction), and show that these are spin-independent.

The quantized electromagnetic field is [see Eq. (5) of [ 102 ] ],

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the nonrelativistic interaction hamiltonian for an atomic system
with two spinless particles (charges @xmath and @xmath and masses @xmath
and @xmath ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

For two spin- @xmath particles, the terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

have to be added to @xmath [see Eq. (7) of [ 102 ] ]. We will carry out
the calculations for the general case of one particle of charge @xmath
and the other having a charge @xmath (we follow the convention of [ 34 ]
that for hydrogen, @xmath is the physical charge of the electron, i.e.
@xmath ). The unperturbed hamiltonian of the system of the two particles
and the electromagnetic field reads [see e.g. Eq. (6) of [ 102 ] ],

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The eigenstates of the “atomic part” @xmath of this
hamiltonian in the center-of-mass system @xmath are the nonrelativistic
Schrödinger–Coulomb wave functions for a reduced mass @xmath [here, the
“atomic part” @xmath excludes the photon field, i.e. the last term of (
4.25 )]. We denote @xmath .

Given that the first-order perturbation @xmath vanishes, the
second-order perturbation yields the dominant nonvanishing perturbation.
When evaluated on an atomic state, it is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The interaction hamiltonian ( 4.23 ) gives rise to QED corrections that
involve both particles (in the current context, these are recoil
corrections involving the product @xmath ), and also to terms which
involve only a single particle and are proportional to @xmath or @xmath
. The latter effects correspond to the self-energies of the two
particles.

The low-energy part of the self energy in leading order [ 32 ] can be
inferred directly from ( 4.26 ), and it can be seen that the
spin-dependent parts from ( 4.24 ) vanish in leading order in the @xmath
-expansion [ 102 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the Schrödinger energy ( @xmath in the reduced mass of the atomic
system under investigation). Starting from the spin-independent
expression ( 4.27 ), it is now relatively straightforward to show that
the leading “self energy logarithm” for S states is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result is by consequence spin-independent. The derivation is
simplified when using the @xmath -method developed and used in various
bound-state calculations [ 32 , 1 , 2 ] . The two terms in square
brackets in ( 4.29 ) correspond to the two self-energies of the two
constituent particles with charges @xmath and @xmath and masses @xmath
and @xmath , respectively. It has been pointed out [ 97 ] that in
contrast to the self energy corrections, the vacuum polarization
corrections given in Eq. ( 4.21 ) must not be double-counted. The
“double-counting” of self energy corrections (and lack of it in the
vacuum-polarization case) finds a natural explanation in our formalism:
whereas the vacuum-polarization correction mainly leads to a
modification of the @xmath -type Coulomb attraction in ( 4.25 ) within a
nonrelativistic effective theory, the structure of the interaction
hamiltonian ( 4.23 ) implies the existence of the two self-energies of
the two constituent particles of the atomic system.

It might be instructive to point out that the formula ( 4.29 ) is
consistent with Welton’s argument for estimating the self energy of a
bound particle which is based on analyzing the influence of the
fluctuating electromagnetic field [a detailed discussion is given on
pp. 80–82 of [ 34 ] ]. For a system with two particles of equal mass
@xmath , we have @xmath .

The leading-order recoil correction (Salpeter correction) can also be
inferred from the interaction hamiltonian ( 4.23 ) via second-order
perturbation theory, by “picking up” terms that involve products @xmath
. It has been shown in [ 102 ] that the leading logarithm (for S states)
of the Salpeter correction is spin-independent (just like the leading
logarithm of the self energy correction). The Salpeter correction is
usually referred to as a relativistic recoil (RR) correction. By
following [ 102 ] , we obtain for the leading logarithm of this effect

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This correction involves only the products @xmath and can therefore be
written as a function of @xmath alone.

For pionium, we have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The leading logarithmic
correction from scalar QED for pionium in the order of @xmath is
obtained by adding the corrections ( 4.29 ) and ( 4.30 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-logarithmic term of order @xmath is spin-dependent, and its
evaluation requires a relativistic treatment of the self energy of a
bound spinless particle; such a calculation would be of considerable
theoretical interest, but the size of the effect for pionium, which is
roughly two orders of @xmath smaller than the leading vacuum
polarization correction, precludes experimental verification in the near
future. However, we would like to point out here that a fully
relativistic treatment of this problem, including a detailed discussion
of the renormalization of the self energy of the spinless particle, has
not yet been accomplished. Scalar QED is a renormalizable theory [ 34 ]
.

The dominance of vacuum polarization over the self energy in pionium is
expressed, in particular, by the fact that even two-loop vacuum
polarization of order @xmath has a stronger effect on the spectrum of
pionium than the leading logarithm from Eq. ( 4.31 ) according to Ref. [
17 ] , and that the strong-interaction correction of order @xmath [ 139
] has to be well understood before any experimental verification of (
4.31 ) appears feasible. Finally, we remark that for a manifestly
non-elementary particle like the pion which has a finite charge radius,
form-factor corrections have to be taken into account.

### Chapter 5 QED Calculations: A Summary

Calculations in the area of bound-state quantum electrodynamics have a
long history, starting with Hans Bethe’s first evaluation of the
hydrogen Lamb shift [ 33 ] . Since then, the field has developed
considerably, and the immense progress in high-resolution spectroscopy
(for a recent culmination of the activities, see [ 42 ] ) has
necessitated the inclusion of higher- and higher-order corrections into
the theoretical framework, leading to increased complexity of the
theoretical calculations. Why should such an effort be carried out? A
more accurate understanding of the QED corrections is of crucial
importance for the determination of the fundamental constants and the
test of quantum electrodynamics. The theory of the QED bound states can,
at little risk to over-statement, be described as one the most developed
theories in all of physics. It combines the intricacies of quantum field
theory (divergences, renormalization) with the experimental
possibilities implied by the accuracy of high-resolution spectroscopy.

For decades, there has been a tremendous amount of work on analytic
self-energy calculations, notably on the coefficient @xmath for S
states. However, an accurate comparison of the analytic results to
numerical data was impossible, simply because no numerical data were
available in the region of low nuclear charge. The semi-analytic
expansion in @xmath is in part problematic because there is evidence
that it may represent a divergent series. This argument may be based in
part on the analogy between Figs. 5.1 and 5.2 , and on the observed
rapid growth of the analytic self energy coefficients ( @xmath is of
order one for S states, @xmath is about @xmath , and the magnitude of
@xmath is as large as @xmath ). The QED effective action gives rise to a
divergent asymptotic expansion in appropriately defined effective
coupling parameters. It is therefore a priori difficult to associate a
finite remainder to a truncated series that involves all known (but
disregards the unknown) analytic coefficients.

The results reported here in Ch. 1 answer this conceptual question in
the following way: the semi-analytic expansion in powers of @xmath is in
full agreement with the obtained numerical results. We may therefore
conclude that the semi-analytic expansion probably gives rise to a
generalized asymptotic series whose remainder is of the order of the
first neglected semi-analytic term as @xmath . Therefore, we may assume
that a truncated semi-analytic expansion in powers of @xmath leads to
reliable theoretical predictions in the realm of low nuclear charge
numbers @xmath . However, although the numerical results confirm the
validity of the semi-analytic expansion in this @xmath -region, they
also show the limitations of this approach: much more accurate results
are obtainable by numerical calculations. The accuracy on the level of
1 Hz for atomic hydrogen reported in Ch. 1 would have involved analytic
terms of an excessively high order in @xmath [approximately @xmath )],
and the multitude and complexity of terms would have been a severe
obstacle for analytic calculations in this order of @xmath . In general,
the related activities have recently sparked a rather broad interest in
the numerical calculation of relativistic, QED self energy and two-body
corrections at low @xmath and the comparison of analytic and numerical
results [ 140 , 141 , 142 , 143 , 144 , 145 , 146 , 147 , 148 , 87 , 149
, 150 , 151 ] .

We have described in Ch. 1 a nonperturbative evaluation of the
one-photon self energy in hydrogenlike ions with low nuclear charge
numbers @xmath to @xmath . The general outline of our approach is
discussed in Sec. 1.3 . In Sec. 1.4 , the numerical evaluation of the
low-energy part (generated by virtual photons of low energy) is
described. In Sec. 1.5 , we discuss the numerical evaluation of the
high-energy part, which is generated by high-energy virtual photons and
contains the formally infinite contributions, which are removed by the
renormalization. Sec. 1.5 also contains a brief discussion of the
convergence acceleration methods as employed in the current evaluation.
We discuss in Sec. 1.6 the comparison of analytic and numerical data for
K- and L-shell states in the region of low @xmath . The main results of
the current investigation are contained in Table 1.5 : numerical data,
nonperturbative in @xmath , for the scaled function @xmath and the self
energy remainder function @xmath for K- and L-shell states at low
nuclear charge. The numerical accuracy of our data is 1 Hz or better in
frequency units for 1S, 2S and both 2P states in atomic hydrogen.

Still, calculations within the semi-analytic expansion in addition to
the numerical calculations (a kind of “dual strategy”) remain important.
They serve as a confirmation and check for currently available and
future numerical approaches. In general, in view of the complexity of
the calculations, an independent check is always highly desirable. For
the two-loop effect, the @xmath -expansion converges more rapidly than
for the one-loop effect in absolute frequency units because of the
additional radiative factor @xmath which decreases the overall size of
the effect (see Ch. 3 ).

It is hoped that the analytic calculations reported in Ch. 3 for low
nuclear charge number @xmath will be supplemented in the future by an
accurate numerical treatment of the two-loop self energy problem (see
also related recent work in the high- @xmath region, Refs. [ 151 , 152 ,
13 ] ). This presupposes that the considerable numerical problems in the
domain of small nuclear charge could be solved by adequate numerical
methods, and that the further problem of the increased computational
demand of the two-loop effect in comparison to the one-loop problem [ 9
, 12 ] can be tackled – possibly by massively parallel computer
architectures. Note, however, that the most accurate theoretical
predictions could only be reached in combining numerical and analytic
results. The reason is the following: All numerical calculations are
performed in the non-recoil limit which is the limit of infinite nuclear
mass. This is not quite sufficient for an accurate theoretical treatment
because the self energy of a bound-state depends genuinely on the ratio
of the orbiting particle to the nuclear mass – an effect beyond the
recoil correction. For example, the argument of the logarithms in Eqs. (
1.2 ) and ( 3.1 ) should be replaced according to @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath is the reduced mass [ 97 ] . The possibility to include these
tiny, but important effects depends crucially on a reliable knowledge of
the analytic coefficients in combination with an accurate numerical
treatment of the problem (see also the discussion in Sec. 2.6 ).

The analytic results can be used to obtain improved theoretical
predictions for the hydrogenic fine structure as compared to the
previous order– @xmath –calculations [ 1 , 2 ] , because they remove the
principal theoretical uncertainty in the order of @xmath due to the
problematic two-loop self energy which is represented diagrammatically
in Fig. 3.1 . Our calculation in Ch. 3 illustrates the usefulness of the
simplified effective treatments of two-loop effects in the analytic
approach based on the modified Dirac hamiltonian ( 3.3 ) and the “
@xmath method”. This aspect highlights, as we believe, the need for
systematic, simplified treatments of higher-order radiative corrections
in bound systems.

In Ch. 3 , we primarily address spin-dependent effects in one-electron
(hydrogenlike) systems. However, the same effects also contribute to the
fine-structure splitting in two-electron (heliumlike) systems. There is
currently remarkable interest in improved measurements of the
fine-structure splitting in helium and heliumlike atomic systems with
low nuclear charge [ 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 ] . The effects addressed here
contribute to the fine-structure splitting in helium on the level of
100 Hz, which is not much smaller than the current experimental accuracy
of about 1 kHz, and allows for an estimate of uncalculated higher-order
contributions.

All analytic calculations rely on the separation of the virtual photon
energy into high- and low-energy energy regions via a parameter @xmath .
This separation is illustrated in Sec. 2.2 . For two-photon problems,
four energy regions result from such a separation, but for the
one-photon problem discussed in Ch. 2 , one separation parameter @xmath
is sufficient. We present in Ch. 2 analytic calculations for excited
atomic states based on the semi-analytic @xmath -expansion. These may be
complemented in the near future by numerical results [ 95 ] . We discuss
some intricacies of the analytic treatment of highly excited atomic
states in Sec. 2.1 . Results for the individual contributions are
presented in Subsections 2.3.1 – 2.3.8 and summarized in Sec. 2.4 .
Final values of the analytic coefficients can be found in Tables 2.1 –
2.7 . The characteristic numerical cancellations between individual
contributions are described in Sec. 2.5 . Finally, in Sec. 2.6 , we
describe a number of observations regarding the dependence of the @xmath
and the @xmath -coefficients on the quantum numbers of the atomic state.

All of the above calculations are related to the bound electron, which
is a spin- @xmath particle. In nature, particles with different spin
quantum numbers exist, and these, too, can form bound systems. The
spin-dependence of the corrections is a conceptually interesting issue
that forms the subject of Ch. 4 . This interest is sparked by the
projected DIRAC experiment at CERN where the bound system of two
oppositely charged pions (“pionium”) will be studied. Notably, even the
relativistic corrections for a bound two-body system consisting of
spinless particles are different for spinless particles than for
particles with nonvanishing spin. They are given by a generalized Breit
hamiltonian that we discuss in Sec. 4.3 . There, we present a simplified
derivation for the relativistic and recoil corrections of order @xmath
to a bound state of two spinless particles. The results agree with
previous calculations [ 129 ] . As evident from equation ( 4.14 ), the
zitterbewegung term is absent in a bound system of two spinless
particles.

The self energy is suppressed in systems with spinless particles in
comparison to the vacuum polarization effect as discussed in Secs. 4.4
and 4.5 , because the lightest known spinless particle is much heavier
than the electron, which implies that the vacuum polarization effect is
larger by two orders of @xmath than the self energy in bound systems of
spinless particles. We provide a complete result for the leading
scalar-QED correction of order @xmath in Sec. 4.5 . A list of further
QED corrections to the 1S level of pionium, including two-loop vacuum
polarization, finite-size corrections and other effects, can be found in
[ 17 ] .

To conclude this Chapter, we would like to mention the complementarity
of the high-precision calculations and experiments at low nuclear charge
and the strong-field calculations and related experiments at high
nuclear charge numbers. While an accuracy [ 42 ] of one part in @xmath
currently appears to be out of reach for hydrogenlike Uranium [ 153 ] ,
the experiments on highly charged ions have meanwhile attained a
precision where a detailed understanding of the nuclear structure and
shape is necessary in order to describe QED effects rigorously [ 154 ] .

Bound systems described by quantum electrodynamics belong to the most
accurately understood physical systems today. They convey a certain
esthetic appeal because the apparent simplicity of the two- and
three-particle systems gives rise to a large number of conceptual as
well as calculational difficulties when a thorough understanding is
sought in higher orders of perturbation theory.

## Part II Convergence Acceleration and Divergent Series

### Chapter 6 Introduction to Convergence Acceleration and Divergent
Series in Physics

The second part of this thesis will be concerned with convergence
acceleration methods and with the summation of divergent series. In
theoretical physics, we often encounter sequences of numbers, either as
a result of perturbation theory or as partial sums of an infinite series
defining a physical quantity, whose numerical properties are
disfavourable: in many cases, the sequences converge so slowly that they
are numerically useless. In other cases, the sequences do not converge
at all, and yet we know – or assume – that the sequences are associated,
nevertheless, to the physical quantity in question, for example in the
form of a divergent asymptotic expansion.

Let us consider the case where the sequence @xmath under investigation
is given by partial sums of an infinite series,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We assume, furthermore, that the @xmath are real (this condition will be
relaxed in the sequel).

(i) Let us assume that the sequence @xmath is convergent . The purpose
of convergence acceleration is to convert @xmath into a new sequence
@xmath with hopefully better numerical properties. If we denote the
limit of the sequence by @xmath , that is @xmath , then the rate of
convergence is obviously increased if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

(ii) Alternatively, let us assume that the sequence @xmath is divergent
. The purpose of the resummation is to determine the generalized limit
(or antilimit) of the sequence. The following question immediately
arises: how is it possible to associate a finite generalized limit with
a divergent series. L. Euler wrote in a letter to Goldbach (1745):
“Summa cuiusque seriei est valor expressionis illius finitae, ex cuius
evolutione illa series oritur.”, which means: the generalized limit of
any divergent series is the value of the particular characteristic
finite expression, whose expansion gives rise to the divergent series.
This is still the main notion of resummation today: Given a divergent
series, to “reconstruct” a posteriori the function whose expansion gave
rise to the divergent series, with a suitable mathematical resummation
method.

We illustrate this idea with a trivial example: A divergent series can
be generated, e.g., by expanding the function @xmath at @xmath in powers
of @xmath . The partial sums of the resulting divergent series read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The resulting sequence, which is @xmath , can be identified as
originating from the discussed function by expansion at unit argument,
and its antilimit is therefore @xmath . Since this argument may not
sound convincing, let us briefly indicate that the result may also be
obtained by imposing the postulate that the antilimit of the sum of two
divergent series should be the sum of the two antilimits each. Then, it
is easy to derive (by inspection) that the antilimit @xmath of the
series @xmath should fulfill @xmath , and thus @xmath (again). A more
formal investigation of this series and its resummation can be found in
[ 155 ] [see Eq. (1.1.1) and the instructive discussion on the p. 6
ibid. ]. It is probably a triviality to express that the most familiar
resummation methods like the Euler transformation, Padé approximants and
recently developed nonlinear sequence transformations of the
Levin–Weniger type all convert the divergent sequence @xmath to the
convergent sequence @xmath , in mutual agreement. Some of these
resummation methods are discussed in the sequel, and we also refer the
reader to the seminal review [ 156 ] . It has been stressed in J.
E. Littlewood’s introduction to [ 155 ] that the subject of divergent
series is in no way “mystical or unrigorous”.

Fundamental differences exist between nonalternating series (without
loss of generality we can assume @xmath @xmath in that case), and
strictly alternating series @xmath where @xmath @xmath (mixed forms will
also be discussed in the sequel). The acceleration of the convergence
and the summation of divergent nonalternating series has been
historically problematic.

For example, it has been known for a long time that the acceleration of
nonalternating slowly convergent series can be highly unstable
numerically (see [ 156 ] and references therein). Likewise, the
summation of nonalternating factorially divergent series has represented
a considerable problem, because the series are typically non–Borel
summable (see [ 157 , 158 , 159 , 160 ] for suitable generalizations of
the concept of Borel summability which provide solutions for large
classes of problems of practical interest).

Recently, considerable progress has been achieved for the nonalternating
case, and we will describe some of the relevant applications. For the
acceleration of convergence of nonalternating series, new powerful
algorithms have been devised [ 23 ] , and generalizations of the Borel
summation process have led to promising results in the case of
nonalternating factorially divergent series [ 25 , 27 , 28 ] .

One would intuitively assume that the perturbation series, even if it is
divergent, should be associated to the physical quantity of interest in
a more or less unique way. Unfortunately, many divergent series and the
associated physical observables (e.g., energy levels as a function of
the coupling strength) fail to fulfill the Carleman criterion [ 161 ]
which guarantees that an asymptotic series can be uniquely associated to
a given mathematical function. It appears that some ambiguity has to
accepted as far as the connection between perturbation theory and
physical quantities is concerned, although some attempts have been made
to resolve ambiguities in particular cases (see e.g. [ 162 ] ).

For completeness, we give here the Carleman criterion which guarantees
that there is a one-to-one correspondence between a function and its
associated asymptotic series (see for example [ 163 ] , Theorems XII.17
– XII.19 and the definition on p. 43 in [ 164 ] , p. 410 in [ 165 ] , or
the comprehensive and elucidating review [ 166 ] ):

Carleman Criterion. Let @xmath be a function which is analytic in the
interior and continuous on a sectorial region @xmath of the complex
plane for some @xmath . Let the function @xmath have an asymptotic
expansion @xmath (for @xmath ). The function @xmath obeys a strong
asymptotic condition (of order @xmath ) if there are suitable positive
constants @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath holds for all @xmath and
for all @xmath . The validity of such a condition implies that the
function @xmath is uniquely determined by its asymptotic series.

Typically, nonalternating factorially divergent series which entail
nonperturbative (imaginary) contributions do not fulfill the Carleman
condition. This failure gives rise to the inevitable ambiguities.

Even the generalized Borel resummation methods introduced in [ 157 , 158
, 159 , 160 ] cannot provide conclusive answers for all possible
physical scenarios. One highly problematic application is given by the
quantum-mechanical double-well oscillator. The perturbation series for
the ground state (as well as for any other unperturbed state) is
divergent. Yet it is known that the ground state splits into two states
of opposite parity when the second minimum of the potential approaches
the first from infinity [ 167 , 168 ] . The interesting observation is
that two distinct quantum states are described by one and the same
perturbation series. The energy difference is nonperturbative in the
coupling and cannot be inferred in principle from perturbation theory.
The problem has been the subject of intensive discussion [ 169 , 170 ,
171 , 172 , 173 , 174 ] . The resulting multi-instanton expansion has
recently found a more mathematically motivated explanation in the theory
of resurgent functions [ 175 , 176 , 177 ] .

We conclude this introduction by expressing that convergence
acceleration and resummation methods cannot be separated. The connection
can be seen as follows. We consider the remainders @xmath , i.e. the
difference of the element @xmath of the sequence and the limit @xmath .
The acceleration of convergence is achieved by eliminating, as far as
possible, the remainders @xmath from a necessarily finite set of input
data @xmath , in order to obtain a better estimate @xmath to @xmath than
the obvious estimate which would be provided by @xmath . Clearly, the
“elimination of remainders” is a concept which can be transported to the
case of a divergent series. The only difference is that for a convergent
series, @xmath as @xmath , whereas for a divergent series, @xmath does
not exist. Otherwise, the concept of the elimination of remainders is
the same for both cases.

Returning to our (simple) example, it is intuitively obvious that a
method which helps to eliminate the remainders

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

inside the circle of convergence @xmath , could be suitable to
accomplish an analogous elimination of the @xmath if @xmath assumes
values outside of the domain of convergence of the series @xmath because
the mathematical structure of the expression which defines @xmath does
not change. These entirely heuristic considerations will be illustrated
and explained in the sequel.

### Chapter 7 Convergence Acceleration

#### 7.1 The Concept of Convergence Acceleration

##### 7.1.1 A Brief Survey

We intend to give a brief overview of the convergence acceleration
methods used in this Thesis, without any claim for completeness or
comprehensiveness with regard to currently known convergence
acceleration techniques. Indeed, excellent textbooks (e.g. [ 178 , 179 ,
180 ] ) and review articles [ 181 , 182 , 183 , 156 , 184 ] on the
subject are available. Here, we focus on aspects of the methods which
will become useful for the applications discussed in later Chapters of
the Thesis.

This brief introduction is structured as follows: After a discussion of
basic concepts (Secs. 7.1.2 and 7.1.3 ), we introduce Padé approximants
(one of the standard mathematical tools for extrapolation and
convergence acceleration) in Sec. 7.1.4 . Next, we discuss nonlinear
sequence transformations in Sec. 7.1.5 . Both of these convergence
acceleration methods are much more powerful and much more numerically
stable in the case of alternating input series than in the case of input
series whose terms have the same sign (nonalternating series). We
conclude in Sec. 7.1.6 with a discussion of the recently proposed [ 23 ]
combined nonlinear-condensation transformation (CNCT) which provides an
efficient algorithm in the historically problematic case of
nonalternating input series.

Before we start the discussion of Padé approximants and nonlinear
sequence transformations, we would like to mention that a large number
of other convergence acceleration methods exist which have all been
documented in the literature: examples include the Euler transformation,
Aitken’s @xmath process, the iterated @xmath process, and Richardson
extrapolation which can be implemented using Wynn’s rho algorithm, and
its iterations. Last, but not least, we mention the Euler–Maclaurin sum
formula. The interested reader will find related information e.g. in
Chs. 5 and 6 of [ 156 ] , App. E.2 of [ 43 ] , and in Eq. (3.6.28)
ff. of [ 185 ] .

Concerning the mutual differences between the Padé method (Sec. 7.1.4
and nonlinear sequence transformations (Sec. 7.1.5 ), we would like to
expand: Given a formal series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

as input, the Padé method produces rational approximants which depend
exclusively on a finite subset of the coefficients @xmath , which in
turn determine the partial sums of ( 7.1 ). Nonlinear sequence
transformations require, in addition to the partial sums of ( 7.1 ),
also explicit remainder estimates, i.e. estimates for the remainder
@xmath which remains after the summation of the first @xmath terms of (
7.1 ).

Thus, the remainder estimates introduce additional degrees of freedom in
the construction of sequence transformations as compared to Padé
approximants. As pointed out in [ 26 ] , one may draw an analogy between
sequence transformations and Padé approximants on the one hand and the
Gaussian integration and the Simpson rule on the other hand; the
variable integration nodes and weight factors of the Gaussian
integration yield additional degrees of freedom which may be used in
order to construct a potentially much more powerful algorithm for
numerical integration.

Except for the additional degrees of freedom, nonlinear sequence
transformations have additional advantages. For example, the delta
transformation to be discussed in Sec. 7.1.5 gave very good results in
the case of the sextic anharmonic oscillator, and there is strong
numerical evidence that it is able to sum the extremely violently
divergent perturbation series for the octic anharmonic oscillator [ 186
] . By contrast, as discussed in [ 186 ] , Padé approximants are
apparently not powerful enough to sum divergent series whose
coefficients diverge like @xmath or even @xmath . These observations
stimulated research on sequence transformations considerably. The rapid
progress in this field is convincingly demonstrated by the large number
of monographs [ 187 , 188 , 189 , 190 , 180 , 191 , 192 , 193 , 194 ,
195 ] and review articles [ 156 , 196 , 197 , 198 ] which appeared in
recent years.

##### 7.1.2 The Forward Difference Operator

An essential ingredient in the construction of sequence transformations,
both for convergence acceleration and for the resummation of divergent
series, is the (forward) difference operator. We define the difference
operator @xmath acting on the sequence @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath th element of the sequence @xmath is given by @xmath . This
way of writing the @xmath th element of the transformed sequence
stresses the fact that @xmath is to be regarded as an element of some
new sequence. However, the brackets are often left out, and we write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

An important relation is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again, we identify

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath th power of the difference operator plays a crucial rule in
constructing sequence transformations.

##### 7.1.3 Linear and Logarithmic Convergence

As already stressed in Ch. 6 , the main notion of convergence
acceleration is to extract information “hidden in trailing digits” from
a necessarily finite number of sequence elements, in order to convert a
sequence @xmath into a new sequence @xmath with hopefully better
numerical properties.

We briefly recall the notion of logarithmic convergence and the
difficulties associated with the acceleration of the convergence of
nonalternating series. Let a sequence @xmath fulfill the asymptotic
condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the limit of the sequence as @xmath . If @xmath , then
the sequence @xmath is divergent. For @xmath , the sequence may either
be convergent or divergent. A convergent sequence with @xmath is called
logarithmically convergent (if @xmath , the series is called linearly
convergent ). Let us further assume that the elements of the sequence
@xmath in Eq. ( 7.6 ) represent partial sums

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

of an infinite series. Here, we will almost exclusively investigate
slowly convergent nonalternating sequences @xmath whose elements are all
real and positive (for these sequences, @xmath ). In the case of slow
convergence, @xmath is either very close or equal to unity.

As observed by many authors (e.g. [ 156 ] ), the acceleration of the
convergence of nonalternating sequences is a potentially unstable
numerical process. The reason is the following: A sequence
transformation can only accelerate convergence if it succeeds in
extracting additional information about the index-dependence of the
truncation errors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

from a necessarily finite set of partial sums @xmath of the input
series. Normally, this is done by forming arithmetic expressions
involving higher weighted differences of the @xmath . The calculation of
higher weighted differences is a potentially unstable process which can
easily lead to a serious loss of numerical significance due to
cancellation if the input data all have the same sign.

We had mentioned in Ch. 6 that the rate of convergence can be said to be
increased if the transformed sequence elements @xmath and the input data
@xmath fulfill [see also Eq. ( 6.2 )]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we implicitly define the @xmath . Let us assume that the input
sequence @xmath is logarithmically convergent and that the transformed
sequence @xmath is linearly convergent with @xmath [see Eq. ( 7.6 ) and
the definition of logarithmic convergence]. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath , and the rate of convergence is increased [according to
the definition of convergence acceleration in Eq. ( 7.9 )].

##### 7.1.4 The Standard Tool: Padé Approximants

The Padé approximation produces a rational approximation to the original
input series; this approximation is given by the ratio of two
polynomials. The @xmath Padé approximant to a series @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

is given by the ratio of two polynomials @xmath and @xmath of degree
@xmath and @xmath , respectively:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The polynomials @xmath and @xmath are constructed so that the Taylor
expansion of the Padé approximation Eq. ( 7.12 ) agrees with the
original input series Eq. ( 7.11 ) up to the order of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the Padé approximant @xmath reproduces upon re-expansion
the first @xmath ( @xmath ) coefficients of the input series.

Usually the normalization condition is choosen such as @xmath is one.
Hence there are @xmath equations to determine the coefficients of @xmath
and @xmath . In most cases it is quite unattractive to solve this system
of equations. A more attractive recursive prescription for the
evaluation of Padé approximants is the @xmath -algorithm given by the
formulas [ 199 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath and @xmath integer. The @xmath -algorithm is discussed in [
199 ] , and a detailed discussion of its implementation can be found in
[ 156 ] . If the input data @xmath are the partial sums

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

of the power series Eq. ( 7.11 ), then the elements @xmath of the
two-dimensional table of transformations produce Padé approximants
according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The elements with odd lower subscripts @xmath of the table of
transformations are only auxiliary quantities.

In practical applications (see e.g. Tables 1 – 3 of [ 24 ] ), the
epsilon algorithm can be used for evaluation of the following staircase
sequence in the Padé table:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of Eq. ( 7.16 ) this corresponds to the sequence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be written as @xmath . Here @xmath denotes the integral part
of @xmath , which is the largest integer @xmath satisfying @xmath . With
this notation the Padé sequence in Eq. ( 7.17 ) can also be written as
@xmath .

Modern computer algebra packages [ 90 ] contain built-in routines for
the evaluation of Padé approximants. While these are computationally
less effective than the epsilon algorithm, they are more flexible with
regard to the degree of the numerator and denominator polynomials. In
particular, the sequence allow for the evaluation of the sequence of
lower-diagonal Padé approximants of the form @xmath .

As already mentioned in Sec. 7.1.1 , it is a typical feature of all
algorithms for Padé approximants that the coefficients @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath of the formal power series ( 7.11 ) suffice to determine
@xmath completely. No additional information is needed. At first sight,
this seems to be very advantageous. However, there are situations in
which this apparent advantage becomes a disadvantage. For instance, the
truncation error of an asymptotic power series which has the Stieltjes
property is for real argument bounded in magnitude by the first term not
included in the partial sum (see Example 9.3 on p. 92 of [ 91 ] ).
Accordingly, the truncation error of a strictly alternating divergent
hypergeometric series @xmath with @xmath , which provides a good
mathematical model for many divergent perturbation expansions, is
bounded in magnitude by the first term not included in the partial sum.
In addition, the truncation error and the first term not included in the
partial sum have the same sign (see Theorem 5.12-5 of [ 200 ] ). In
principle, this information should be very helpful in summation
processes. Unfortunately, Padé approximants are not able to profit from
it. This greatly reduces their efficiency if a divergent hypergeometric
series @xmath of that kind or a divergent perturbation series of a
similar type is to be summed.

##### 7.1.5 Nonlinear Sequence Transformations

A sequence transformation @xmath is a rule which converts a slowly
convergent or divergent sequence @xmath whose elements may be the
partial sums @xmath [see Eq. ( 6.1 )] of an infinite series, into a new
sequence @xmath with hopefully better numerical properties. Padé
approximants, which were discussed in Section 7.1.4 , are special
sequence transformations since they transform the partial sums of a
formal power series ( 7.11 ) into a doubly indexed sequence of rational
approximants ( 7.17 ). In the current Section, alternative
transformations will be discussed.

Let us now assume that the sequence @xmath of partial sums of an
infinite series diverges but can be summed to its generalized limit
@xmath . Then the sequence elements @xmath can for all integers @xmath
be partitioned into the generalized limit @xmath and remainders @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath diverges, then the remainders @xmath do not vanish as @xmath .
A divergent sequence would be summed to its generalized limit @xmath if
the remainders @xmath could somehow be eliminated from the sequence
elements @xmath . For a slowly convergent sequence, one can hope to
accelerate convergence by eliminating approximations to the @xmath
obtained from a finite set of sequence elements which are used as input
data for the transformation.

The sequence @xmath is transformed into a new sequence @xmath , whose
elements can for all @xmath be partitioned into the generalized limit
@xmath of the original sequence and a transformed remainder @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

This approximative elimination process can be termed successful if the
transformed remainders @xmath either vanish as @xmath (in the case of a
divergent input sequence where the @xmath do not vanish at all as @xmath
), or if the @xmath vanish faster than the original remainders @xmath as
@xmath [in the case of a slowly convergent input sequence, see also
Eq. ( 7.9 )]. A sequence transformation is a rule which transforms a
slowly convergent or divergent sequence @xmath into a new sequence
@xmath with hopefully better numerical properties.

However, the truncation errors of a divergent series can depend on
@xmath in a very complicated way. Consequently, the direct elimination
of approximations to @xmath from @xmath can be very difficult. A
considerable simplification can often be achieved by means of a suitable
reformulation. Let us consider the following model sequence (see Section
3.2 of [ 156 ] ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a remainder estimate , which has to be chosen according
to some rule and which may depend on @xmath in a very complicated way,
and @xmath is a correction term , which should be chosen in such a way
that it depends on @xmath in a relatively smooth way. Moreover, the
products @xmath should be capable of producing sufficiently accurate
approximations to the actual remainders @xmath of the sequence to be
transformed.

The principal advantage of this approach is that now only the correction
terms @xmath have to be determined. The subsequent elimination of @xmath
from @xmath is often much easier than the direct elimination of
approximations to @xmath from @xmath . The use of remainder estimates
@xmath is also an efficient way of incorporating additional information
about the remainders into the summation scheme.

The model sequence ( 7.21 ) has another undisputable advantage: There is
a systematic way of constructing a sequence transformation which is
exact for this model sequence. Let us assume that a linear operator
@xmath can be found which annihilates the correction term @xmath . Then,
a sequence transformation, which is exact for the model sequence ( 7.21
), can be constructed quite easily. Just apply @xmath to @xmath . Since
@xmath annihilates @xmath according to @xmath and is by assumption
linear, we find that the following sequence transformation @xmath is
exact for the model sequence ( 7.21 ) (see Eq. (3.2-11) of [ 156 ] ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Simple and yet very powerful sequence transformations are obtained if
the annihilation operators are based upon the finite difference operator
@xmath defined in Sec. 7.1.2 . A polynomial @xmath of degree @xmath in
@xmath is annihilated by the @xmath -th power of @xmath . Thus, we now
assume that the correction terms @xmath can be chosen in such a way that
multiplication of @xmath by some suitable quantity @xmath yields a
polynomial @xmath of degree @xmath in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the weighted difference operator @xmath annihilates
@xmath , and the corresponding sequence transformation ( 7.22 ) is given
by the ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

A number of sequence transformations can be obtained by specializing
@xmath . For instance, @xmath with @xmath yields Levin’s sequence
transformation [ 201 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We follow the notation of [ 156 ] . The subscript @xmath denotes the
order of the transformation, and @xmath denotes the starting index (the
initial element) of the input data. Observe that the @xmath sequence
elements @xmath , … @xmath and the @xmath remainder estimates @xmath …
@xmath are needed for the computation of the transformation @xmath . The
shift parameter @xmath has to be positive in order to admit @xmath in (
7.25 ). In most practical applications, it is observed that any choice
other than @xmath does not lead to a significant improvement of the rate
of convergence, and therefore the choice @xmath is standard [ 156 ] .

The notation @xmath is in need of a certain further explanation. As
explained above, @xmath represents the initial element of the sequence
@xmath used in the evaluation of the transform. The specification of
@xmath as the second argument of @xmath is therefore redundant as far as
the index @xmath is concerned, because @xmath already appears as an
upper index in @xmath . The arguments @xmath (and @xmath ) are to be
interpreted as follows: they rather specify the initial element @xmath
and the initial remainder estimate @xmath which have to be used in the
calculation of the right-hand side of ( 7.25 ). Of course, the
evaluation of @xmath requires the @xmath sequence elements @xmath as
input. The knowledge of the “post-initial” elements @xmath is implicitly
assumed in writing the definition ( 7.25 ).

According to Smith and Ford, who had investigated the performance of
sequence transformations for a wide range of test problems [ 202 , 203 ]
, Levin’s transformation is among the most powerful and most versatile
sequence transformations that are currently known.

We can also assume that the unspecified weights @xmath in ( 7.24 ) are
Pochhammer symbols according to @xmath with @xmath . This yields the
delta transformation (see Eq. (8.2-7) of [ 156 ] ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

As in the case of Levin’s transformation, the most obvious choice for
the shift parameter is @xmath .

The numerator and denominator sums in ( 7.25 ) and ( 7.26 ) can be
computed more effectively with the help of the three-term recursions
[see Eq. (7.2-8) of [ 156 ] ]:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and (see Eq. (8.3-7) of [ 156 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The initial values @xmath and @xmath produce the numerator and
denominator sums, respectively, of @xmath and @xmath .

Let us assume that the terms @xmath in ( 6.1 ) are strictly alternating,
i.e. @xmath with @xmath . In this case, the first term @xmath not
included in the partial sum @xmath is the best simple estimate for the
truncation error. This corresponds to the remainder estimate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which was proposed by Smith and Ford [ 202 ] . The use of this remainder
estimate in ( 7.25 ) and ( 7.26 ) yields the following sequence
transformations [Eqs. (7.3-9) and (8.4-4) of [ 156 ] ]:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.31)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Alternative remainder estimates for the sequence transformations ( 7.25
) and ( 7.26 ) were discussed in Sections 7 and 8 of [ 156 ] or in [ 204
, 205 ] .

A final word on sequence transformations: It is observed that sequence
transformations constructed according to ( 7.31 ) often lead to much
better numerical results than better known convergence accelerators like
the Euler transformation, Wynn’s epsilon or rho algorithms, or Aitken’s
@xmath process [ 156 ] . In particular, there is overwhelming empirical
evidence that @xmath and @xmath work very well in the case of convergent
or divergent alternating series for instance as they occur in special
function theory [ 201 , 156 , 206 , 23 , 180 , 202 , 203 , 207 , 208 ,
209 , 210 ] or in perturbation theory [ 211 , 186 , 212 , 207 , 208 ,
213 , 214 , 215 , 216 , 217 ] . Only for some special model problems
could rigorous convergence proofs be obtained (see [ 218 ] or Sections
13 and 14 of [ 156 ] ). No general convergence proof is known for delta
transformation @xmath as well as their parent transformations @xmath and
@xmath . In view of the partially unsatisfactory situation concerning
the availability of mathematical proof, we have carried out
high-precision studies of the convergence of sequence transformations of
the type ( 7.31 ), in part using multi-precision arithmetic (see Sec.
7.2.2 ). In the absence of a rigorous proof, one of the concerns which
may be raised against the convergence of the transforms ( 7.31 ) is a
plausible asymptotic nature of the sequence of transforms. In our
numerical experiments, we found no indication of asymptotic behaviour.
The rate of convergence of the transforms remained constant, and we
observed apparent convergence up to 430 decimal figures (see Sec. 7.2.2
below). In the absence of rigorous proof and the presence of
considerable numerical evidence for the computational usefulness of
sequence transformations of the type ( 7.31 ), we believe that
experimental mathematics may give some hints at the theoretical
soundness of the concepts involved.

##### 7.1.6 The Combined Nonlinear–Condensation Transformation (CNCT)

We assume the series @xmath is slowly convergent and nonalternating,
i.e. @xmath @xmath . In order to make the notation of involved
subscripts more clear, we temporarily identify @xmath . Following Van
Wijngaarden [ 219 ] , we transform the nonalternating input series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose partial sums are given by ( 7.7 ), into an alternating series
@xmath . After the first step of the transformation, the limit of the
input series is recovered according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantities @xmath are defined according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviously, the terms @xmath defined in Eq. ( 7.34 ) are all positive if
the terms @xmath of the original series are all positive. The @xmath are
referred to as the condensed series [ 23 ] , and the series @xmath is
referred to as the transformed alternating series , or alternatively as
the Van Wijngaarden transformed series .

The construction of the condensed series reminds one of Cauchy’s
condensation theorem (see e.g. p. 28 of Ref. [ 220 ] or p. 121 of Ref. [
221 ] ). Given a nonalternating series @xmath with terms that satisfy
@xmath , Cauchy’s condensation theorem states that @xmath converges if
and only if the first condensed sum @xmath defined according to Eq. (
7.34 ) converges.

The summation over @xmath in Eq. ( 7.34 ) dose not pose numerical
problems. Specifically, it can be easily shown in many cases of
practical importance that the convergence of @xmath (in @xmath ) is
linear even if the convergence of @xmath is only logarithmic. We will
illustrate this statement by way of two examples.

Example 1: a logarithmically convergent input series whose terms behave
asymptotically as @xmath with @xmath . In this case, the partial sums

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

converge linearly with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Example 2: a series with @xmath where @xmath and @xmath real. Here, we
have @xmath , and the series is (formally) linearly convergent. However,
slow convergence may result if @xmath is close to one. In this case, the
condensed series are very rapidly convergent,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, when summing over @xmath in evaluating the condensed series
according to Eq. ( 7.34 ), it is in many cases sufficient to evaluate
the condensed series by adding the terms successively, and no further
acceleration of the convergence is required.

As shown in [ 222 , 23 ] , the condensation transformation defined
according to Eqs ( 7.33 )– ( 7.35 ) is essentially a reordering of the
terms of the input series @xmath . Furthermore, Daniel was able to show
(see the Corollary on p. 92 of Ref. [ 222 ] ) that for nonalternating
convergent series whose terms decrease in magnitude ( @xmath ), the
equality ( 7.33 ) holds. This formally justifies the correctness of the
condensation transformation defined according to Eqs. ( 7.33 ) – ( 7.35
).

Note that the property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

derived in [ 222 ] , facilitates the numerical evaluation of a set of
condensed series, by reducing the evaluation of condensed series of odd
index to a trivial computation.

In the second step of the CNCT, the convergence of the Van Wijngaarden
transformed series @xmath on the right-hand side of Eq. ( 7.33 ) is
accelerated by a suitable nonlinear sequence transformation. We start
from the partial sums

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

of the Van Wijngaarden transformed series.

We use the partial sums @xmath defined in Eq. ( 7.40 ) as input data for
the delta transformation ( 7.31 ). This leads to the CNC transforms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which require as input the elements @xmath of the Van Wijngaarden
transformed series.

#### 7.2 Applications of Convergence Acceleration Methods

##### 7.2.1 Applications in Statistics and Applied Biophysics

Several slowly convergent series of the type considered in this Section
of the Thesis define special functions that have important uses in
statistics, namely the Riemann zeta, generalized zeta, Jonquière
functions and Lerch’s transcendent (see [ 92 ] for definitions and some
properties of these functions). Discrete distributions are related to
these functions by associating probability mass functions (p.m.f.s) with
the terms of the particular infinite series defining the special
functions. In turn, the normalization constants of the p.m.f.s are
associated with the sums of the series.

Consider a discrete distribution with the p.m.f.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and with support of all nonnegative integers @xmath , where @xmath is a
(vector of) parameter(s) and @xmath is a constant. The probability over
the set of all outcomes is unity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we obtain the normalization constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

(in statistics, the random variable is usually denoted by the symbol
@xmath , whether continuous or discrete, but we will denote it here by
the symbol @xmath in order to follow the usual notation used in the
treatment of special functions). Thus we expect the sum in Eq. ( 7.44 )
to exist and to converge to a finite value. In the sequel, we consider
several related discrete distributions. The Zipf distribution has the
p.m.f.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

with support of all positive integers @xmath . The normalization
constant ( 7.44 ) is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , which is immediately recognized as the Dirichlet series
for the Riemann zeta function [Eq. (1) on p. 32 of Ref. [ 92 ] ]. Basic
properties of the Zipf distribution can be found in [ 223 ] .

The Zipf–Mandelbrot distribution [ 224 ] is the generalization of the
Zipf distribution that adds a constant to the ranks @xmath and has the
p.m.f.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the support of all nonnegative integers @xmath . The normalization
constant ( 7.44 ) is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The sum ( 7.48 ) is recognized as the generalized zeta
function [Eq. (1) on p. 24 of Ref. [ 92 ] ].

Further, the p.m.f.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the support of all positive integers @xmath defines the Good
distribution [ 225 ] . The constant ( 7.44 ) is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , which is recognized as the Jonquière’s function [Eq. (14)
on p. 30 of Ref. [ 92 ] ; see also [ 226 ] ]. Important properties of
the Good distribution were derived in [ 227 , 228 ] .

In biophysics, one is interested in establishing the statistical
structure of DNA and RNA sequences. Indeed, an interest in statistical
compositions of DNA and protein sequences originated shortly after the
discovery that the nucleotide sequences of RNA uniquely determines the
amino-acid sequence of the proteins. An early analysis was performed in
[ 229 ] , where it was observed that the distributions of relative
abundances of amino-acids and nucleotides were nonrandom, i.e. deviated
from models assuming uniform distribution of different words in any
given text. Zipf distributions and related generalizations proved to be
very useful in further studies [ 230 , 231 , 232 ] .

A formal generalization of the Zipf, the Zipf–Mandelbrot and the Good
distributions is possible upon realizing that the Riemann zeta, the
generalized zeta and the Jonquière functions constitute special cases of
the Lerch transcendent which is defined by the following series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath [Eq. (1) on p. 27 of Ref. [ 92 ] ]. We use here
the the nonstandard notation of a dummy index @xmath in order to
highlight the connection with statistical theory. The relations between
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath can be obtained by considering
appropriate limits if @xmath (e.g., by letting @xmath and/or @xmath to 0
and/or 1), and by making use of the following functional relation
[Eq. (2) on p. 27 of Ref. [ 92 ] ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, Eq. ( 7.52 ) with @xmath can be used to evaluate sums
that start from @xmath rather than from @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Tab. 7.1 , we have summarized the relations between the different
statistical distributions and their defining special functions. The
table illustrates the fact that the three distributions, Zipf (Zeta),
Zipf–Mandelbrot (Generalized zeta) and Good (Jonquière), are special
cases of the Lerch distribution, and that their properties can be
expressed in terms of Lerch’s transcendent with special values of
parameters.

We have found that the application of the combined
nonlinear-condensation transformation (CNCT) described in detail in Sec.
7.1.6 is very suitable for the accelerated evaluation of the Lerch
transcendent ( 7.51 ) in the nonalternating case ( @xmath ). Details of
the implementation, both in C and Mathematica [ 90 ] , are discussed in
[ 30 , 31 ] . For @xmath , the series ( 7.51 ) is alternating. In this
case, the direct application of the delta transformation ( 7.31 ) leads
to an efficient calculational scheme [ 31 ] . A C code for the Lerch
transcendent is available [ 233 , 234 ] .

##### 7.2.2 An Application in Experimental Mathematics

We would like to begin this section by quoting [ 235 ] : “In April 1993,
Enrico Au–Yeung, an undergraduate at the University of Waterloo, brought
to the attention of the author’s [David Bailey’s] colleague Jonathan
Borwein the curious fact that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

based on a computation of 500,000 terms. Borwein’s reaction was to
compute the value of this constant to a higher level of precision in
order to dispel this conjecture. Surprisingly, his computation to 30
digits affirmed it. [David Bailey] then computed this constant to 100
decimal digits, and the above equality was still affirmed.” Many
formulas similar to ( 7.54 ) have subsequently been established by
rigorous proof [ 236 ] .

With the help of a multiprecision system [ 237 , 238 , 235 ] and the
CNCT, we have verified ( 7.54 ) “experimentally” to a couple of hundred
decimals. The calculation will be sketched in the following. Using the
definition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

we rewrite ( 7.54 ) as follows,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.56)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the Euler-Mascheroni constant @xmath , and @xmath is the
logarithmic derivative of the Gamma function [ 91 , 92 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the help of the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

the conjecture ( 7.54 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

We proceed to calculate numerically, to high precision, the infinite sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

using the CNC transformation.

In order to establish the rate of convergence of ( 7.60 ), we
investigate the asymptotic behaviour of the @xmath as @xmath . The
logarithm of the Gamma function can be expanded into an asymptotic
series [see Eq. (4.03) on p. 294 of [ 91 ] ]:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the integral part of @xmath , i.e., the largest integer
@xmath satisfying @xmath , @xmath is a Bernoulli polynomial defined by
the generating function [see Eq. (1.06) on p. 281 of Ref. [ 91 ] ]:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a Bernoulli number (p. 281 of Ref. [ 91 ] ). The following asymptotic
relation for @xmath follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The leading asymptotics of the remainder of the sum ( 7.60 ) after
adding @xmath terms can thus be derived easily. We have for large @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Based on these formulas, the remainder of the sum ( 7.60 ), for large
@xmath , can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the Euler-Maclaurin formula [Eqs. (2.01) and (2.02) on p. 285 of
Ref. [ 91 ] ] has been used in order to convert the sum over the @xmath
in the asymptotic regime of large @xmath [see Eq. ( 7.66 )] into an
integral plus correction terms. In order to calculate ( 7.59 ) to an
accuracy of 200 decimals, Eq. ( 7.67 ) says that we would be required to
add on the order of @xmath terms. Without the use of convergence
acceleration methods, this would represent a formidable computational
task.

Using the CNCT, it is easy to calculate the sum ( 7.59 ) to 200 digits,
based on multiprecision arithmetic [ 235 ] and a Linux personal
computer, within a few hours. We obtain for the 246th and the 247th CNC
transform defined according to Eq. ( 7.41 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.68)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.69)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The apparent convergence to 200 decimals can be verified against the
right-hand side of Eq. ( 7.59 ). Of course, the right-hand side of Eq. (
7.59 ), which involves only rationals, zeta functions and the
Euler–Mascheroni constant,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

can be easily evaluated to 200 decimals using known algorithms which are
included in computer algebra systems [ 90 ] .

The evaluation of the terms @xmath proceeds as follows. For small index
@xmath , it is easy to write a recursion relation relating @xmath and
@xmath based on the (trivial) recursion for the @xmath function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

For large index @xmath , the asymptotic formula ( 7.65 ) can be used in
order to calculate the @xmath function to high precision. The point at
which index one may switch from the recursion to the asymptotic method
depends on how many explicit values for Bernoulli numbers are available
to the machine. We use the first values for the first 60 Bernoulli
numbers, to 250 decimals, for our calculation. We switch from one method
to the other when the index @xmath of @xmath has reached a value of 500.

With 84 308 @xmath terms evaluated (out of which 1364 by recursion and
82944 by the asymptotic method), we evaluate the first 247 transforms
with the results presented above in Eqs. ( 7.68 ) and ( 7.69 ). If the
terms of the series ( 7.54 ) were added on a term-by-term basis, then
about @xmath would be required for an accuracy of 200 decimals in the
final result. The reduction of this number to roughly 84 000 corresponds
to an acceleration of the convergence by roughly 200 orders of
magnitude. We have also carried out, using enhanced precision, a
calculation to 430 decimals, involving about 500 CNC transformations and
arithmetic with 600 decimal figures. These evaluations not only confirm
the conjecture ( 7.59 ) to high precision, but they also represent one
of the most accurate experimental verifications of the convergence
properties of the delta transformation ( 7.31 ) today. Moreover, it is
observed that the rate of convergence of the CNC transforms, which is
approximately one decimal figure per transformation, remains constant
over a wide range of transformation orders. This observed behaviour is
consistent with linear convergence [ @xmath in Eq. ( 7.6 )] in higher
transformation orders. By contrast, the series ( 7.59 ) is only
logarithmically convergent. This corresponds to convergence acceleration
according to the definition ( 7.9 ).

##### 7.2.3 Other Applications of the CNCT

We would like to mention the existing applications in the domain of
quantum electrodynamic bound-state calculations (see [ 9 , 43 , 12 ] and
Ch. 1 of this Thesis). Another existing application concerns the quantum
electrodynamic effective action (see Ref. [ 20 ] ).

J. Becher [ 239 ] has investigated the applicability of the combined
nonlinear-condensation transformation to series of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Series of this type occur naturally in the context of plate contact
problems with periodic boundary conditions [ 240 ] . The arguments
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real and positive for cases of practical
relevance. For @xmath and @xmath , the series @xmath and @xmath are very
slowly convergent. In App. A.2 of [ 239 ] , it is demonstrated by way of
numerical example that the CNCT is able to efficiently accelerate the
convergence of these series in problematic parameter regions.

In the numerical calculations, it is necessary to evaluate terms with
large index @xmath . This can lead to numerical overflow because of the
large arguments of the hyperbolic functions. Clearly, representations
like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

provide a solution for this problem.

Let us recall that considerable effort has been invested in the
development of efficient numerical methods for the evaluation of the
series ( 7.71 ) – ( 7.73 ) [ 241 , 242 , 243 , 244 , 245 ] . These
alternative methods make intensive use of special properties of the
series. They involve integral transformations and infinite series over
numerical integral [ 244 ] , and they make use of special properties of
Legendre’s chi-function [ 243 ] which is related to the functions ( 7.71
) – ( 7.73 ).

A further application of convergence acceleration methods discussed by
J. Becher [ 239 ] is the calculation of the incomplete Gamma function
@xmath whose asymptotic expansion for large argument reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is observed (see App. A.3 ibid. ) that the divergent asymptotic
series of this function for large positive argument can be resummed
effectively using the delta transformation, without any recourse to the
CNCT.

#### 7.3 Conclusions and Outlook for Convergence Acceleration

We have discussed several applications of the convergence acceleration
methods introduced in Sec. 7.1 : in statistical physics (Sec. 7.2.1 ),
in experimental mathematics (Sec. 7.2.2 ), and other applications,
mainly in the evaluation of special functions (Sec. 7.2.3 ).
Specifically, it is observed that a combination of the methods
introduced in Secs. 7.1.5 and 7.1.6 leads to an efficient calculational
scheme for the Lerch transcendent @xmath defined in Eq. ( 7.51 ). This
special function provides a generalization of several kinds of
probability density functions which are of significance for the
statistical analysis of DNA sequences (see Table 7.1 ).

Other applications can be envisaged: For example, the evaluation of
generalized hypergeometric functions – notably of two-variable
hypergeometric functions (Appell functions) @xmath and @xmath [ 246 ] –
has been historically problematic. In the recent investigation [ 247 ] ,
the evaluation of @xmath is considered: The algorithm consists in two
steps: (i) the sophisticated use of analytic continuations to map the
point @xmath into the convergence region of the defining hypergeometric
series of the Appell function, and (ii) the computation of the Appell
function within the region of convergence. The analytic continuations
give rise – in addition to @xmath functions of transformed argument – to
the @xmath function, which can in turn be written in terms of Appell’s
@xmath function. This implies that numerical methods also have to be
devised for the @xmath function. The second step of the algorithm
described in [ 247 ] is the actual numerical calculation of the Appell
function(s) ( @xmath and @xmath ) within the region of convergence. This
calculation proceeds by investigating the criterion @xmath . If the
criterion is fulfilled, then both the @xmath and the @xmath are
evaluated by single-index series expansions in terms of @xmath ’s, for
example employing the formula [ 248 , 249 ]

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (7.76)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

If the criterion is not fulfilled, the authors resort to the solution of
a third-order differential equation for the evaluation of the Appell
function [starting from the point @xmath where @xmath vanishes]. It
appears possible that an application of convergence acceleration
algorithms to the series ( 7.76 ) could lead to an efficient
calculational scheme in the problematic case @xmath where the authors of
[ 247 ] had to resort to an integration of a third-order differential
equation.

Possible improvements over existing algorithms concern “multi-stage
transformations”. For example, it was observed in [ 26 ] that the rate
of convergence of the output data resulting from Borel summation (see
Sec. 8.2.2 ) of a specific divergent series describing the quantum
electrodynamic effective action could be further accelerated by using
two iterations of the epsilon algorithm [defined in Eq. 7.1.4 )],
i.e. by evaluating Padé approximants to the Padé approximants of the
Borel transforms (in this sequence). Iterated forms of a number of
convergence accelerators have been discussed in [ 156 ] . In general,
the iteration of suitable convergence accelerators depends on a thorough
analysis of the remainder structure resulting from previous “stages” of
the transformation, and it is not a priori guaranteed that a
“multi-stage transformation” with only one iterated algorithm will help.
In principle, the use of iterated algorithms can only be helpful when
the evaluation of the sequence transforms or Padé approximants is
computationally cheap in comparison to the evaluation of further terms
of the input sequence which could potentially be used to calculate
higher-order terms in a single-stage transformation process.

### Chapter 8 Divergent Series

#### 8.1 Introduction to Divergent Series in Physics

The observation that many perturbation series encountered in quantum
mechanics and quantum field theory are divergent, sparked the
development of large-order perturbation theory [ 250 ] . This subject is
inherently connected to the resummation of divergent series, and with
the development of appropriate numerical methods which exploit all
available information contained in a necessarily finite number of
perturbative coefficients. Of prime importance in this context is the
Borel method to be discussed in Sec. 8.2.2 .

As already stressed in Ch. 8 , there are connections between the
convergence acceleration methods discussed in Ch. 7 and the resummation
methods discussed in the current Chapter. Specifically, the methods
introduced in Secs. 7.1.4 and 7.1.5 will be used below in Sec. 8.3.2 in
the context of the resummation of the divergent perturbation series for
the QED effective action.

Essentially, we will consider four physical applications of resummation
methods: (i) the energy displacement of a hydrogen atom in a background
electric field, including the autoionization width (Sec. 8.2 ), (ii)
zero-dimensional field theories (Sec. 8.3.1 ), (iii) the QED effective
Lagrangian for background magnetic and electric fields (Sec. 8.3.2 ),
and (iv) the energy levels of the double-well potential which receive
nonperturbative contributions from multi-instanton effects (Sec. 8.3.3
).

Several important aspects and basic concepts connected with divergent
series and the large-order behavior of perturbation theory can be
illustrated by investigating the (divergent) perturbation series of the
Stark effect [ 251 ] . This effect, which is also known as the
LoSurdo–Stark effect in view of the existence of the investigation [ 252
] ), describes the energy displacement of a hydrogen atom in a static
external electric field and can be expressed as a perturbation series
(power series) in the electric field strength.

The first nonvanishing perturbation (in atomic units) is the
second-order effect

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the sum over @xmath runs over the entire spectrum, including the
continuum, but excluding the 1S ground state, and @xmath is the
nonrelativistic (Schrödinger) energy of the @xmath th state. A well
known, but perhaps surprising result says that the coefficients of the
terms of order @xmath , @xmath , @xmath grow so rapidly that the series
in @xmath ultimately diverges, irrespective of how small the field
strength is. The convergence radius of the factorially divergent
perturbation series is zero. The perturbation series for the Stark
effect [ 252 , 251 ] can be formulated to arbitrarily high order [ 253 ]
. The perturbative coefficients grow factorially in absolute magnitude [
254 ] . The perturbation series is a divergent, asymptotic expansion in
the electric field strength @xmath , i.e. about zero electric field.
This means that the perturbative terms at small coupling first decrease
in absolute magnitude up to some minimal term. After passing through the
minimal term, the perturbative terms increase again in magnitude, and
the series ultimately diverges.

By the use of a resummation method, it is possible to assign a finite
value to an otherwise divergent series, and various applications of
resummation methods in mathematics and physics have been given, e.g., in
[ 165 , 156 , 179 , 255 , 24 ] . When a divergent series is resummed
(cf. Ch. 6 ), the superficial precision limit set by the minimal term
can be overcome, and more accurate results can be obtained as compared
to the optimal truncation of the perturbation series. However, the
resummation of the relevant divergent series is problematic in the
considered case, because the Borel transform, from which the physically
correct, finite result is obtained by evaluating a generalized Borel
integral – see Eq. ( 8.11 ) in Sec. 8.2.2 below –, exhibits a rich
singularity structure in the complex plane. The perturbation series is
formally not Borel summable.

The Stark effect and its associated divergent perturbative expansion
including the nonperturbative, nonanalytic imaginary contributions have
attracted considerable attention, both theoretically and experimentally
[ 253 , 254 , 256 , 257 , 258 , 259 , 260 , 261 , 262 , 263 , 264 , 265
, 266 , 267 , 268 , 269 , 270 , 271 , 272 , 273 , 274 , 275 , 276 , 277
, 157 , 278 , 279 , 280 , 281 , 282 , 283 , 284 , 285 , 286 ] .
Experiments have been performed in field strengths up to a couple of
MV/cm [ 287 , 288 , 289 , 290 ] .

Rather mathematically motivated investigations regarding the Borel
summability of the divergent perturbation series for the Stark effect
were performed in [ 265 ] and [ 159 ] , and it was established that the
perturbation series of the Stark effect is Borel summable in the
distributional sense (for the definition of “distributional Borel
summability” we refer to [ 158 ] ).

In comparison to the previous investigation [ 157 ] , we use here an
optimized resummation method that combines an analytic continuation of
the Borel transform with Padé approximants in the conformal variable and
the explicit use of the “leading renormalon pole”. All of these methods
will be described in Secs. 8.2.2 and 8.2.3 . These optimized Borel
transforms represent an alternative to so-called order-dependent
mappings which have been discussed intensively in the literature [ 291 ,
292 , 293 , 294 ] .

After the discussion of the Stark effect (Secs. 8.2.2 – 8.2.4 ), we turn
our attention to the resummation of the divergent perturbation series
for zero-dimensional field theories (Sec. 8.3.1 ), to the QED effective
action (Sec. 8.3.2 ), and to the double-well potential (Sec. 8.3.3 ).

#### 8.2 The Stark Effect: A Paradigmatic Example

##### 8.2.1 Perturbation Series for the Stark Effect

In the presence of an electric field, the @xmath symmetry of the
hydrogen atom is broken, and parabolic quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are used for the classification of the atomic states [ 168 ]
. For the Stark effect, the perturbative expansion of the energy
eigenvalue @xmath reads [see Eq. (59) of [ 253 ] ],

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the electric field strength. For @xmath , the leading
large-order factorial asymptotics of the perturbative coefficients have
been derived in [ 269 ] as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given as an asymptotic series,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantities @xmath are constants. The @xmath -coefficients in Eq. (
8.3 ) are given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Here, the principal quantum number @xmath as a function of the parabolic
quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is given by [see Eq. (65) in
[ 253 ] ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

According to Eq. ( 8.2 ), the perturbative coefficients @xmath , for
large order @xmath of perturbation theory, can be written as a sum of a
nonalternating factorially divergent series [first term in Eq. ( 8.2 )]
and of an alternating factorially divergent series [second term in Eq. (
8.2 )]. Because the @xmath in Eq. ( 8.3 ) are multiplied by the
factorial @xmath , we infer that for large perturbation theory order
@xmath , the term related to the @xmath coefficient ( @xmath )
dominates. Terms with @xmath are suppressed in relation to the leading
term by a relative factor of @xmath according to the asymptotics

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . The leading ( @xmath )–coefficient has been evaluated in [
254 ] as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

According to Eqs. ( 8.2 ), ( 8.3 ) and ( 8.7 ), for states with @xmath ,
the nonalternating component of the perturbation series dominates in
large order of perturbation theory, whereas for states with @xmath , the
alternating component is dominant as @xmath . For states with @xmath ,
the odd- @xmath perturbative coefficients vanish [ 269 ] , and the even-
@xmath coefficients necessarily have the same sign in large order [see
Eq. ( 8.2 )]. According to Eq. ( 8.2 ), there are subleading divergent
nonalternating contributions for states with @xmath , and there exist
subleading divergent alternating contributions for states with @xmath .
This complicates the resummation of the perturbation series.

##### 8.2.2 Borel–Padé Resummation

The resummation of the perturbation series ( 8.1 ) by a combination of
the Borel transformation and Padé approximants proceeds as follows.
First we define the parameter

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The large-order growth of the perturbative coefficients [see Eqs. ( 8.2
) and ( 8.3 )] suggests the definition of the (generalized) Borel
transform [see Eq. (4) in [ 26 ] ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we consider the argument @xmath of @xmath as a complex variable
and @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 8.8 ). The additive constant (in this
case @xmath ) in the argument of the Gamma function is chosen in
accordance with the notion of an “asymptotically improved” resummation
(see also [ 26 ] ). It is observed that the additive constant @xmath can
be shifted by a small integer without affecting the convergence of the
Borel resummed series. Because the perturbative coefficients @xmath
diverge factorially in absolute magnitude, the Borel transform @xmath
has a finite radius of convergence about the origin. The evaluation of
the (generalized) Laplace–Borel integral [see Eq. ( 8.11 ) below]
therefore requires an analytic continuation of @xmath beyond the radius
of convergence. The “classical” Borel integral is performed in the
@xmath -range @xmath , i.e. along the positive real axis [see
e.g. Eqs. (8.2.3) and (8.2.4) of [ 165 ] ]. It has been suggested in [
295 ] that the analytic continuation of ( 8.9 ) into regions where
@xmath retains a nonvanishing, albeit infinitesimal, imaginary part can
be achieved by evaluating Padé approximants. Using the first @xmath
terms in the power expansion of the Borel transform @xmath , we
construct the Padé approximant [we follow the notation of [ 179 ] , see
also Eq. ( 7.12 )]

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.10)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the largest positive integer smaller than @xmath .
We then evaluate the (modified) Borel integral along the integration
contour @xmath shown in Fig. 8.1 in order to construct the transform
@xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The successive evaluation of transforms @xmath in increasing
transformation order @xmath is performed, and the apparent convergence
of the transforms is examined. This procedure is illustrated in Tables I
and II of [ 25 ] .

The contour @xmath is supposed to encircle all poles at @xmath in the
upper right quadrant of the complex plane with @xmath in the
mathematically negative sense. That is to say, the contribution of all
poles @xmath with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is added to the principal value (P.V.) of the integral ( 8.11 ) carried
out in the range @xmath . We have,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The principal-value prescription [first term in Eq. ( 8.12 )] for the
evaluation of the Laplace–Borel integral has been recommended in [ 295 ,
296 ] . This prescription leads to a real (rather than complex) result
for the energy shift and cannot account for the width of the
quasistationary state. The additional pole contributions [second term in
Eq. ( 8.12 )] are responsible for complex-valued (imaginary) corrections
which lead, in particular, to the decay width.

By contour integration (Cauchy Theorem) and Jordan’s Lemma, one can show
that the result obtained along @xmath is equivalent to an integration
along the straight line with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . This contour has been used in [ 157 ] (see also p. 815 in
[ 297 ] ). The exponential factor @xmath and the asymptotic behavior of
the Padé approximant @xmath as @xmath together ensure that the integrand
falls off sufficiently rapidly so that the Cauchy Theorem and Jordan’s
Lemma can be applied to show the equivalence of the representations (
8.12 ) and ( 8.13 ).

The representation ( 8.13 ) illustrates the fact that the integration in
the complex plane along @xmath analytically continues the resummed
result in those cases where the evaluation of the standard Laplace–Borel
integral is not feasible due to poles on the real axis. The
representations ( 8.11 ) and ( 8.12 ) serve to clarify the rôle of the
additional terms which have to be added to the result obtained by the
principal-value prescription in order to obtain the full physical
result, including the nonperturbative, nonanalytic contributions. Note
that, as stressed in [ 25 ] , the pole contributions in general do not
only modify the imaginary, but also the real part of the resummed value
for the perturbation series.

Formally, the limit of the sequence of the @xmath as @xmath , provided
it exists, yields the nonperturbative result inferred from the
perturbative expansion ( 8.1 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because the contour @xmath shown in Fig. 8.1 extends into the complex
plane, the transforms @xmath acquire an imaginary part even though the
perturbative coefficients in Eq. ( 8.1 ) are real.

In the context of numerical analysis, the concept of incredulity [ 298 ]
may be used for the analysis of the convergence of the transforms @xmath
of increasing order @xmath . If a certain number of subsequent
transforms exhibit apparent numerical convergence within a specified
relative accuracy, then the calculation of transforms is stopped, and
the result of the last calculated transformation is taken as the
numerical limit of the series under investigation. It has been observed
in [ 25 , 295 ] that for a number of physically relevant perturbation
series, the apparent numerical convergence of the transforms ( 8.11 ),
with increasing transformation order, leads to the physically correct
results.

It is observed that the rate of convergence of the transforms ( 8.11 )
can be enhanced if instead of the unmodified Padé approximants ( 8.10 )
leading “renormalon” poles are explicit used for the construction of
modified approximants. For the ground state, this entails the following
replacement in Eq. ( 8.11 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.15)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath . For the excited state with quantum numbers @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , we replace

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The resummation method by a combination of Borel and Padé
techniques – current Section – will be referred to as “method I” in the
sequel.

##### 8.2.3 Doubly–Cut Borel Plane

According to Eqs. ( 8.2 ) and ( 8.3 ), the perturbative coefficient
@xmath , for large @xmath , can be written as the sum of an alternating
and of a nonalternating divergent series. In view of Eqs. ( 8.4 ) and (
8.7 ), we conclude that the series defined in Eq. ( 8.9 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has a radius of convergence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

about the origin, where @xmath is the principal quantum number [see
Eq. ( 8.5 )]. Therefore, the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

has a unit radius of convergence about the origin. It is not a priori
obvious if the points @xmath and @xmath represent isolated singularities
or branch points. The asymptotic properties ( 8.2 ) and ( 8.3 ) together
with Eq. ( 8.6 ) suggest that the points @xmath and @xmath do not
constitute poles of finite order. We observe that the leading factorial
growth of the perturbative coefficients in large perturbation order
@xmath is divided out in the Borel transform ( 8.18 ), which is a sum
over @xmath . The perturbative coefficient @xmath can be written as an
asymptotic series over @xmath [see Eq. ( 8.3 )]. We interchange the
order of the summations over @xmath and @xmath , we use Eq. ( 8.6 ) and
take advantage of the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Borel transform @xmath can then be written as a sum over terms of
the form @xmath where for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficient @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

These considerations suggest that the points @xmath and @xmath represent
essential singularities (in this case, branch points) of the Borel
transform @xmath defined in Eq. ( 8.18 ). For the analytic continuation
of @xmath by conformal mapping, we write @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

(this conformal mapping preserves the origin of the complex plane).
Here, we refer to @xmath as the Borel variable, and we call @xmath the
conformal variable. We then express the @xmath th partial sum of ( 8.18
) as

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (8.23)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

where the coefficients @xmath are uniquely determined [see, e.g.,
Eqs. (36) and (37) of [ 299 ] ]. We define the partial sum of the Borel
transform, re-expanded in terms of the conformal variable @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then evaluate (lower-diagonal) Padé approximants to the function
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define the following transforms,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

At increasing @xmath , the limit as @xmath , provided it exists, is then
again assumed to represent the complete, physically relevant solution,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

We do not consider the question of the existence of this limit here (for
an outline of questions related to these issues we refer to [ 300 ] ;
potential problems at excessively strong coupling are discussed in Sec.
IIC of [ 301 ] ).

Inverting Eq. ( 8.22 ) yields [see Eq. ( 8.26 )]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conformal mapping given by Eqs. ( 8.22 ) and ( 8.28 ) maps the
doubly cut @xmath -plane with cuts running from @xmath to @xmath and
@xmath to @xmath unto the unit circle in the complex @xmath -plane
(i.e., it is a surjective mapping). The cuts themselves are mapped to
the edge of the unit circle in the @xmath -plane.

In comparison to the investigations [ 299 ] and [ 300 ] , we use here a
different conformal mapping defined in Eqs. ( 8.22 ) and ( 8.28 ) which
reflects the different singularity structure in the complex plane
[cf. Eq. (27) in [ 299 ] ]. We also mention the application of Padé
approximants for the numerical improvement of the conformal mapping
performed according to Eq. ( 8.25 ). In comparison to [ 27 ] , where the
additional Padé–improvement in the conformal variable is also used, we
perform here the analytic continuation by a mapping whose structure
reflects the double cuts suggested by the asymptotic properties of the
perturbative coefficients given in Eqs. ( 8.2 ), ( 8.3 ) and ( 8.6 )
[cf. Eq. (5) in [ 27 ] ].

The method introduced in this Section will be referred to as “method
II”. One goal of the current investigation is to contrast and compare
the two methods I and II. A comparison of different approaches to the
resummation problem for series with both alternating and nonalternating
divergent components appears useful, in part because the conformal
mapping (without further Padé improvement) has been recommended for the
resummation of quantum chromodynamic perturbation series [ 299 , 300 ] .

##### 8.2.4 Numerical Calculations for the Stark Effect

In this section, the numerical results based on the resummation methods
introduced in Secs. 8.2.2 and 8.2.3 are presented. Before we describe
the calculation in detail, we should note that relativistic corrections
to both the real and the imaginary part of the energy contribute at a
relative order of @xmath compared to the leading nonrelativistic effect
which is treated here (and in the previous work on the subject, see e.g.
[ 269 , 157 ] ). Therefore, the theoretical uncertainty due to
relativistic effects can be estimated to be, at best, 1 part in @xmath
(for an outline of the relativistic and quantum electrodynamic
corrections in hydrogen see [ 302 , 48 , 50 , 1 , 2 , 49 , 51 ] ).
Measurements in very high fields are difficult [ 287 ] . At the
achievable field strengths to date (less than @xmath or about @xmath ),
the accuracy of the theoretical prediction exceeds the experimental
precision, and relativistic effects do not need to be taken into
account.

The perturbative coefficients @xmath defined in Eq. ( 8.1 ) for the
energy shift can be inferred, to arbitrarily high order, from the
Eqs. (9), (13–15), (28–33), (59–67) and (73) in [ 253 ] . The atomic
unit system is used in the sequel, as is customary for this type of
calculation [ 253 , 259 , 262 , 264 ] . The unit of energy is @xmath
where @xmath is the fine structure constant, and the unit of the
electric field is the field strength felt by an electron at a distance
of one Bohr radius @xmath to a nucleus of elementary charge, which is
@xmath (here, @xmath is the permittivity of the vacuum).

We consider the resummation of the divergent perturbative expansion (
8.1 ) for two states of atomic hydrogen. These are the ground state (
@xmath ) and an excited state with parabolic quantum numbers @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . We list here the first few perturbative coefficients
for the states under investigation. For the ground state, we have (in
atomic units),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The perturbation series for the state @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is
alternating, but has a subleading nonalternating component [see Eq. (
8.2 )]. The first perturbative terms read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that for @xmath , the unperturbed nonrelativistic energy is
recovered, which is @xmath in atomic units. In contrast to the real
perturbative coefficients, the energy pseudoeigenvalue (resonance)
@xmath has a real and an imaginary component,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the autoionization width.

Using a computer algebra system [ 90 ] , the first 50 nonvanishing
perturbative coefficients are evaluated for the ground state, and for
the state with parabolic quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , we
evaluate the first 70 nonvanishing perturbative coefficients. The
apparent convergence of the transforms defined in Eqs. ( 8.11 ) and (
8.26 ) in higher order is examined. In the case of the Borel–Padé
transforms defined in Eq. ( 8.11 ), use is made of the replacements in
Eqs. ( 8.15 ) and ( 8.16 ) [“leading renormalon poles are being put in
by hand”]. This procedure leads to the numerical results listed in
Tables 8.1 and 8.2 . The numerical error of our results is estimated on
the basis of the highest and lowest value of the four highest-order
transforms.

An important result of the comparison of the methods introduced in Secs.
8.2.2 and 8.2.3 is the following: Both methods appear to accomplish a
resummation of the perturbation series to the physically correct result.
Method I (Borel @xmath Padé with leading renormalon poles, see Sec.
8.2.2 ) and method II (Borel @xmath Padé-improved conformal mapping, see
Sec. 8.2.3 ) appear to lead to results of comparable accuracy.

To date, a rigorous theory of the performance of the resummation methods
for divergent series of the type discussed in this work (with
alternating and nonalternating components) does not exist. The
logarithmic singularities introduced by the branch points of
higher-order polylogarithms [see the index @xmath in Eq. ( 8.19 )] are
difficult to approximate with the rational functions employed in the
construction of Padé approximants. A solution to the problem of
approximating the logarithmic singularities, based on finite number of
perturbative coefficients, would probably lead to further optimizimation
of the rate of convergence of the transformed series. Within the current
scheme of evaluation, the problematic logarithmic singularities may be
responsible, at least in part, for certain numerical instabilities at
higher transformation order, e.g. in the result for @xmath in Eq. (
8.2.4 ) below.

For the atomic state with quantum numbers @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
the evaluation of the transforms @xmath defined in Eq. ( 8.11 ) (method
I) and of the transforms @xmath defined in Eq. ( 8.26 ) (method II) in
transformation order @xmath for a field strength of @xmath . Method I
leads to the following results,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Method II yields the following data,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Numerical results obtained by resummation are presented in Tables 8.1
and 8.2 for a variety of field strengths and for the two atomic states
under investigation here.

#### 8.3 Further Applications of Resummation Methods

##### 8.3.1 Zero–Dimensional Theories with Degenerate Minima

We consider the generating functional in a zero-dimensional theory (in
this case, the usual path integral reduces to an ordinary integral).
First, we briefly consider the @xmath -theory in zero dimensions [see
Eq. (9-177) ff. in [ 34 ] ]; the generating functional reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The strictly alternating divergent asymptotic expansion in powers of
@xmath for @xmath reads,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

On using the known asymptotics valid for @xmath , which in this case
yield the “large-order” asymptotics of the perturbative coefficients,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is easy to explicitly establish the factorial divergence of the
series (see also p. 888 of [ 297 ] ). The generating functional in zero
dimensions has been proposed as a paradigmatic example for the
divergence of perturbation theory in higher order. It can be resummed
easily to the nonperturbative result; in particular it is manifestly
Borel summable, and no singularities are present on the positive real
axis. Specifically, in Table 8.3 , we consider the resummation of the
series ( 8.35 ) by Padé approximants (Sec. 7.1.4 ) and delta
transformations (Sec. 7.1.5 ). The rapid rate of convergence due to the
delta transformations in comparison to the Padé approximants is obvious;
this finding is consistent with the results of Ref. [ 24 ] .

Complications are introduced by degenerate minima. As a second example,
we consider the modified generating functional [compare with Eq. (2.6)
on p. 15 of [ 250 ] and with Eq. (40.1) on p. 854 of [ 297 ] ]:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The expansion of the exponential in powers of the coupling @xmath leads
to a divergent asymptotic series,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.38)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath denotes a Gegenbauer (ultraspherical) polynomial. Note that
terms of half-integer power of @xmath entail an odd power of the field
and vanish after integration. The first few terms of the asymptotic
expansion read,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.39)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For the perturbative coefficients

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

we establish the following asymptotics,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the nonalternating character of the expansion ( 8.38 ), it is not
Borel summable in the ordinary sense. Rather, it is Borel summable in
the distributional sense [ 158 , 159 ] . Here, we present numerical
evidence supporting the summability of the divergent expansion ( 8.39 )
based on a finite number of perturbative coefficients. The final
integration is carried out along the contour @xmath introduced in [ 25 ]
[see also Eq. ( 8.44 ) below]. The same contour has also been used for
the resummation of divergent perturbation series describing
renormalization group (anomalous dimension) @xmath functions [ 27 ] . As
explained in [ 25 ] , the integration along @xmath , which is based on
the mean value of the results obtained above and below the real axis,
leads to a real final result if all perturbative coefficients are real.

In particular, the resummation of the divergent expansion ( 8.39 ) is
accomplished as follows. We first define the Borel transform of the
generating functional by [see Eq. (4) in [ 26 ] and the discussion after
Eq. ( 8.9 )]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Padé approximants to this Borel transform are evaluated,

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.43)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the largest positive integer smaller than @xmath .
We then evaluate the (modified) Borel integral along the integration
contour @xmath introduced in [ 25 ] ; specifically we define the
transform @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, poles above and below the real axis must be considered,
and the final result involves no imaginary part. The particular case of
@xmath is considered. Values for the partial sums of the perturbation
series ( 8.39 ) and the transforms defined in Eq. ( 8.44 ) are shown in
Tab. 8.4 . The transforms exhibit apparent convergence to 6 decimal
places in 20th order, whereas the partial sums of the perturbation
series diverge. Between the second and forth term of the perturbation
series, (the forth term constitutes the minimal term), the partial sums
provide approximations to the exact result. It might seem surprising
that the minimal term in the perturbative expansion is reached already
in forth order, although the coupling assumes the small value @xmath .
This behavior immediately follows from the large geometric factor in
Eq. ( 8.41 ) which leads to a “resultative coupling strength parameter”
of @xmath . “Nonperturbative effects” of the order of @xmath provide a
fundamental limit to the accuracy obtainable by optimal truncation of
the perturbation series; this is consistent with the numerical data in
Table 8.4 .

We have also investigated the resummation of the divergent series ( 8.39
) via a combination of a conformal mapping and Padé approximants in the
conformal variable. The situation is analogous to the Stark effect:
Results are consistent than those presented in Table 8.4 obtained by the
“pure” Borel–Padé and in this case slightly more accurate. The radius of
convergence of the Borel transform @xmath defined in Eq. ( 8.42 ) is
@xmath [cf. Eq. ( 8.17 ) for the Stark effect], and the appropriate
conformal mapping in this case reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

[cf. Eq. ( 8.22 )]. The inverse reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

[cf. Eq. ( 8.28 )]. The conformal mapping ( 8.45 ) maps the complex
@xmath -plane with a cut along @xmath unto the unit circle in the
complex @xmath -plane. While the zero-dimensional model example given in
Eq. ( 8.37 ) does not exhibit all problematic features of degenerate
anharmonic double-well oscillators, certain analogies can be
established; these comprise in particular the need to evaluate the mean
value of Borel transforms above and below the real axis (see also [ 27 ]
).

##### 8.3.2 The Effective Action as a Divergent Series

Maxwell’s equations receive corrections from virtual excitations of the
charged quantum fields (notably electrons and positrons). This leads to
interesting effects [ 303 , 304 ] : light-by-light scattering, photon
splitting, modification of the speed of light in the presence of strong
electromagnetic fields, and – last, but not least – pair production.

When the heavy degrees of freedom are integrated out (in this case, the
“heavy particles” are the electrons and positrons), an effective theory
results. The corrections can be described by an effective interaction,
the so-called quantum electrodynamic (QED) effective Lagrangian. The
dominant effect for electromagnetic fields that vary slowly with respect
to the Compton wavelength (frequencies @xmath ) is described by the
one–loop quantum electrodynamic effective (so-called “Heisenberg–Euler”)
Lagrangian which is known to all orders in the electromagnetic field [
305 , 306 , 307 , 308 , 309 , 304 ] .

The Heisenberg–Euler Lagrangian @xmath , which constitutes a quantum
correction to the Maxwell Lagrangian, is usually expressed as a
one-dimensional proper-time integral [see e.g. Eq. (3.43) in [ 304 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

To clarify the notation, we introduce the well-known Lorentz invariants
@xmath and @xmath which are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath            @xmath      (8.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where and are the electric and magnetic field strengths, @xmath is the
field strength tensor, and @xmath denotes the dual field strength tensor
@xmath . By @xmath and @xmath we denote the secular invariants ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These Lorentz invariants are referred to as secular invariants because
they emerge naturally as eigenvalues of the field strength tensor; these
eigenvalues are conserved under proper Lorentz transformations of the
field strength tensor. There are connections between the different
representations [ 304 ] : If the relativistic invariant @xmath is
positive, then it is possible to transform to a Lorentz frame in which
and are antiparallel . In the case @xmath , it is possible to choose a
Lorentz frame in which and are parallel . Irrespective of the sign of
@xmath we have in the specified frame

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

In any case, because @xmath and @xmath are positive definite, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

which clarifies the sign ambiguity in ( 8.48 ). We give in ( 8.47 ) and
( 8.48 ) seemingly redundant definitions, but it will soon become
apparent that each of the alternative “points of view” has its
applications. The Maxwell Lagrangian is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

As it is obvious from Eq. ( 8.46 ), the correction @xmath to the Maxwell
Lagrangian is conveniently written in terms of the secular invariants
@xmath and @xmath .

It was observed as early as 1956 [ 310 ] that the quantum correction (
8.46 ), when expressed as a perturbation series in the usual QED
perturbation theory parameter @xmath , constitutes a divergent series.
This divergent character of the QED perturbative expansion is supported
by Lipatov’s argument based on a saddle-point expansion of the
generating functional [ 311 , 312 , 313 ] , and explicit estimates for
the large-order (factorially divergent) behaviour of the QED
perturbative coefficients have been obtained in [ 314 , 315 ] .
Recently, the divergent character of the large-order behaviour of
perturbative expansions in quantum field theory has found an exquisite
confirmation in explicit 30-loop calculations of renormalization group
@xmath functions in a six-dimensional @xmath theory, and in a Yukawa
theory [ 316 , 317 ] .

Here, we will study the divergent series generated by expanding the
effective action ( 8.46 ) in powers of @xmath . We will distinguish the
cases of a magnetic and an electric background fields. We start with a
magnetic field of strength @xmath in which case the effective action
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

[put @xmath , @xmath in Eq. ( 8.46 )]. The nonperturbative results in
Eq. ( 8.53 ) can be expanded in powers of the effective coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

This results in the divergent asymptotic series

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.55)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

for @xmath . Here, @xmath denotes the modulus of the @xmath th Bernoulli
number. The Bernoulli numbers alternate in sign,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expansion coefficients

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

obviously display an alternating sign pattern and grow factorially in
absolute magnitude,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

The series ( 8.55 ) is an alternating series. In [ 310 , 163 , 255 ] ,
it was shown that the series ( 8.55 ) is Borel summable. A further
expansion of the perturbative coefficients @xmath for large @xmath is
carried out in [ 255 ] in order to perform the Borel summation; this
analysis follows the asymptotic expansion in Eq. ( 8.58 ) above, and
higher-order terms in the asymptotics of the coefficients for large
@xmath are also used. Here we consider the resummation of the divergent
series ( 8.55 ) with the help of rational approximants which use as
input data only a finite number of perturbation theory coefficients in
numerical form. Specifically, we use Padé approximants defined in Eq. (
7.12 ) and discussed in Sec. 7.1.4 and the nonlinear sequence
transformations @xmath and @xmath defined in Eqs. ( 7.30 ) and ( 7.31 ),
respectively. The nonlinear transformations were discussed in Sec. 7.1.5
.

The transformations are applied to the divergent perturbation series
Eq. ( 8.55 ), the transforms are calculated with the help of the
recurrence relations ( 7.27 ) and ( 7.28 ). The evaluations presented in
Tables 8.5 and 8.6 are carried out for values @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
of the expansion parameter @xmath defined in Eq. ( 8.54 ). The first
column in the tables contains the index @xmath , the second column
contains the partial sums of the input series and in the last three
columns are the results of the Padé Approximation, the d-transformation
and the delta-transformation.

The data in the tables is presented to a numerical accuracy of @xmath .
The convergence of the transforms is indicated by underlining those
decimal places which appear to have converged to the nonperturbative
result. The numerical data in the Tables 8.5 and 8.6 indicate that the
most favourable numerical results are obtained with the Weniger
delta-transformation. For the numerical calculations, exact rational
arithmetics was used [ 90 ] . Numerical experiments for @xmath larger
than @xmath (not shown) and data presented in [ 24 ] indicate that the
Weniger delta transformation appears to resum the divergent series (
8.55 ) at least up to @xmath , and to arbitrary precision. The other
resummation prescriptions – Padé, and the Levin d-transformation – fail
in this domain of strong coupling.

In the case of a background electric field, Eq. ( 8.46 ) yields the
following expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

In analogy to the expansion parameter for the magnetic case from Eq. (
8.54 ), we can define the effective coupling as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expansion of the effective action in powers of @xmath leads to the
formal power series

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.61)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The perturbation series is nonalternating. Because the remainder
estimate @xmath [see Eq. ( 7.29 )] is in general not valid for
nonalternating series, we cannot assume that any of the previously
discussed resummation methods (Padé, or the delta or d-transformation)
are able to resum the perturbation series Eq. ( 8.61 ). This is
confirmed by the explicit numerical data presented in Table 8.7 .

There exists a “nonperturbative” imaginary part for the uniform
background electric field which is a priori not contained in the
perturbation series whose coefficients are all real and positive [see
Eq. ( 8.61 )]. The imaginary part can be directly inferred from Eq. (
8.59 ) by residue calculus, the result is [ 34 , 255 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

The characteristic factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

is nonperturbative since Eq. ( 8.62 ) has an essential singularity in
the limit @xmath , and it is reminiscent of characteristic expressions
occurring in the description of quantum mechanical tunneling
processes (see p. 195 in [ 34 ] ). In our context, the imaginary part (
8.62 ) describes the pair production in an electric background field. As
is well known, the vacuum in very strong electric fields becomes
unstable with regard to particle-antiparticle pair production (see also
the elucidating discussion in [ 303 ] ).

Spontaneous pair production becomes considerable only in strong external
electric fields. Ordinary field strengths are much smaller than the
critical field @xmath for which

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The critical field strength @xmath can be written (including @xmath and
@xmath ) as the ratio of the rest mass of the electron to the
characteristic length scale which is set by the Compton wavelength of
the electron:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

This critical field strengths are comparable to those felt by an
electron in a hydrogenlike atom whose nucleus has the charge @xmath .

Nonalternating divergent perturbation series require considerable effort
in their resummation. It has been shown in [ 25 ] that a generalized
Borel-Padé method can be used to reconstruct the imaginary part of the
full nonperturbative result. This method depends on the special
integration contours in the complex plane, introduced in Secs. 8.2.2 and
8.2.3 . In Table 8.8 , we present results for the generalized Borel
transforms constructed according to Eqs. (1) – (6) of [ 25 ] ).

As for the complex resonances of the Stark effect (see the numerical
results in Sec. 8.2.4 ), it is possible to reconstruct the
nonperturbative imaginary part (pair production rate) from the purely
real perturbative coefficients in Eq. ( 8.61 ).

##### 8.3.3 The Double–Well Problem

We discuss in the current section specific results, recently obtained in
[ 29 ] , for the quantum-mechanical double-well problem and the related
multi-instanton expansion. The energy levels of the double-well
potential receive, beyond perturbation theory, contributions which are
non-analytic in the coupling strength; these are related to instanton
effects. For example, the separation between the energies of odd- and
even-parity states is given at leading order by the one-instanton
contribution, which, in the path integral formalism, corresponds to a
tunneling of the particle from one minimum of the potential to the other
minimum. In order to determine the energies (of individual levels as
well as the separations) more accurately, multi-instanton configurations
have also to be taken into account. The multi-instanton configurations
describe a particle that tunnels between the minima more than once. For
even instantons, the particle returns to the minimum from which it
started the motion.

For the double-well problem, the energy eigenvalues of the states at
nonvanishing coupling @xmath cannot in principle be obtained by analytic
continuation from the unperturbed situation at vanishing coupling @xmath
because a potential with degenerate minima introduces a degeneracy in
the spectrum: for any one unperturbed state, two states emerge when the
perturbation is switched on. These two states are separated by an energy
shift which is nonperturbative and nonanalytic in the coupling,
i.e. vanishing to any order in perturbation theory. Therefore, the two
states are described by the same perturbation series and yet differ in
their energy by instanton contributions. Specifically, we consider the
case of the double-well potential with the hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Of course, the alternative formulation @xmath gives rise to the same
energy levels, but the form ( 8.66 ) illustrates that the coupling plays
the formal rôle of @xmath . The hamiltonian ( 8.66 ) can be obtained
from @xmath by the scaling @xmath . It has been conjectured [ 171 , 172
, 173 , 174 ] that an asymptotic expansion for the energy eigenvalue can
be obtained by finding a solution to the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be understood as a modified Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization
condition. The plus and minus signs apply to even- and odd-parity
states, respectively. The conjecture ( 8.67 ), whose validity has been
proven in [ 176 ] , has found a natural explanation in the framework of
Ecalle’s theory of resurgent functions [ 175 , 177 , 318 ] . The
functions @xmath , @xmath constitute power series in both variables. The
function @xmath describes the perturbative expansion; its evaluation is
discussed in [ 171 , 174 ] . The first terms read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ground and the first excited state are both described by the same
perturbation series which can be found by inverting the equation @xmath
. When the energy is expressed in terms of the naive perturbation series
in @xmath , the function @xmath then vanishes in any order of
perturbation theory, i.e. in all orders in @xmath . Here, @xmath is the
quantum number of the unperturbed state which is a harmonic oscillator
eigenstate. The function @xmath essentially describes instanton
contributions [ 174 ] ; its first terms read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

A solution to the equation ( 8.67 ) can be found by systematically
expanding the energy eigenvalue @xmath in powers of @xmath and in the
two quantities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Terms of order @xmath belong to the @xmath -instanton contribution. The
energy eigenvalue for nonvanishing perturbation @xmath can be described
by two quantum numbers: the unperturbed quantum number @xmath and the
positive or negative parity of the state. We have (the upper index
denotes the instanton order)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the perturbation series (zero-instanton contribution) is given as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the right-hand side is parity independent. For @xmath , the
instanton contribution reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The lower indices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of the @xmath coefficients
denote the instanton order, the power of the logarithm and the power of
@xmath , respectively. Some of the results that will be used in the
sequel read,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is Euler’s constant. Odd-instanton contributions have
opposite sign for opposite-parity states and are responsible, in
particular, for the energy difference of the ground state with quantum
numbers @xmath and the first excited state with quantum numbers @xmath .
The dominant contribution to the separation of the two lowest energy
levels is given by the one-instanton contribution:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

By contrast, even-instanton contributions have like sign for
opposite-parity states and are responsible, in particular, for the
displacement of the mean value @xmath from the value of the generalized
Borel sum of the perturbation series @xmath (for the evaluation of the
generalized Borel sum of a nonalternating divergent series, see Sec.
8.3.1 ). The dominant contribution to the displacement comes from the
two-instanton effect, and we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function [ 172 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

relates the multi-instanton contributions to the energy eigenvalues,
which can be evaluated numerically, and to the (generalized) Borel sum
of the perturbation series which is evaluated by analytic continuation
of the integration path into the complex plane (see [ 297 ] ). The
calculation of @xmath at small coupling is problematic because of severe
numerical cancellations. From the equations ( 8.75 ), ( 8.3.3 ) and (
8.77 ), we obtain the following asymptotics for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.78)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

If we additionally perform an expansion in inverse powers of @xmath and
keep only the first few terms in @xmath in each term in the @xmath
-expansion, the result reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.79)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The higher-order corrections, which are only logarithmically suppressed
with respect to the leading terms @xmath , change the numerical values
quite significantly, even at small coupling. In Table 8.9 we present
numerical results for the function @xmath at small coupling; these are
in agreement with the first few asymptotic terms listed in equation (
8.78 ) up to numerical accuracy. Of course, for strong coupling,
significant deviations from the leading asymptotics must be expected due
to higher-order effects; these are indeed observed. For example, at
@xmath the numerically determined value reads @xmath whereas the first
asymptotic terms given in equation ( 8.78 ) sum up to a numerical value
of @xmath .

The higher-order corrections to the two-instanton effect are related to
the corrections to the leading factorial growth of the perturbative
coefficients. This can be seen by expressing that the imaginary part of
the perturbation series, when continued analytically from negative to
positive coupling, has to cancel with the imaginary part of the
two-instanton contribution which is generated by the logarithms @xmath .
The corrections of order @xmath and @xmath yield the @xmath – and @xmath
–corrections to the leading factorial growth of the perturbative
coefficients. From the results for @xmath ( @xmath ) given in equation (
8.3.3 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

The analytic results should be checked against explicit values of the
perturbative coefficients. We have determined the first 200 perturbative
coefficients @xmath ( @xmath ) of the perturbation in the form of
rational numbers, i.e. to formally infinite numerical accuracy. This
allows to verify the @xmath – and @xmath –corrections to the leading
factorial growth in equation ( 8.80 ) to high accuracy, for example by
employing Richardson extrapolation [ 319 ] . Using the 160th through the
200th perturbation coefficient as input data for the Richardson
algorithm, the coefficients of the leading, of the @xmath -subleading
and of the @xmath suppressed corrections are found to be consistent with
the analytic results given in equation ( 8.80 ) up to a relative
numerical accuracy of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively. For
completeness, we give here the numerical values of the 198th through the
200th perturbative coefficients, to 30 decimals. These read:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Values for all 200 coefficients are available [ 234 ] .

It is an interesting consequence of the expansion ( 8.71 ) that the
energy difference @xmath , at small coupling, is described to high
accuracy by the one-instanton contribution ( @xmath in equation ( 8.73
)). For @xmath , we obtain to 180 decimals,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.82)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

whereas

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (8.83)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Decimals which differ in the two energy levels are underlined. The
results have been obtained by lattice extrapolation using a modified
Richardson algorithm which is constructed according to ideas outlined in
[ 156 ] . Calculations were performed on IBM RISC/6000 workstations
while making extensive use of multiprecision libraries [ 237 , 238 , 235
] . We define @xmath as the @xmath th partial sum of the one-instanton
contribution @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using exact rational expressions for the coefficients @xmath ( @xmath ),
we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.85)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

These values are in excellent agreement with the numerically determined
energy difference (see the results presented above in equations ( 8.82 )
and ( 8.83 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first 70 decimals in equations ( 8.82 ) and ( 8.83 ) are the same
because the one-instanton contribution is of the order of @xmath . The
accuracy to which the one-instanton contribution describes the energy
difference @xmath is limited by the three-instanton effect which for
@xmath is of the order of @xmath . Note that the two-instanton effect
(which for @xmath is of the order of @xmath ) does not limit the
accuracy to which the one-instanton contribution describes the energy
difference because it has the same sign for opposite-parity states.

We have demonstrated that the behavior of the characteristic function
@xmath defined in equation ( 8.77 ) at small coupling is consistent with
higher-order corrections to the one- and two-instanton contributions,
specifically with the instanton expansion of the energy levels governed
by the equations ( 8.71 ) and ( 8.73 ), with the assumption that the
instanton contributions given by equation ( 8.73 ) should be Borel
summed, with the explicit results for the higher-order coefficients
listed in ( 8.3.3 ) and the analytically derived asymptotics for the
function @xmath given in equation ( 8.78 ). The corrections of relative
order @xmath to the leading factorial growth of the perturbative
coefficients – see equation ( 8.80 ) – are consistent with the
analytically evaluated @xmath –corrections to the two-instanton effect
and with the explicit values for the first 200 terms in the perturbation
series ( 8.72 ). The nonperturbative energy difference @xmath at small
coupling @xmath is described, to high accuracy, by the one-instanton
contribution only.

#### 8.4 Divergent Series: Some Conclusions

A priori , it may seem rather unattractive to assume that the quantum
electrodynamic perturbation series may be divergent even after the
regularization and the renormalization. However, as shown by explicit
nontrivial 30-loop calculations of renormalization group @xmath
functions in a six-dimensional @xmath theory, and in a Yukawa theory
(presented recently in [ 316 , 317 ] ), we believe that the ultimate
divergence of the perturbative expansion can be regarded as a
matter-of-fact, clearly demonstrated by explicit high-order
calculations. Therefore, it appears meaningful to explore the physical
implications of this divergence.

We have discussed four physical applications of resummation methods for
divergent series: (i) the energy displacement of a hydrogen atom in a
background electric field (Sec. 8.2.4 ), (ii) zero-dimensional (model)
field theories (Sec. 8.3.1 ), (iii) the QED effective Lagrangian (Sec.
8.3.2 ), and (iv) the energy levels of the double-well potential (Sec.
8.3.3 ). The mathematical structure of these problems can be
characterized as follows, in the order of increasing complexity:

-   The QED effective Lagrangian for a background magnetic field,
    expressed as a perturbation series in @xmath , is manifestly Borel
    summable [ 310 , 163 , 255 ] , and the nonperturbative result can be
    inferred by a number of different resummation methods, as discussed
    in Sec. 8.3.2 .

-   The QED effective Lagrangian for a background electric field, as
    well as the perturbation series for a hydrogen atom in an electric
    field, is not Borel summable. The same applies to the perturbation
    series for a zero-dimensional field theory with degenerate minima.
    However, these three problems admit a treatment according to the
    concept of generalized (distributional) Borel summability [ 158 ] .
    Numerical results (see [ 25 , 28 ] and Secs. 8.2.4 and 8.3.2 )
    confirm the distributional Borel summability, and the use of
    additional asymptotic information about the perturbative
    coefficients [“leading renormalon poles”, see Eqs. ( 8.15 ) and (
    8.16 ) in Sec. 8.2.2 ] accelerates the convergence of the
    Borel-transformed perturbation series.

-   The double-well potential represent a very problematic case: the
    full nonperturbative solution to the eigenvalue problem cannot be
    obtained in principle from perturbation theory. The reason is the
    following: the perturbation introduces an additional degeneracy in
    the spectrum: each unperturbed level splits into two energy levels
    when the perturbation is nonvanishing. Both of these levels are
    described by one and the same naive perturbation series (see Sec.
    8.3.3 ). The energy difference is nonperturbative and nonanalytic in
    the coupling strength, and finds an explanation in the theory of
    instantons.

For the Stark effect and the QED effective Lagrangian (electric field),
the existence of nonperturbative contributions is intimately linked with
the failure of the Carleman criterion (see for example [ 163 ] ,
Theorems XII.17 and XII.18 and the definition on p. 43 in [ 164 ] ,
p. 410 in [ 165 ] , Ch. 6 of this Thesis or the elucidating discussion
in Ref. [ 166 ] ). The Carleman criterion determines, roughly speaking,
if nonanalytic contributions exist for a given effect which is described
by a specified perturbation series. In this sense, the divergence of the
perturbative expansion is physically important: for the QED effective
action, it allows for the existence of nonanalytic, nonperturbative
contributions like the pair-production amplitude which is not contained
in the real perturbation series ( 8.61 ) and cannot be obtained on the
basis of perturbation theory alone.

Also, we would like to illustrate here the utility of resummation
methods in those cases where perturbation theory breaks down at large
coupling. As explained in Secs. 8.2.4 , 8.3.1 and 8.3.2 , even in
situations where the perturbation series diverges strongly, it can still
be used to obtain meaningful physical results if it is combined with a
suitable resummation method. In a relatively weak field, it is possible
to obtain more accurate numerical results by resummation than by optimal
truncation of the perturbation series (see also [ 25 ] ). In a strong
field, it is possible to obtain physically correct results by
resummation even though the perturbation series diverges strongly (see
the discussion in Sec. 8.2.4 and the data in Tables 8.1 , 8.2 and 8.4 ).
By resummation, the perturbation series which is inherently a
weak-coupling expansion can be given a physical interpretation even in
situations where the coupling is large. Returning to the analogy to
quantum field theory, one might be tempted to suggest that physically
complete results can in many cases be obtained after regularization,
renormalization and resummation.

Can the full nonperturbative result (for energy levels etc.) be inferred
in all cases by a resummation of the divergent perturbation series? The
answer is, unfortunately, no. This is demonstrated in Sec. 8.3.3 by way
of example. In theories with degenerate minima (such as the double-well
problem), corrections to energy levels are caused by so-called instanton
contributions that follow naturally by an expansion of the path integral
around nontrivial saddle points. The @xmath -instanton contribution is
characterized by a nonperturbative factor @xmath where [see Eq. ( 8.70
)] @xmath , and @xmath is the coupling. The expansion of @xmath in
powers of @xmath vanishes in all orders of @xmath . The nonperturbative
energy splitting between even- and odd-parity states is investigated by
considering the function @xmath defined in Eq. ( 8.77 ). This function
would vanish if the generalized Borel sum of the perturbation series
could reproduce energy levels exactly. However, it does not vanish, as
demonstrated by the data in Tab. 8.9 (the numerical data can be
interpreted naturally by considering so-called two-instanton effects).
At the same time, in a zero-dimensional theory with degenerate minima
(considered in Sec. 8.3.1 ), resummation is successful despite the
existence of a nontrivial saddle point. The reason for the success of
the resummation in this model problem appears to lie in the fact that no
degeneraces are introduced by the additional saddle point. The
perturbation series determines the generating functional uniquely, which
is not the case in the double-well potential where two distinct energy
levels (of opposite parity) share the same perturbation series. This
intriguing situation will warrant further investigation in the near
future.

### Chapter 9 Conclusions

We proceed to the interpretation of the results obtained in this Thesis,
which has a dual subject: “quantum electrodynamic bound-state
calculations and large-order perturbation theory”.

The significance of quantum electrodynamics as one of the most appealing
physical theories (a “jewel” of theoretical physics according to Richard
Feynman) does not require any further explanation. The esthetic appeal
of bound-state quantum electrodynamics stems from the accuracy of the
experimental verifications, the significance of the theory for the
determination of the fundamental constants, and the conceptual
complexity of the calculations which derives from the apparent
simplicity of the physical systems under study, when an accurate
understanding is required in higher orders of perturbation theory.
However, the divergence of the perturbative expansion in large orders,
which persists even after the regularization and renormalization, raises
fundamental questions regarding the internal consistency of the
theoretical predictions. The problems associated with the divergence of
the perturbative expansion do not only plague quantum electrodynamics,
but even occur in ordinary quantum mechanical perturbation theory. This
Thesis is divided into two Parts, which represent two attempts to
advance our understanding of the higher-order corrections as well as of
the conceptual questions raised by the divergence of the perturbative
expansion.

In the first Part, we discussed aspects of certain quantum
electrodynamic bound–state calculations, which have been carried out
over the past years. Not all of these calculations [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 ,
6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 ] could be
described in full detail. Both the experimental accuracy as well as the
accuracy of the theoretical calculations have improved dramatically in
recent years [ 42 ] . On the theoretical side, the calculations at low
nuclear charge number may be based on either of two methods: the
analytic approach that is based on the @xmath -expansion and the
numerical approach in which all electron propagators are kept in exact
relativistic form. Progress has been achieved due to advances in the
analytic approach that profit from an adequate formulation of the
problem, and due to the development of numerical techniques which have
led to the highly accurate numerical evaluation of QED corrections in
the realm of low nuclear charge number. This has led to the favourable
situation where analytic and numerical calculations can be checked
against each other. In view of the complexity of the calculations and
their importance for the determination of the fundamental constants [ 86
] , the existence of independent cross-checks for the calculations is
highly desirable.

Numerical calculations at low @xmath have been made possible by
convergence acceleration methods described in the second Part of this
Thesis (notably by the combined nonlinear-condensation transformation).
These techniques have led to the solution of the severe numerical
difficulties associated with the singularity of the propagators for
equal radial arguments, and to a reduction in computing time by three
orders of magnitude. Results obtained for the one-photon self energy are
several orders of magnitude more accurate than previous calculations of
the effect. They represent the first direct evaluations of the one-loop
self energy at the nuclear charge numbers @xmath and @xmath , which are
of crucial importance for precision spectroscopy (atomic hydrogen and
hydrogenlike helium).

The analytic calculations of the one-loop self energy for higher excited
states will be complemented in the near future by numerical calculations
based on the new techniques [ 95 ] , leading to a cross-check of the
type mentioned above. Severe difficulties associated with the multitude
of analytic terms due to the more complicated wavefunctions of the
highly excited states and the associated angular momentum algebra have
been a problem for self energy calculations in this area.

The calculations for the bound-state two-loop self energy report on the
first evaluation of the highly problematic nonlogarithmic higher-order
two-loop binding correction @xmath . Let us recall that analytic work on
the corresponding @xmath correction for the less involved one-loop
problem has extended over three decades [ 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 32 ] . The
development of analytic methods for the evaluation of @xmath leads to an
improved understanding of the scaling of the two-loop effect at low
@xmath and will enable a detailed comparison of analytic and possibly
available numerical results for the two-loop effect in the future. At
the same time, these results lead to improved predictions for the
hydrogen and helium fine structure.

The spin-dependence of quantum electrodynamic corrections is a
conceptually important issue. We focus on spinless particles and present
a simplified derivation of the generalized Breit hamiltonian for a
system of two spinless particles. Although scalar QED is a
renormalizable theory, we found the issue of bound-state calculations
within this theory insufficiently addressed in the literature. Our
calculations for the leading-order self energy and the relativistic
recoil correction are the first corrections of the “self energy type” to
be evaluated within bound-state QED involving only scalar particles.

As a further application, we would like to mention the recent
investigation [ 18 ] .

In the second Part of the Thesis, we investigate convergence
acceleration and resummation methods for divergent series. The
convergence acceleration techniques address the fundamental problem of
the acceleration of a slowly convergent, nonalternating series. Severe
numerical instabilities associated with the formation of higher-order
weighted differences for nonalternating series have been a major
obstacle for algorithms that try to accomplish this task. The methods
find applications in areas as diverse as DNA sequence analysis and
experimental mathematics.

Recent highly nontrivial 30-loop calculations [ 316 , 317 ] have
convincingly demonstrated the divergence of the perturbative expansions
in quantum field theory originally conjectured by Dyson [ 320 ] . We
discuss nonlinear sequence transformations as an alternative to the
“usual” Borel method for the resummation of divergent series that result
from perturbative expansions in quantum field theory. These
transformations have favourable asymptotic properties and lead in many
cases to better numerical results than Padé approximants. We also
discuss generalizations of the Borel method which lead to consistent
results even if the full, nonperturbative physical energy level or
vacuum-to-vacuum amplitude acquires an imaginary part due to quantum
mechanical tunneling. This imaginary part, which represents the
autoionization decay width (Stark effect) and the electron-positron
pair-production amplitude (in the case of the QED effective action), can
be derived starting only from the real (not complex!) perturbative
coefficients. In the double-well problem, the situation is different.
Even- and odd-parity states acquire an energy separation which is
nonperturbative and nonanalytic in the coupling strength and is an
effect which in principle cannot be derived from perturbation theory
alone. The energy separation is given by so-called multi-instantons
which follow naturally from a path integral representation of the
partition function and correspond to configurations where the particle
tunnels repeatedly between the two minima of the double-well potential.
The results lead to a better understanding of the energy shifts due to
multi-instanton effects, by evaluating higher-order corrections to the
two-instanton effect, and they also lead to an accurate verification of
the instanton expansion via a comparison to numerically determined
energy levels.

The common theme of all investigations discussed in is to to explore the
predictive limits of quantum theory . It has been the aim of this Thesis
to present results for some of the essential QED corrections which
influence the spectrum of bound systems and are of current experimental
interest, as well as to work towards a solution of the questions
regarding the predictive limits of field theories set by the ultimate
divergence of the perturbative expansion. Certain methods developed
along this endeavour have meanwhile found applications in other areas
(applied biophysics and mathematics).