# Chapter 1 Motivation and Introduction

### 1.1 Motivation

It is the main goal of physics to explain all ratios between measurable
quantities. The hope is that in the end a very simple, beautiful and
unique mathematical structure emerges, the theory of everything.

Modern physics is based on two major building blocks: general relativity
and quantum physics. The former expresses all phenomena of the
macroscopic world and especially gravity in terms of simple geometric
concepts. The latter is powerful in explaining the microscopic world by
replacing the notion of particles which occupy a certain position in
space and carry a certain amount of momentum by the more abstract
formalism of states in a Hilbert space and observables as operators
acting on them. Since the distinction between microscopic and
macroscopic world seems to be rather arbitrary, these two building
blocks should be unified in an underlying theory. More than that, as
they stand, the two concepts are even inconsistent. Straight forward
quantization of general relativity leads to infinities in physical
processes that can not be tolerated. A larger theory unifying gravity
and quantum theory is hence not only desired from an aestethic point of
view but indeed required for consistency.

After many years of extensive search for this unifying theory, a single
candidate has emerged: string theory. String theory replaces the
fundamental point like objects of particle physics by 1d strings thereby
removing the infinities encountered in quantizing general relativity.
General relativity reemerges as a low energy limit at large distances,
where it was tested experimentally. However at small distances stringy
physics takes over and even our concepts of space and time break down.
Similarly ordinary particle physics as described by the standard model
can reemerge in the limit where gravitational interactions between the
particles can be neglected. The energy scale at which both gravity and
quantum effects become important is set by the Planck scale and is
roughly @xmath . Since this scale is so huge, it is impossible to just
create the fundamental degrees of quantum gravity in an accelerator and
then look what they are.

Even though string theory has all the ingredients required by modern
physics it is difficult to make contact with physics as we know it. The
major obstacle is that string theory allows for a variety of different
vacua, each of which leads to different physics. No precise predictions
about the low-energy physics (like answers to the why questions left by
the standard model) can be made without finding a process that
determines the right vacuum. However the most important concepts
appearing in string theory, namely gauge theory, gravity and
supersymmetry, are indeed known or believed to dominate the real world.
While the former two are the bases for all physics described by the
standard model and general relativity, the latter is believed to be of
similar importance for next generation collider physics. Experimental
verification of supersymmetry in the real world would be even more
support that string theory is not just the only known consistent quantum
theory of gravity, but indeed the fundamental theory realized in our
world.

Of special interest are also objects which probe the regime of quantum
gravity, that is they are small enough for quantum effects to be
important and heavy enough to require gravity. Examples of such objects
are black holes close to their singularity or our universe in very early
times, close to big bang. Treatment of these important issues as well as
the vacuum selection problem requires non-perturbative information about
string theory. So far the perturbative expansion of string theory in
terms of worldsurfaces was the only definition we had of string theory.
Only very recently tools have emerged that allow us control certain
aspects of the non-perturbative physics behind string theory, raising
the hope that these fundamental issues can finally be addressed.

### 1.2 Introduction

During the so called “second string revolution” it has become possible
to gain control over aspects of string theory [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] that were
not contained in its perturbation expansion in terms of worldsurfaces.
The major achievements were the discovery of D-branes [ 4 , 5 ] as one
of the non-perturbative objects in string theory and the realization of
the role of duality symmetries in string theory [ 6 ] , relating two
seemingly different theoretical descriptions to one and the same
physical situation.

Dualities have been of similar importance in gauge theories. Using
dualities it has been possible to solve the IR behaviour of certain
quantum field theories exactly [ 7 ] and get a lot of non-perturbative
information even in situations with less restrictive symmetries. However
in all those setups supersymmetry is a vital ingredient and it is not
clear yet how these methods can be generalized to non-supersymmetric
situations.

Non-perturbative string theory and Super Yang Mills (SYM) gauge theories
are indeed deeply related. The dynamics of the D-branes which are so
important for our understanding of non-perturbative string-theory is
basically governed by SYM. This connection can be used in a twofold way:
dualities and other obscure aspects of field theory only discovered
recently, like non-trivial fixed points of the renormalization group
with mutual non-local objects becoming massless, find their natural
place in string theory, where they can be easily visualized.

On the other hand some problems which seem intractable in string theory
can be mapped to questions in gauge theory, which are under much better
control. Indeed it has been proposed that all non-perturbative aspects
of string theory can be encoded in large @xmath SYM theory [ 8 ] .

It is the purpose of this work to highlight some of the insights gained
with the help of this deep connection between gauge theory and string
theory.

In Chapter 2 I will review the construction of D-branes and explain how
gauge theory determines their dynamics. I will also comment on the
important role D-branes played in understanding string theory dualities,
since these dualities lead to the discovery of an 11-dimensional theory
called M-theory that basically summarizes all the non-perturbative
insights we gained about string theory and is the natural arena for
visualizing aspects of SYM which are hard to understand from the field
theory point of view.

In Chapter 3 I will introduce a setup first used by Hanany and Witten to
study 3d gauge theories embedded in string theory. In Chapter 4 I will
use this setup to study certain aspects of 6-dimensional and
4-dimensional physics. The interplay will allow us to understand certain
non-trivial fixed points and transitions which are obscure from the
field theory point of view, to say the least. But we can also learn
about string theory from the correspondence. Among many other things it
will allow us to show that in string theory chiral vacua can be smoothly
deformed into non-chiral vacua, perhaps taking a small step towards a
more detailed understanding of the vacuum selection problem.

In Chapter 5 I will show how the other aspects of the gauge-theory /
string-theory connection are related to the Hanany-Witten setups by a
series of string-theory dualities. We will see that the different
techniques used to explore the correspondence might be more or less
powerful in various situations, but that in the end we are guaranteed to
obtain the same results, no matter how we chose to embed our gauge
theory under consideration into string theory.

In Chapter 6 I will discuss what open problems remain and where we can
go from here.

## Chapter 2 D-branes and non-perturbative effects in string theory

### 2.1 The breakdown of perturbation theory

String theory as we used to know it was only defined via its
perturbation series. That is a given scattering process receives
contributions from worldsheets of various topology. Higher genus
surfaces are weighted with higher powers of @xmath , the string coupling
(which is the expectation value of a dynamical field, the dilaton:
@xmath )

[]

Figure 1: Propagation of a string from its perturbative definition

To calculate the contribution from a single diagram in the perturbation
series depicted in Fig.1 , we have to solve a conformal field theory on
the worldvolume of the given topology and than integrate over all
possible deformations (moduli). This is often possible. 2d conformal
field theories are very constraint due to the high amount of symmetry
and many calculational tools are available. At weak coupling only
diagrams of low genus contribute and we can actually calculate the
amplitudes.

However this perturbative definition clearly fails when we are at strong
coupling. Here we really have to calculate an infinite number of
diagrams, since higher topologies are no longer suppressed. Worse than
that, a generic scattering process may also receive contributions that
are not even visible at all in the perturbation series, even if we would
be able to sum up the infinite diagrams. Such contributions are
suppressed as @xmath (or as @xmath ). These contributions have a series
expansion around strong coupling ( @xmath )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

None of these terms has the right power to match any of those appearing
in the ordinary perturbation series which only contains positive powers
of @xmath . These are purely non-perturbative effects.

From field theory it is well known that there are indeed phenomena
giving rise to such non-perturbative contributions. The most famous
example are instantons. Instantons are stable solutions to the
Yang-Mills equations of motion that are centered in space and time.
Their existence is due to the fact that Yang-Mills can have
topologically distinct vacua. Instanton solutions interpolate between
different vacua and their stabelness is therefore guaranteed by
topology. Arguing on the bases of the cluster decomposition principle
one can show [ 9 ] that in order to define a consistent quantum field
theory we indeed have to sum over all possible instanton backgrounds
when performing the path integral, so these configurations do contribute
to scattering processes. Calculating the classical action corresponding
to an instanton configuration one finds that it is indeed suppressed as
@xmath . This example also gives us an intuitive feeling why such things
will never appear in the perturbative expansion: while perturbation
theory expands around a given vacuum, non-perturbative contributions
arise from tunnelling processes and interpolation between different
vacua. But this is also why it is so crucial to understand
non-perturbative states in string theory: solving the vacuum problem,
that is what is the right string theory ground state and how did nature
pick it, requires detailed understanding of precisely these processes.

Similar effects are due to solitonic objects like monopoles or domain
walls. They are again stable solutions to the equations of motion
centered in space. This enables us to interpret them as particles (or
higher dimensional objects) in our theory. They have masses which go
like @xmath . At weak coupling they are very heavy and can be neglected.
However at strong coupling they should be included. Virtual monopoles
running in loops will be suppressed by @xmath due to the @xmath factor
in the path integral, signalling a non-perturbative contribution.

In the same spirit we can try to identify solitonic objects with mass
@xmath in string theory in order to identify non-perturbative string
states. By studying supergravity (SUGRA), the low-energy field theory
limit of string theory, one indeed finds a whole zoo of such objects,
generically called p-branes. Among more exotic objects there exists the
magnetic dual of the string, the NS5 brane with tension @xmath and the
so called Dirichlet (D) branes, whose tension at weak coupling only
grows as @xmath . Understanding those objects should enable us to learn
about non-perturbative effects in string theory. They will be the topic
of the rest of this work.

### 2.2 A string theoretic description of D-branes

To understand the contribution to the amplitude by a given brane
configuration, one can study perturbative string theory in the
background of the branes at weak string coupling. For the D-branes this
is straight forward, once one realizes that D-branes are space-time
defects at which open strings can end.

[]

Figure 2: String in the background of a D-brane

Figure 2 shows this basic concept of D-brane physics. It was known since
the early days of string theory that in open string theory one can as
well impose Dirichlet boundary conditions (the end of the string is at a
fixed position) as the usual Neumann boundary conditions (the end is
free to move, no momentum is allowed to flow of the end). One usually
neglected this possibility, since it introduced hyperplanes (the planes
on which the endpoints are forced to stick) which break Lorentz
invariance. It was the achievement of Polchinski to show [ 4 , 5 ] via
an explicit 1-loop open string calculation that these space-time defects
carry charge under the RR gauge fields of string theory and calculating
their tension to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the string coupling and length
respectively. These properties allow us to identify them with the
stringy version of the solitonic solutions of SUGRA which I already
called D-branes before.

Now it is straight forward to do everything we are used to from
perturbative string theory in the background of the D-branes. Quantizing
the oscillator modes of the string theory in the presence of the
modified boundary conditions one finds that the massless spectrum of the
open strings ending on the D-brane are given by a SYM multiplet living
on the brane worldvolume. That is, for the D9 brane we find the usual
@xmath SYM multiplet consisting of the vector gauge field and the
gauginos in 10d. All other branes yield dimensional reductions of those
to the appropriate worldvolume dimension.

Demanding conformal invariance on the string worldsheet yields equations
of motion for the space-time fields by setting the @xmath function of
the 2d conformal theory on the worldsheet to zero, order by order in the
string tension (which plays the role of the coupling constant in the 2d
theory), just like in the well known case of Neumann boundary
conditions. Writing down an action that yields these equations one
obtains as an effective action for the D-brane theory a supersymmetric
Dirac-Born-Infeld action with Wess-Zumino couplings to the bulk fields [
10 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is a formal sum over all the form fields present
in the IIA/B supergravity and the integral always picks out the right
form to go with the right power of @xmath from the exponential. The
fields should be understood as pullbacks from superspace to the
worldvolume.

The low-energy approximation of this action, that is the expansion to
lowest order in @xmath (the string length), yields SYM on the
worldvolume. This is in accordance with the analysis of the massless
spectrum. The gauge coupling can be read off from ( 2.2 ) to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

As in the case of fundamental string theory the scalars on the
worldvolume define the position of the brane in the transverse space.
Via the DBI action these are coupled to the worldvolume gauge fields.
This is an important property of the D-brane action which we will
explain in more detail in the following. Basically a brane can absorb
the flux of a charged particle by bending in transverse space, balancing
the force from the gauge fields with its tension, that is with the
worldvolume scalars. A flat D-brane breaks half of the supersymmetries
(since the open string spectrum only has half of the supersymmetries of
the closed spectrum). The supersymmetries preserved have to satisfy ¹ ¹
1 which can e.g. be seen by analyzing the Killing spinor equations in
the background of the D-brane soliton solution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the preserved supercharge is @xmath and @xmath , @xmath are the
supercharges generated by left- and right- moving degrees of freedom in
the surrounding type II string theory. Choosing a non-trivial embedding
generically breaks all the supersymmetries. If the embedding geometry
allows for some Killing spinors, lower fractions of supersymmetry may be
preserved.

If we try to repeat this analysis for NS5 branes we run into trouble.
The NS5 brane metric looks like a tube, the dilaton blows up if we move
towards the core and any conformal field theory description breaks down.
Only asymptotically, the NS5 brane can be described by a well known
conformal field theory, a WZW model [ 11 ] . The NS5 brane worldvolume
theory is not accessible by purely perturbative string techniques.
However we will see later that we can deduce its properties by string
dualities.

### 2.3 D-branes and gauge theory

By now we have gained some insights in the dynamics governing D-branes.
We have learned that there is a very deep connection between D-branes
and gauge theories. We will analyse how some of the most interesting
aspects of D-branes are captured by simple field theoretic phenomena.
This discussion will pave the way for the discussion in the following
chapters, where I will exploit the D-brane / gauge theory correspondence
to learn about string theory as well as about gauge theory. The general
philosophy is that we consider certain limits of string theory, in which
the gravity and heavy string modes (the bulk modes) decouple, leaving us
just with the open string sector described by SYM. The basic quantities
that control this limit are the Planck scale @xmath and the string scale
@xmath (the inverse of the string length). They satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which just shows the relation between string frame and Einstein frame.
Sending @xmath to infinity is the same as sending Newton’s constant to
zero, so gravity is decoupled. Taking @xmath to infinity sends all
excited string states to infinite mass effectively decoupling them, too.
This can be done at finite string coupling, keeping an interacting SYM
theory.

#### 2.3.1 Gauge theory on the worldvolume

As we have seen, the effective theory on the worldvolume is given by a
DBI action. We want to analyse this world volume theory in the limit,
where the bulk physics decouples, that is we get rid of gravity and
other closed string modes. We only keep the degrees of freedom on the
brane. Expanding the DBI action in @xmath (which explicitely shows up
together with every @xmath ) it is easy to see, that in the @xmath limit
the theory on the worldvolume of the D @xmath -brane reduces to @xmath
SYM in p+1 dimensions. The amount of supersymmetry preserved by a given
brane is determined by its embedding in space-time, as discussed above.
A flat brane always preserves half of the 32 supercharges of type II
theory, leading to maximally supersymmetric Yang-Mills on the
worldvolume. Now let us consider what happens if @xmath D-branes
coincide. This situation was analysed by Witten [ 12 ] .

A single D-brane supports on its worldvolume a single @xmath multiplet.
These massless states arise from a string starting and ending on the
same brane. The mass of a state is given by the length of the string
times the string tension. The massless vector hence arises from a zero
length string starting and ending at the same point. Each of the ends of
the strings carries a Chan-Paton label of the gauge group, that is an
index in the fundamental representation, so the vector multiplet is
correctly left with a fundamental and an antifundamental index, an
adjoint field. Clearly nothing happens to these states if many D-branes
coincide. However, whenever two branes are close, there are new states
that become important. Strings stretching from one brane to the other
yield states whose mass is determined by the distance between the
branes. They carry a fundamental Chan Paton index of the U(1) of the
brane they start and end on respectively. It is natural to identify
those as W-bosons of a broken U(2) gauge group. The distance between the
branes determines the Higgs expectation value. When @xmath branes
coincide all the W-bosons become massless and the full @xmath gauge
symmetry becomes visible.

In order to obtain different gauge groups one can consider D-branes
coinciding on top of space-time singularities. An example of such a
singularity which is under control from perturbative string theory is an
orientifold plane, the fixed plane of a @xmath orbifold action, that
combines worldsheet parity with a space time reflection in @xmath
coordinates. The resulting @xmath space-time fixed plane is called an O
@xmath orientifold plane. A similar calculation like that of
Polchinski’s determination of the D-brane charge shows that the
orientifold is also charged under the same RR field as the D @xmath ,
where the relative value of the charge is given by ² ² 2 Here and in
what follows I will always consider the D-brane and its @xmath mirror as
different objects, each carrying charge @xmath . If one wants to
consider only physical D-branes one should assign them charge @xmath in
these conventions.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The sign is determined by a discrete choice of the precise way one
performs the projection. When @xmath D-branes coincide on-top of the
orientifold (and hence also coincide with their @xmath mirrors), only
oriented strings stretching between the branes will yield new massless
gauge bosons, leading to an @xmath ( @xmath ) gauge theory on their
worldvolume for an orientifold of negative (positive) charge. The best
known example is the type I string. If we mod out IIB just by
world-sheet parity we basically produce an O9. Since this is a
space-filling brane we have to cancel the RR charge, forcing us to use
the negatively charged orientifold with 32 D-branes on top of it,
yielding an @xmath gauge theory, as expected.

#### 2.3.2 Compactifications and D-branes

There is a seemingly different way that D-branes can be described by
gauge theories. If we consider compactifications of string theory, we
will have non-perturbative states in the resulting lower-dimensional
theory from D-branes wrapping cycles of the compactification manifold.
The mass of these states is just given by the tension of the brane times
the volume of the cycle (and therefore has the @xmath dependence
signalling a non-perturbative state). At certain points in the moduli
space of compactifications some of these cycles may shrink to zero size,
leading to new massless states in the low-energy theory. Some of these
states are usually massless vectors, giving rise to non-perturbative
gauge groups.

[]

Figure 3: Non-perturbative states from D-branes on shrinking cycles

### 2.4 Engineering Gauge theories

With the two mechanisms at hand we can try to engineer gauge theories,
that is we make up a string theory geometry with branes that realize a
certain gauge theory we want to study. Combining the two basic
mechanisms discussed above in various ways there are several
possibilities to do so. Basically all these different approaches
described in the literature can be separated in three classes. As I will
discuss in the last chapter they are actually equivalent. There I will
also give a more technical discussion for the specific case of @xmath
theories in 4d.

#### 2.4.1 Geometric Engineering

A geometric engineer tries to cook up a string background that captures
all aspects of the gauge theory she wants to study in the geometry of
the compactification manifold. In order to focus on the gauge theory
modes, one has to decouple all stringy modes and all bulk modes. That is
one has to send @xmath and @xmath to infinity. Let me for simplicity of
notation discuss the case of a K3 compactification ( see [ 13 ] and
references therein), engineering an @xmath or @xmath supersymmetric
gauge theory in 6d for type IIA or the heterotic string respectively. It
should be clear that these principles work the same way in other
examples. The relevant scale is the 6d Planck scale given according to a
KK ansatz by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Decoupling gravity therefore effectively amounts to decompactifying the
K3. Since the 6d gauge coupling of the perturbative gauge groups already
present in 10d are also given via the KK ansatz as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

they decouple in the same decompactification limit. The only gauge
groups that survive are the non-perturbative gauge groups that arise via
wrapping branes around vanishing cycles in the manifold. All information
about the gauge theory is therefore encoded in the local singularity
structure of the K3.

The basic example is IIA on an ALE space, that is a non-compact version
of K3. An ALE is a blow-up of an @xmath orbifold, where @xmath is a
discrete subgroup of @xmath . Since spinors transform as a @xmath under
the @xmath spacetime rotations, embedding the orbifold in just one of
the @xmath factors leaves half of the spinors invariant and hence also
half of the supersymmetries unbroken. Since K3 can be written as an
orbifold of @xmath , these orbifold singularities can arise locally in
the geometry of K3. The statement that @xmath should be a subgroup of
@xmath is equivalent to demanding that the holonomies of K3 only fill up
@xmath and not the full @xmath of a generic 4d manifold. In order to
obtain gauge dynamics, the local description in terms of the ALE is all
we need. We expect new gauge dynamics when we move to the singular
point, the orbifold itself.

The ALE space has topological non-trivial cycles.

[]

Figure 4: Non-trivial 1-cycle on @xmath .

Figure 4 illustrates non-trivial @xmath s arising from an @xmath
orbifold. Similarly we get 2-spheres on the ALE. These 2-spheres shrink
to zero size at the orbifold point. New massless states arise from D2
branes wrapping these cycles. The intersection pattern of the 2-cycles
will determine the gauge group. Luckily all discrete subgroups of @xmath
can be classified by an ADE pattern, where the corresponding Dynkin
diagram gives us precisely the information about the intersection
numbers of the vanishing spheres. The resulting gauge theory has a
non-abelian ADE gauge group.

#### 2.4.2 Branes as Probes

‘‘Branes as Probes’’ is the most natural way if we want to learn
something about string theory from Yang-Mills theory. The idea is that
in order to study what happens to a given string background once one
takes into account all the quantum effects, one probes the background
with a D-brane ³ ³ 3 In this language one could view string theory as we
used to know it as probing space-time with a fundamental string. . On
the worldvolume of the D-brane we will as usual find a gauge theory. The
background geometry will be encoded in this gauge theory via the matter
content, the amount of unbroken supersymmetry and the interaction
potentials. Solving the quantum gauge theory will teach us about the
quantum behaviour of the background. This technique has been very
successfully used for probing D @xmath branes and O @xmath planes with D
@xmath branes [ 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 ] , as well as probing orbifold
singularities with D @xmath branes [ 19 , 20 ] .

In both cases the matter content and classical superpotential of the
gauge theory can be analyzed by perturbative string theory. For the
higher p branes, we will find new states on the D @xmath worldvolume
corresponding to the zero modes of strings stretching between D @xmath
and D @xmath branes in addition to the gauge multiplet already present
from the D @xmath -D @xmath strings.

In the case of the orbifold we first include all the twisted sectors
required in string theory for consistency by including all the mirror
D-branes and strings stretching in between them. Then we project onto
states invariant under the orbifold group and this way obtain the
corresponding spectrum.

#### 2.4.3 Hanany-Witten setups

Hanany and Witten (HW) introduced a setup of intersecting branes
realizing @xmath @xmath gauge theories. The gauge theory again lives on
the worldvolume of D-branes. The other branes make the gauge theory
interesting by breaking SUSY and introducing new matter. Since we are
now only dealing with flat branes in flat space, many things become very
intuitive. Moduli and parameters just correspond to moving the branes
around and are very easy to visualize. As advertised above I will show
in the end, that all the 3 approaches are actually equivalent, so by
studying the intuitive HW setups we can get non-trivial results about
quantum string backgrounds by considering the “dual” branes as probes
setup. The next chapter is devoted to an extensive review of the HW
idea, so I won’t go into any details at this point.

### 2.5 D-branes and dualities

#### 2.5.1 String Dualities and M-theory

Probably the most important application of D-branes so far is the idea
of string-dualities, the statement that one and the same physical system
has two dual descriptions. The concept of duality was already discussed
long ago in the context of field theories, as I will explain in more
detail in the Chapter 3. In string theory duality was first detected in
the form of T-duality [ 21 ] . Studying the spectrum of bosonic string
theory on a circle of radius @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

One sees that due to the presence of winding modes characterized by the
integer @xmath as well as momentum modes @xmath around the circle, the
states are invariant under an exchange of the two if one simultaneously
takes @xmath into @xmath . This invariance under @xmath exchange can be
shown to be a symmetry of amplitudes to all orders in perturbation
theory and is believed to be valid even non-perturbatively. The two
compactifications are T-dual to each other. For the superstring this
T-duality works almost the same. For example type IIA on @xmath is dual
to IIB on @xmath . In this case the @xmath form fields from the RR
sector T-dualize into @xmath and @xmath form fields, depending on
whether we take the components along or transverse to the compact
direction. Since the D @xmath branes couple to these fields, T-duality
transverse to the worldvolume produces a @xmath brane while T-duality
along a worldvolume direction leaves us with a @xmath brane.

More interesting are dualities relating one string theory at weak
coupling to another string theory at strong coupling. Many dualities of
this type have been discovered over the recent years. However non of
them can be proven by a direct calculation. Since by definition we
compare a strongly coupled with a weakly coupled theory, only one side
is accessible to calculations. Duality then amounts to a prediction for
the strong coupling behaviour of the other theory. The reason why most
string theorists nevertheless believe in the validity of these dualities
is that they can be checked in several ways. The most important check is
the matching of objects which are BPS. They preserve some fraction of
the supersymmetry and are therefore protected by the superalgebra from
any renormalization. We have already encountered some of these objects:
D-branes. This way certain properties of these non-perturbative states
which dominate the strong coupling theory can be calculated and they can
be matched onto the perturbative states at weak coupling.

One of the examples I am going to consider several times in this work is
the selfduality of type IIB string theory. Type IIB with coupling @xmath
is dual to type IIB with @xmath . Including the axion @xmath we can
build a complex coupling @xmath . Combining the @xmath to @xmath duality
with the invariance of the axion under shifts of @xmath , a whole @xmath
of dual theories can be constructed. The NS 2-form field combines with
the RR 2-form into an @xmath doublet. The objects coupling to them, the
fundamental F1 and the D1 string are exchanged under the strong-weak
coupling duality. More general @xmath transformations take the F1 into a
@xmath bound state of @xmath fundamental and @xmath D-strings. Similarly
their magnetic duals, the NS5 and the D5 brane form an @xmath doublet.
Since there is only one 4-form field, it has to be a singlet under
@xmath and hence the D3 brane stays invariant under all duality
transformations. Since the low-energy effective actions of the dual
theories are supposed to agree, the Planck scale has to remain
invariant, therefore using ( 2.5 ) the dual string scale has to be
@xmath .

Basically all string dualities can be summarized as the existence of an
conjectural 11d theory, called M-theory, which contains all the string
theories as well as 11d SUGRA as perturbative expansions in certain
limits.

[]

Figure 5: All known string theories as well as 11d SUGRA are just
different perturbative expansions of an overarching 11d M-theory.

Since I am going to use this M-theory picture in what follows, let me
briefly present as a defining duality of M-theory the duality between
11d SUGRA and type IIA, which originally led to the discovery of
M-theory [ 6 , 22 ] . According to this proposal M-theory on a circle is
type IIA string theory with the IIA coupling and string length given in
terms of the 11d Planck length and the radius of the 11th dimension
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

These relations can be obtained by comparing the low-energy effective
actions. The relation really constitutes a strong-weak coupling duality:
at very large @xmath IIA becomes strongly coupled and we lose all
control. However in the 11d picture as @xmath becomes bigger the
curvature becomes smaller and SUGRA becomes a good approximation.
Similar at very small @xmath the curvatures are Planckian in 11d, so
SUGRA fails to capture the physics, however perturbative string theory
is a good description. To describe couplings of order 1, we need the yet
unknown full fledged M-theory.

The appearance of the 11th dimension can be seen from studying D-branes.
D0 branes are non-perturbative states, whose mass goes to zero in the
strong coupling limit. @xmath D0 branes are believed to form a unique
threshold bound state (that is with zero binding energy) [ 12 , 23 ] .
They therefore led to a tower of states with mass @xmath . It is natural
to identify these as momentum modes around the 11th dimension of radius
@xmath . M-theory also provides us with a nice organization principle
for all the other branes. From 11d SUGRA we learn that M-theory has two
extended objects, the M2 and the M5 brane. Together with three more
complicated solutions that only arise upon compactification of at least
one more direction, the wave (momentum mode around the circle) with mass
@xmath , its magnetic dual, the KK monopole 6 brane with tension @xmath
and an M9 brane with tension @xmath , they give rise to all brane
solutions in the perturbative limits of M-theory.

#### 2.5.2 Matrix Theory

Having said the above, it would clearly be desirable to find a
microscopic definition of M-theory. The only candidate that has emerged
so far is matrix theory [ 8 ] . The idea behind this approach is to
quantize the theory in a special frame, called the infinite momentum
frame, where only a very limited amount of the original degrees of
freedom are visible. What we do is boost ourselves as observers
infinitely along a compact direction, so that of all modes with momentum
@xmath only those with positive @xmath survive. This has to be
considered as @xmath and @xmath both go to infinity with @xmath also
going to infinity.

Since we want to work at finite @xmath to do any realistic computation,
one would like to study a reference frame that is described by finite
@xmath matrix theory and reduces to the IMF in the @xmath limit. Such a
frame exists, the discrete light cone frame. Therefore we want to study
discrete lightcone quantization (DLCQ) of M-theory. This was conjectured
to be described by the finite @xmath matrix model in [ 24 ] . DLCQ
formally can be thought of as quantizing the theory on a compact
lightlike circle. This notion seems to be rather counterintuitive.
Indeed it was shown in [ 25 ] that the best way to think about the DLCQ
is to consider it as a limit of a compactification on an almost
lightlike circle, that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . For @xmath this reduces to a lightlike compactification
with radius @xmath . Now this compactification is just a Lorentz boost
transform of an ordinary spacelike compactification on @xmath with boost
parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore Seiberg’s final result can be stated as follows: DLCQ of any
system is Lorentz equivalent to the @xmath limit of a spacelike
compactification on @xmath . But we know what M-theory on a vanishing
circle is: it is just weakly coupled IIA! Since this is a rather
familiar theory, it is very easy to identify the relevant degrees of
freedom.

So matrix theory is just the weak coupling limit of type IIA string
theory. The relevant degrees of freedom surviving are the carriers of
positive momentum around the (vanishing) circle in the 11th dimension.
But we already identified them as D0 branes. Studying matrix theory of
compactified M-theory, we find that the limit on the IIA side shrinks
all the radii to zero, forcing us to perform a T-duality. This way the
D0 branes turn into different branes. But after all one finds that
matrix theory is defined via the worldvolume theory of a certain brane.
Some of these are rather exotic. E.g. matrix theory on the @xmath is
described by a D4 brane at very strong coupling, so that it turns into
an M5 brane [ 26 , 27 ] . Similar the @xmath compactification is
described by D5 branes at strong coupling and hence IIB NS5 branes at
weak coupling [ 28 ] . The @xmath is described by D6 branes at strong
coupling [ 29 , 30 ] . However in this case one automatically keeps some
of the bulk modes, so that the interacting world volume theory is not
decoupled from gravity ⁴ ⁴ 4 Existence of limits decoupling the bulk
while keeping an interacting theory on the brane are required for the
“brane proof” of the existence of certain fixed points in higher
dimensions. I will discuss the existence and non-existence of these
limits in the following chapters. . Higher dimensional compactifications
are plagued by similar problems. Even though we can still define matrix
theory as the worldvolume theory of some brane, this description is not
any more useful than saying M-theory is a consistent 11d theory of
gravity, since the corresponding worldvolume theories do not decouple
from the bulk gravitons in the matrix limit ⁵ ⁵ 5 Some doubts have been
voiced, whether it is legitimate to neglect all the effects of the modes
with zero momentum around the compact circle, which became infinitely
heavy and were integrated out by keeping only the positive momentum
modes. Doing field theory, these zero modes carry all the information
about the non-trivial vacuum structure. In DLCQ the vacuum is trivial.
The description we presented so far might have to be modified due to the
effects of the zero modes. .

The matrix conjecture this way elevates the SYM / non-perturbative
string theory correspondence to a principle: not only does the
worldvolume SYM capture important aspects of non-perturbative string
theory, it is used as a definition of “all of M-theory”. So learning
something about the worldvolume theory of branes will always
automatically bring us a step further towards the goal of understanding
the fundamental theory of everything.

By analyzing the size of D0 bound states some evidence can be found that
matrix theory is holographic, that is information in a given space-time
volume grows like the area surrounding the volume, not like the volume
itself [ 31 , 32 ] . This is supposed to be a genuine property of
quantum gravity. The idea is that the best you can do is to fill up your
volume with a big black hole and the entropy of the black hole grows
with its horizon area. Until recently it has been totally unclear how
such a principle could be implemented in string theory. Maldacena’s
proposal [ 33 ] led to a beautiful realization of holography in spaces
with negative cosmological constant. So far matrix theory is our only
candidate for a holographic description of Minkowski space.

#### 2.5.3 Worldvolume theory of the NS5 brane

As we have seen it is easy to understand the worldvolume theory of the
D-branes from analyzing the modes of strings with Dirichlet boundary
conditions. The NS5 and M5 branes are a little bit more elusive, but
using dualities we can say something about them, too. First consider the
IIB NS5 brane. Type IIB is selfdual, that is type IIB with coupling
@xmath and string scale @xmath is dual to type IIB with coupling @xmath
and string scale @xmath , holding @xmath fixed. The dual theory is the
theory of IIB D1 strings, which play the role of fundamental strings at
strong coupling. This duality takes NS5 into D5 brane. From this we
learn that as the D5 the NS5 will be governed by 6d SYM with gauge
coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The supersymmetries preserved by an flat NS5 brane living in 012345
space will satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath depends on whether we consider IIA or IIB.

The M5 brane can be best understood in the limit where M-theory is well
described by 11d SUGRA. Here @xmath coinciding M5 branes can just be
thought of as a soliton given by the following SUGRA solution, with
@xmath being the field strength of the 3-form vector potential [ 34 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Analyzing the zero modes of this soliton one can calculate that the
worldvolume supports a 6d @xmath supersymmetric tensor multiplet. From
11d SUGRA - IIA duality we immediately learn that the IIA NS5 brane
hence also supports a (2,0) tensor multiplet. However this time one of
the 5 scalars in the tensor multiplet lives on a circle (the one
parametrizing the position of the 5brane in the 11th dimension). Using a
normalization in which the scalar has mass dimension 2 ⁶ ⁶ 6 This is the
natural normalization since the scalars sit in the same multiplet as the
2-form @xmath which must have mass dimension 2, so that the @xmath
Wilson line is dimensionless the radius of this circle is @xmath .

## Chapter 3 Exploiting the SYM D-brane correspondence

### 3.1 Classical Hanany-Witten setups

After we have learned in principle how to use the SYM D-brane
correspondence in order to engineer certain gauge theories in a stringy
setup, we now want to exploit this correspondence and study possible
applications. One of the most prominent and intuitive setups used to
learn about gauge theories from string theory is the Hanany-Witten (HW)
setup [ 35 ] . Let me briefly review the basic ideas. A very exhaustive
review of these setups and their applications can be found in [ 36 ] .

#### 3.1.1 Branegineering

The idea behind Hanany-Witten setups is to study branes in flat space
and get interesting gauge theories by having many flat branes
intersecting each other. The matter content can be determined by simple,
intuitive rules. Similarly deformations and moduli become easily
visible. In the last chapter of this work I will establish a dictionary
mapping HW setups to the other approaches, where the interesting
dynamics is hidden in the background geometry. This way HW setups can be
used to encode complicated looking information about deformations and
phase transition in harmless looking brane moves. In several cases
aspects of string theory in the background of the intersecting branes
can be solved, leading to interesting results about the quantum gauge
theory on the brane.

We start with the maximally supersymmetric (16 supercharges) SYM on the
worldvolume of a D @xmath brane. For definiteness let me discuss the
case @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 As compared to @xmath in the original work of [ 35 ]
. The idea will be the same in the other dimensions.

In order to go to more interesting physics with lower supersymmetry, we
have to project out some of the degrees of freedom. This can be achieved
by letting our D4 branes, which I henceforth will call color branes (
@xmath of those will give rise to SUSY QCD with @xmath colors), end on
another brane. The boundary conditions will do the job of projecting out
certain states.

The concept of a brane ending on branes is a straight forward
generalization of the defining property of D-branes as an object on
which strings can end. Indeed all of the “brane ends on brane”
configurations used in this work can be obtained from this defining
setup via duality:

[]

Figure 6: Configurations dual to a fundamental string ending on a
D-brane.

Figure 6 illustrates this chain of dualities. Another way to understand
the who-ends-on-whom rules is to study the worldvolume theories. The end
of a brane is a charged object. In order for a given brane to be allowed
to end on another brane, there should better be a field on the
worldvolume that can carry away that charge. In the case of the
fundamental string ending on the D-brane, the end of the string is
charged electrically under the worldvolume gauge field. Similarly we can
explain the other setups of figure 6 . For example the D2 brane ending
on a IIA NS5 brane is the string like object charged under the 2-index
tensor gauge field on the worldvolume, the D3 brane ending on the NS5 or
D5 is the magnetic monopole on the worldvolume (which is a 2-brane in 6
dimensions).

In addition the non-vanishing field strength induced on the brane
couples via the DBI ( 2.2 ) action to the scalars which describe the
embedding of the brane and the brane has to bend in order to compensate
the force exerted by the gauge field. Indeed it was shown in [ 37 ] that
the DBI action allows for stable soliton solutions which can be
interpreted as a string ending on a D-brane. Much can be understood
about bending just on the base of symmetry arguments. As we will see in
the following bending is really a quantum effect in the field theory. So
for now I will neglect bending and only discuss the “classical” setup.

We choose to let our D4 branes end on two NS5 branes. This way the D4
brane stretches only over a finite interval bounded by the NS5 branes.
Usually one chooses this finite interval to be in the 6 direction. This
will do several things for us: for one certain degrees of freedom will
be projected out by the boundary conditions, as desired. In addition,
since our gauge theory now lives on a compact interval, the low energy
theory will be governed by the KK-reduction on the interval. Thus
effectively we will be dealing with a @xmath dimensional theory. Last
but not least the addition of the NS5 brane will break some more
supersymmetry. We will remain with 8 supercharges, that is in the @xmath
case with @xmath , as can be checked explicitly using ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.14
). The following table displays the worldvolume directions of these
branes. The additional D6 brane will be explained soon.

         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ------ -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  NS 5   x        x        x        x        x        x        o        o        o        o
  D 4    x        x        x        x        o        o        x        o        o        o
  D 6    x        x        x        x        o        o        o        x        x        x

The presence of these branes breaks the Lorentz symmetry group @xmath
down to @xmath . While the first part is our obvious Lorentz group in
4d, the rest should better have an interpretation as the R symmetry of
the corresponding superalgebra. It has to be an R symmetry due to the
fact that we interpreted the worldvolume scalars as positions of the
branes in this “internal” part of spacetime, therefore the scalars and
fermions on the worldvolume naturally transform like vectors and spinors
under this internal Lorentz group. A symmetry group acting differently
on the fermions and scalars in a supermultiplet is an R symmetry. Indeed
the R symmetry of the @xmath SUSY algebra is @xmath .

To determine from perturbative string theory which degrees of freedom
are projected out would require an analysis in the background of NS5
branes. Luckily there is an easier way to figure out what is going on,
by remembering once again that the scalars describe the position of the
brane. Without the NS5 branes, we had 5 scalars in the 5d @xmath
vectormultiplet, describing the position of the D4 brane in 45789 space.
In addition we will get a 6th scalar after KK reduction from the
6-component of the vector itself. Under the 4d @xmath SUSY 4 of these
scalars constitute the bosonic part of a hypermultiplet (HM), while the
vector together with the 2 other scalars forms the bosonic part of the
vectormultiplet (VM). Now requiring the D4 brane to end on the NS5 brane
fixes its position in 789 space. The only scalars surviving are the 45
motion. From supersymmetry it than follows, that the surviving multiplet
is the VM and the HM is projected out. The same will be true for any D
brane ending on NS5 branes. So indeed in order to branegineer gauge
theories a D brane ending on NS5 branes will be the starting building
block. The gauge coupling of the gauge theory is also encoded in this
simple setup. Due to the KK reduction the inverse gauge coupling is
proportional to the distance @xmath between the 2 NS5 branes. Using (
2.3 ) the precise value for the gauge coupling of the @xmath dimensional
gauge theory from a D @xmath brane suspended between two NS5 branes is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Moving the brane along the 45 direction turns on vevs for these scalars.
This corresponds to moving on the Coulomb branch of the gauge theory. At
generic points of the Coulomb branch all the D4 branes will be at a
different 45 position and we are left with an unbroken @xmath gauge
group, justifying the name.

As already indicated in the brane table above, using ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.14
) there is one more brane one can add without spoiling any further SUSY,
a D6 brane. Analyzing the possible brane motions one finds, that a D4
between two D6 branes supports a hypermultiplet while the vector is this
time projected out. A D4 suspended from NS5 to D6 is stuck and hence
supports no scalars and since we have @xmath this means no degrees of
freedom at all. So in order to have a gauge theory we will keep having
the D4 end on the two NS5 branes. Is there any new multiplet that arise
from the presence of @xmath “flavor” D6 branes? The D4 D6 system only
contains D-branes, so it is easy to deal with. In addition to the
strings ending only on the D4 brane, we will have strings ending on the
D4 and on the D6. Analyzing their massless sector one finds @xmath
hypermultiplets in the fundamental representation of @xmath . Naively
one can understand this from the fact that such strings will have an
@xmath Chan Paton factor on their one end and an @xmath Chan Paton
factor on their other end.

The dynamics of this system in the IR will only be determined by the
lightest branes. In the case of HW setups these will be the lowest
dimensional objects around, that is the D4 branes. The @xmath symmetry
is really a global symmetry, the gauge bosons from D6 D6 strings
decouple. This general philosophy that only the smallest brane
contributes to the dynamics carries over to HW setups in other
dimensions, where we suspend D @xmath color branes between NS branes
with @xmath branes taking over the role of flavor branes. Motions of
light branes will correspond to moduli, while motions of heavy branes
are parameters of the theory.

Let us consider the limits involved in more detail. Let me discuss the
case of D3 branes between NS5 branes and flavor D5 branes as in the
original work of [ 35 ] . Since this is in type IIB the worldvolume of
the NS5 brane supports just SYM and is easier to discuss.

In order to decouple gravity and higher string modes we send @xmath and
@xmath to infinity. We hold @xmath fixed. This sets the scale for all
the gauge theory modes. In order to decouple the Kaluza Klein modes from
the interval we want this to be much less than @xmath , that is we have
to consider weak string coupling. Indeed in this limit the gauge
coupling on the NS5 and D5 branes, which is @xmath and @xmath goes to
zero, justifying in a quantitative manner our assertion that at low
energies the only surviving modes are those of the lowest dimensional
brane, leading to a 3d gauge theory.

To summarize, we have shown that in the decoupling limit

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

the HW setup with @xmath D @xmath color and @xmath D @xmath flavor
branes describes an interacting p dimensional theory with @xmath gauge
group and @xmath flavors.

#### 3.1.2 There’s so much more one can do

So far we allowed ourselves to freely jump between dimensions in order
to relate the classical setups. This is indeed possible by applying a
simple T-duality to the original 3d setup. As long as we act inside the
worldvolume of the NS5 brane it will stay an NS5 brane, while the color
and flavor branes loose or gain a dimension whether we T-dualize a
worldvolume or a transverse direction. The maximal dimension we can
achieve this way is 6 from D6 branes between NS5 branes. These will be
the main focus of this work. Gauge theories in more than 6 dimensions
have a minimal of 16 supercharges. This is a classical constraint just
following from the size of the spinor representation of @xmath . Our
branes know all this. In any dimension the 8 supercharge HW setup looks
as follows:

             @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ---------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  NS 5       x        x        x        x        x        x        o        o        o        o
  D @xmath   x        @xmath   up       to       @xmath   @xmath   x        o        o        o
  D @xmath   x        @xmath   up       to       @xmath   @xmath   o        x        x        x

In order to go down to 4 supercharges we need yet another kind of brane.
One thing we can do is to rotate one of the players already present [ 38
, 39 ] . Checking the unbroken supersymmetries according to ( 2.4 ) and
( 2.14 ) we see that for example an NS5’ brane living in 012389 space
will do the job. It will break 1/2 of the supersymmetries presented in
the setup so far. In addition the @xmath part of the R-symmetry
corresponding to rotations in the 789 plane is broken to @xmath as
required. Analyzing the massless modes on a D4 brane suspended between
NS and NS’ we now find that all the scalars are locked. Only the @xmath
vector multiplet survives the projection. The same amount of SUSY will
be preserved if we choose to rotate the second NS5 brane by any nonzero
angle @xmath in the 4589 plane. The adjoint chiral multiplet from the
decomposition of the @xmath vector multiplet under @xmath will receive a
mass @xmath . For @xmath one recovers the @xmath theory, for @xmath the
adjoint decouples all together. In [ 38 ] they also found that when we
use @xmath coinciding NS5’ branes a superpotential @xmath is created
rather than the mass term @xmath which we obtained for @xmath . One can
argue for a term like this by studying which flat directions such a term
lifts in the classical field theory and than comparing with the possible
brane motions. The second possibility is rotating the flavor branes [ 40
] . This will leave the matter content untouched. Instead the
superpotential @xmath required for an @xmath theory will be turned off
continously with @xmath .

All these rotations are only possible for HW setups in 4 and lower
dimensions, again reflecting the fact that 4 is the maximal dimension
for SYM with 4 supercharges. Introducing even more branes with other
rotations we can as well engineer gauge theories with 2 and 1
supercharges in 3 and 2 dimensions. Of course it is no problem to also
write down configurations that preserve no supersymmetry at all. A
generic setup will do so.

Since rotating branes as we have seen just corresponds to perturbing
@xmath theories, only a very restricted class of @xmath theories may be
constructed this way. For example (except for one exotic exception I
will introduce later) no chiral gauge theories can be constructed this
way. In order to do so it is necessary to generalize the idea of
suspending a D @xmath brane on an interval in order to have a p
dimensional gauge theory to having @xmath branes on a rectangle (a brane
box) [ 41 ] ² ² 2 An equivalent way of viewing this is to view NS 5
branes at an orbifold as it was suggested in [ 42 ] . For us it seems
more natural to either have the advantages of branes as probes or the HW
setup. However the hybrid construction yields the same answers. . This
way generic models can be constructed, at least on the classic level.
Recently it has been shown [ 43 ] that they are also good as a quantum
theory as long as we choose an anomaly free matter content. This proof
is done in the equivalent brane as probe picture. Since the relation
between the various approaches will be one of my main subjects I will
postpone a discussion of brane boxes to later chapters.

Let me at this point introduce another possible construction used to
introduce flavors. It will also be the basic building block for product
gauge groups. The basic question to analyze is the following: let us
consider three NS5 branes at 3 different positions in the 6 direction.
We will put @xmath D4 branes on the first and @xmath D4 branes on the
second interval. What is the low energy field theory corresponding to
this? We will definitely get an @xmath gauge theory. Additional matter
will be produced from the D4 D4 strings stretching from the @xmath to
the @xmath branes. They have one Chan Paton factor in each gauge group.
So we would expect to obtain bifundamental matter that is a
hypermultiplet fundamental under both gauge groups. This can again be
verified by checking that the allowed brane motions correspond to the
classic moduli space of the gauge theory. Taking the third NS brane to
infinity the second gauge group decouples and becomes a global symmetry.
This way one can introduce flavors via semi-infinite D4 branes to the
left or right.

Indeed the two ways of including flavors are related if we take into
account the HW effect: whenever a flavor D5 crosses and NS5 a D3 is
created in between them. This process holds in all the T-dual
configurations as well. That brane creation must occur can be seen by
looking at the so called linking number of the NS5 and D5 brane, which
is a topological invariant. In order to have it unchanged in brane
crossing prcesses, a D3 brane has to be created when D5 and NS5 pass. So
if we move all the flavor branes to the far left or right, we will
create semi-infinite branes. The number of flavors didn’t change, just
their realization. There are many equivalent pictures yielding the same
gauge theory.

There is one more classical parameter we can introduce: the relative
position of the NS5 branes in the 789 space. This corresponds to turning
on an FI term @xmath , that is adding

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

to the Lagrangian, where @xmath is the auxiliary field in the vector
multiplet. Once more one can prove this by analyzing the possible brane
motions in the presence of this term and compare with classical gauge
theory.

We have now all the tools in order to branegineer quite arbitrary
classical gauge groups. The space of all possible brane motions
corresponds to the classical moduli space of the gauge theory. We
already identified the 45 motions as the Coulomb branch. The Higgs
branch is seen if we split the color branes along the flavor branes. As
shown earlier such a brane segment between two color branes supports the
4 scalars in a hypermultiplet, corresponding to moving the segment off,
leaving a broken gauge group. A generic point on the Higgs branch then
would look as follows:

[]

Figure 7: A maximally broken situation on the Higgs branch in a theory
with 4 supercharges. The numbers denote the complex scalar degrees of
freedom associated with motions of the given brane piece. The s-rule has
been taken into account.

In the picture, the fat line is the NS brane, the fat broken line is the
NS’ brane, the horizontal lines denote color and the broken vertical
lines denote flavor branes. For a theory with 8 supercharges, the NS’
has to be replaced by an NS branes and both sides of the picture look
the same. The picture does not depend on the dimension (it has to be 4
or less since we are only dealing with 4 supercharges). The numbers
denote the complex degrees of freedom associated to moving around the
brane pieces. In order to reproduce the results from classic gauge
theory we have to take into account the so called s-rule [ 35 ] : given
a single pair of NS and flavor brane, only a single color brane is
allowed to end on them. Summing up all the degrees of freedom we find
that the complex dimension of the Higgs branch is (for @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

in perfect agreement with the field theory counting, where we just count
the scalar fields that are not eaten by the Higgs mechanism,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Higgs branch is not visible when we use semi-infinite branes to
realize the flavors. Turning on FI terms (that is separating the NS
branes in 789 space for 8 supercharges or just in 7 space for 4
supercharges) kills the Coulomb branch of the @xmath theories, as is
expected. Since the color branes are only allowed to extend in the 6
direction in order to preserve SUSY they have to split on the flavor
branes, that is we have to be on the Higgs branch.

### 3.2 Solving the quantum theory

#### 3.2.1 Bending and quantum effects

Above I argued in a qualitative manner that a brane has to bend if
another brane ends on it in order to balance the force exerted by the
flux it has to support, since the end of the other brane represents a
charge on its worldvolume. Let me discuss this point in a bit more of a
quantitative manner following [ 44 , 37 ] . Before doing so I’d like to
show that bending indeed is a quantum effect from the point of view of
the SYM.

Let me discuss the @xmath setup in 4d since this was the main example I
discussed on the classical level so far. The classical value of the
Yang-Mills coupling is given by @xmath where @xmath again denotes the
length of the interval. In order to focus on the SYM modes in this setup
we want to take the decoupling limit ( 3.2 ). The tension of the D4
brane and the NS5 brane are @xmath and @xmath respectively. Since @xmath
is proportional to @xmath we see that for zero coupling the NS5 brane is
infinitely heavy and hence is not pulled or bent by the D4 brane.
Turning on the loop corrections in the gauge theory is reflected in the
bending of the branes.

As pointed out earlier, the DBI action couples the scalars and the
vector multiplet, so a non-trivial flux on the brane (as it is induced
by the end of another brane) can be supported by simultaneously turning
on vevs for the scalars, that is bending the brane since the scalars
describe the position of the brane. We are only interested in the @xmath
limit, so the SYM approximation of the DBI is sufficient. We are looking
for a stable setup with non-vanishing flux. One way to construct this is
to look at BPS setups. One can construct them by demanding some
preserved supersymmetry. The no force condition is then guaranteed. This
discussion was carried out in [ 37 ] . The same results for the bending
as found by Callan and Maldacena can be obtained in a more qualitative
fashion following the discussion of Witten and noting that

-   the bending should be proportional to the net charge, that is:
    branes ending on the left - brane ending on the right

-   the scalar terms in the SYM action demands a minimal area embedding
    of the brane, therefore the bending should be a solution of a
    Laplace equation

-   the bending can only depend on the worldvolume directions transverse
    to the end of the other brane and for symmetry reasons should only
    depend on the radial distance

From this discussion it follows that in order to solve for the bending
of the NS branes in a p dimensional HW setup we should solve the Laplace
equation in the @xmath NS5 brane worldvolume directions transverse to
the end of the D @xmath brane, leading to @xmath , log, @xmath , @xmath
bending in 5,4,3, @xmath dimensions, where @xmath denotes the radial
coordinate along the NS5 brane worldvolume away from the end of the D
@xmath brane. The coefficient in front of the @xmath dependence will be
proportional to the net number of branes. In 6d the transversal space is
zero dimensional. No bending can occur, no field strength can be
supported. The net number of branes has to be zero.

In theories with 8 supercharges the only perturbative corrections to the
@xmath function come from 1-loop. Since the gauge coupling is encoded in
the length of the interval, the @xmath , @xmath , log, @xmath , @xmath
bending in 6,5,4,3, @xmath dimensions reflects precisely the known
1-loop running of the gauge coupling in these dimensions.

There is one peculiar effect due to the bending. As I stated above, only
motions of the light branes are moduli of the setup. Taking into account
the bending we should make this slightly more precise: only such motions
leaving the asymptotic form of the heavy branes untouched will
correspond to moduli. Consider the simplest setup of @xmath color branes
on the interval. We argued above that the classic theory describes
@xmath gauge group. A generic point on the Coulomb branch will have an
unbroken @xmath corresponding to moving the @xmath branes independently
along the NS5 branes. If we have a @xmath or faster fall of in the
bending, quantum mechanically the color branes only created a little
dimple on the NS5 and the asymptotic of the NS branes will stay
unchanged. However if we have logarithmic or linear bending, changing
the center of mass would correspond to changing the asymptotic
behaviour. Therefore on the quantum level the center of mass @xmath part
is frozen out and we are only left with an @xmath gauge theory. This
reflects the field theory statement that only in 3 and lower dimensions
a @xmath gauge theory can lead to interacting IR physics.

Once we have frozen out the @xmath we have to find a new interpretation
for the 789 position of the branes. An FI term is only possible for
abelian gauge groups (the auxiliary component of the vector multiplet
transforms as an adjoint and is not gauge invariant unless we are
dealing with @xmath ). On the other hand @xmath theories have a new
branch: the baryonic branch ³ ³ 3 Going from @xmath to @xmath basically
corresponds to gauging baryon number . Interpreting the 789 position as
a deformation that forces us on this baryonic branch yields the right
moduli spaces when compared with gauge theory calculations.

In addition to the effects from loops there are also corrections due to
instantons. These instantons can be seen directly in the brane picture.
It is known that a D @xmath brane within a D @xmath brane satisfies the
4 dimensional YM instanton equations [ 45 ] . So D0 branes are
instantons within D4 branes. To interpret these D0 branes as instantons
in the 0123 spacetime we should consider Euclidean D0 branes whose
world-line stretches along the 6 direction so that they are contained
within the D4 branes between the NS5 branes [ 46 , 47 , 48 ] . This way
the field theory objects and quantum effects have been mapped to
D-branes and their properties. The problem is now to solve the theory
after including all these effects.

#### 3.2.2 Lifting to M-theory

So far we have seen how the quantum corrections manifest themselves in
the stringy embedding. Now we are going to actually solve them. This
analysis was performed in the remarkable work of Witten [ 44 ] . To
implement this solution we use the IIA M-theory duality and view our
setup as an 11d setup. For large values of the radius @xmath of the
eleventh dimension 11d SUGRA will be a good approximation. Since both
the NS5 and the D4 lift to an M-theory M5 brane, our whole setup will be
described by just a single M5 brane in 11d. For this brane to be a
solution of the 11d equations of motion, it will be determined by the
requirement that it lives on a minimal area cycle (this way Laplace
equation sneaks in again). Therefore the shape of our branes will be
solely determined by solving the problem of soap bubbles: we fix the
asymptotics of the branes and they will arrange themselves to live on a
minimal area cycle.

Before I move on and show that indeed all quantum effects, perturbative
as well as non-perturbative, are indeed incorporated in the shape of the
M5 brane in the 11d SUGRA limit, let me first discuss the validity of
this limit. Let me discuss once more the precise decoupling limit from
the IIA point of view. Here we want to decouple gravity, heavy string
modes and KK modes from the finite interval, that is send @xmath and
@xmath to infinity and @xmath to zero, while keeping the gauge coupling
@xmath fixed. Translating into 11d units @xmath is supposed to be fixed
as @xmath goes to zero. But this requires us to also take @xmath to
zero. This is the opposite limit of the one where we are able to solve!
The only reason why I nevertheless will go on and do some calculations
in what follows is that holomorphic quantities will be protected and we
can calculate them at any value of @xmath , even though they will only
correspond to gauge theory quantities in the small @xmath regime. Also
qualitative aspects, like e.g. whether the theory confines, are supposed
to agree. But it has been shown in [ 49 ] that in general unprotected
terms do not agree. This is a pity, since the holomorphic information is
encoded in the SW curve and was known already from pure field theory
considerations [ 7 ] . The branes only give us a nice organizing
principle for analyzing the holomorphic quantities in complicated
situations, where field theory “guess and check” methods like they are
usually employed in order to obtain SW curves do not work anymore, like
in situations with many product groups [ 44 ] or matter content that
leads to non hyperelliptic curves, e.g. two-index symmetric tensors [ 50
] .

In order to get new information we have to solve the full string theory
in the background of NS and D4 branes, a task that seems too hard with
today’s tools. This is a problem that is common to most approaches of
trying to get new gauge information out of string theory, including the
most recent one, the Maldacena large @xmath conjecture, about which I
will make some more comments in what follows. There is always one regime
where we can easily compute and another regime where we want the answer.
However for Maldacena’s case to get the full answer we have to do string
theory on @xmath with some RR flux turned on. This hasn’t been solved so
far, but due to the large symmetries of the background at least there is
hope.

Above I have argued that in M-theory we can solve for the exact shape of
the M5 brane by solving the minimal area condition given a set of
boundary conditions, which incorporate the classical input. Requiring
SUSY of the low energy effective action amounts to restricting to
supersymmetric cycles, a special subclass of minimal area cycles [ 51 ,
52 ] . A cycle is supersymmetric if a brane wrapping it preserves some
amount of supersymmetry. For 2-cycles this condition directly translates
into holomorphicity. A 2-cycle obtained as the zero-locus of a
holomorphic function of 2 complex coordinates will preserve 1/2, as the
zero locus of 2 equations in 3 variables 1/4 of the original
supersymmetries.

Now let me go ahead and show that indeed all the quantum effects are
incorporated in the shape of the brane. After this I will write down the
solution as obtained in [ 44 ] . We already found that the bending of
the brane incorporates the perturbative corrections. In the type IIA
setup the non-perturbative corrections have to be put in by hand. They
are represented by Euclidean D0 branes stretching along the 6 direction.
In order to incorporate all instanton effects we would have to sum over
all setups bound with a given number of D0s. What becomes of the D0
branes once we lift to 11d? Remember that the 11d origin of a D0 brane
is momentum around the compact @xmath circle, that is a bound state with
D0 branes corresponds to adding 10 momentum. The 10 position of the D4
brane would be a function of time:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our field theory instantons correspond to Euclidean D0 branes, that is
their worldvolume stretches along the finite interval in the 6 direction
instead of stretching in time. According to the same philosophy they
should correspond to “twist” in the 11d setup, that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

All quantum effects lead to “bending” and “twisting” in 11d and are
hence incorporated in the shape of the brane.

Now let me move on and present the solution. Let me discuss the general
setup of @xmath NS5 branes leading to a product of @xmath @xmath gauge
groups. We choose as complex coordinates @xmath and @xmath , so that a
D4 brane is at @xmath and an NS5 brane at @xmath This is the only
complex structure in which our two ingredients can be written as
holomorphic functions. Since our 2-cycle asymptotically will look like
NS5 or D4, we have to choose this structure. Taking the exponential in
the definition of @xmath beautifully takes into account the compactness
of @xmath . Using @xmath as @xmath -parameter one can introduce a
complex coupling constant

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath denote the positions of the various NS5 branes. At the
one loop level the 1-loop running of the gauge coupling from the
logarithmic bending is simply generalized to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the position of the D4 branes to the left
and right of the NS5 brane under consideration.

In order to incorporate all the non perturbative effects we have to
solve for a surface @xmath in the four-manifold @xmath which is
parametrized by the coordinates @xmath and @xmath . As stated above,
@xmath space-time supersymmetry requires that @xmath varies
holomorphically with @xmath , such that @xmath is a Riemann surface in
@xmath . Using @xmath , @xmath is defined by the complex equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

At a given value of @xmath , the roots of @xmath in @xmath are the
positions of the 5-branes, i.e. @xmath is a polynomial of degree @xmath
in @xmath . On the other hand, for fixed @xmath , the roots of @xmath in
@xmath are the positions of the IIA 4-branes. Recall briefly the
situation of a model with two 5-branes, i.e. @xmath . This model is
described by the curve

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are polynomials in @xmath of degree
@xmath . More specifically, the zeroes of @xmath ( @xmath ) correspond
to the positions of the semi-infinite 4-branes ending from the left
(right) on the 5-branes. On the other hand, the polynomial @xmath
belongs to the @xmath 4-branes suspended between the two 5-branes. After
suitable rescaling and shifting of @xmath and @xmath , one obtains for
pure @xmath gauge theory simply @xmath . @xmath is then a polynomial of
the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are the order parameters of the theory. In order to
include, for example, @xmath flavors of hypermultiplets from the right,
@xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is important to note that these curves precisely coincide with the
Seiberg-Witten Riemann surfaces [ 7 ] . The entire holomorphic @xmath
prepotential is encoded in the curve @xmath .

## Chapter 4 Applications of the brane construction

As we have seen in the previous chapter there is a deep connection
between gauge theories and string dynamics. In the following I will show
how this connection can be used to understand certain aspects of gauge
theory and the phase structure of string theory, especially the
transitions between topologically distinct vacua.

### 4.1 Dualities in the brane picture

#### 4.1.1 Exact S-duality

##### General Idea

In the previous chapter I discussed that there are certain symmetries in
string theory, relating one theory at strong coupling to another theory
at weak coupling. More generally speaking, in theories with a free
parameter (e.g. the coupling) we identify theories with different values
of this parameter. The easiest example is the self-duality of type IIB
string theory, where this free coupling is the string coupling and the
duality symmetry identifies the theory at @xmath with the theory at
@xmath . If we also include the axion, @xmath is enhanced to a complex
coupling parameter and we have a whole @xmath symmetry acting on it.
This strong weak coupling duality exchanges fundamental string and
D-string. Taking into account the full @xmath one finds a whole zoo of
@xmath strings in type IIB. This kind of duality is usually called
S-duality.

The idea that such a duality may also exist in field theory is very old.
It is easy to convince oneself that classical Maxwell theory is
invariant under the exchange of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Of course this “duality” can only be valid if we introduce magnetic
charges as well as electric charges. Since in quantum mechanics
consistency requires that electric charge @xmath and magnetic charge
@xmath satisfy the Dirac quantisation condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we see that any implementation of this electric magnetic duality
symmetry in a quantum theory would automatically provide an S-duality,
since the charges also play the role of coupling parameters, and hence
strong electric coupling corresponds to weak magnetic coupling. This
idea of realizing a quantum version of electric magnetic duality was
first voiced in [ 53 ] and is hence referred to as Montonen-Olive
duality. The problem is that in a standard field theory, like QED, the
coupling constant is not a good operator, but runs according to the
renormalization group. Therefor it is expected that S-duality is only
realized in finite theories. One way to guarantee finiteness is to
consider maximally supersymmetric Yang-Mills where supersymmetry
guarantees cancellation of all divergencies.

Indeed by now it is believed that @xmath SYM realizes Montonen-Olive
duality. Like in IIB string theory the @xmath duality is enhanced to a
full @xmath duality once we include the theta angle and its invariance
under @xmath shifts. Since at least one of the two theories we want to
identify with each other is at strong coupling, it is again impossible
to directly prove the duality. But several consistency checks have been
performed, the most convincing being Sen’s calculation [ 54 ]
establishing the existence of all the @xmath dyon states @xmath dual to
the electron multiplet.

Another way to establish this Montonen-Olive duality is to exploit the
gauge theory- string theory correspondence. The idea is that by
embedding the gauge theories into string theory, string dualities
directly translate down into dualities of the field theory. Of course
this is not a “proof” of the duality, but one reduces the number of
independent assumptions to just string dualities.

Indeed in the case of S-duality in @xmath , @xmath SYM it is straight
forward to realize this idea. We just study flat D3 branes in uncurved
space. According to ( 2.3 ) the gauge coupling on the D3 brane is just
@xmath . @xmath dyons in the field theory are @xmath strings ending on
the brane. S-duality of IIB leaves the D3 brane invariant. Field theory
duality is just what is left of the string theory duality after we
decoupled the bulk modes.

##### S-duality in @xmath

There are some examples of finite theories with less than 16
supersymmetries. In @xmath the @xmath function is solely determined at
1-loop, @xmath . So just by choosing the right matter content the theory
is finite. It is believed that all these theories do posses an S-duality
acting on their coupling constant. This was first established for the
@xmath case with 4 flavors in [ 55 ] .

In order to find the S-duality in the brane picture one first performs
the lift to M-theory. Finiteness translates into a no bending
requirement. The duality group is then the homotopy group of the
resulting Riemann surface [ 44 ] . Since this analysis only depends on
having the curve and not whether we obtain it from brane physics or just
from field theory this statement does not shed much new light on @xmath
S-duality. The story becomes clearer when going to the branes as probes
picture. Finiteness corresponds to cancellation of tadpoles in the
orbifold background, as I will show when discussing the duality between
these two approaches. The gauge theory can be realized as D3 branes on
top of an ADE singularity. As in the @xmath case S-duality of the
embedding IIB string theory directly translates down to S-duality of the
gauge theory. In general the duality group will be bigger than just
@xmath since it will also include transformations that just relabel the
gauge group factors. These are obvious symmetries. Since they in general
do not commute with S-duality a large discrete duality group is
generated.

The orbifold construction carries over straight forwardly to @xmath .
Now we have to consider D3 branes on top of an @xmath singularity with
@xmath . Here we have to distinguish two kinds of tadpoles [ 43 ] :
tadpoles from twist elements that leave a 2d plane fixed (so that they
look like @xmath ) cancel only in a finite theory, all other tadpoles
have to cancel in order for the theory to be free of anomalies. This can
be understood as follows: a non-vanishing tadpole corresponds to a net
charge. In a compact space this has to vanish. If our orbifold has an r
dimensional fixed plane, we are dealing with a charge in r dimensions.
If r is bigger than 2 there are no problems with this. For r=2, as we
have to deal with in the @xmath case and for the special tadpoles in
@xmath the charge will lead to a logarithmic divergence. I will prove
that this divergence is nothing but the running of the gauge coupling in
Chapter 4. So cancellation of tadpoles of the first kind ( @xmath ) is a
necessary requirement, tadpoles of the second kind ( @xmath ) vanish
only in theories with no running. Again one can see the finiteness
requirement in the dual brane box picture as a no-bending requirement [
56 ] . S-duality is again established trivially by the embedding via D3
brane in type IIB.

There are certainly other @xmath S-dual pairs. The list of finite
theories, which can be constructed using the methods of [ 57 ] or [ 58 ]
exhibits many examples which can not be realized in any brany way so
far, and probably most of them exhibit some kind of S-duality. One way
one might hope to generate such S-dual pairs is to scan through all
finite theories whose Seiberg dual is known. Before embarking on this
discussion let me explain Seiberg duality and its brane realization.

#### 4.1.2 Seiberg duality and Mirror symmetry

##### Universality

Another interesting aspect of field theory that can be addressed quite
systematically in a brany language is universality. The phenomenon of
universality is due to the effect that the renormalization group (RG)
flow is irreversible. Evolving a theory towards the IR, certain
information about the theory is lost. Several possible deformations of
the theory are irrelevant and do not lead to new IR physics. Many
different theories hence flow to the same fixed point. The detailed
information encoded in the UV physics does not matter and all physical
IR properties are just encoded in the structure of the fixed point
theory. Since many different theories flow to the same fixed point their
IR physics is described by the universal properties of the fixed point.
All theories flowing to the same fixed point are usually referred to as
a universality class. This is the closest we can get to duality in the
context of theories with a running coupling. The dual theories (which
are usually still referred to as electric and magnetic) no longer are
identically, but nevertheless describe the same physics in the IR.

In field theory it is often very difficult to establish whether two
different theories belong to one and the same universality class.
Usually one identifies certain possible deformations of the theory as
irrelevant. This is done analysing their quantum dimensions. Once we
know the precise dimension (that is after quantum corrections have been
taken into account) of a given operator we can read off from the
dimension if the corresponding dimensionful coupling increases or
decreases once we multiply all length scales involved with a certain
scaling factor. The corresponding operators are called relevant or
irrelevant. The former lead to a different IR description, latter leave
the IR description unchanged. Of special interest are dimensionless
operators. They are usually referred to as marginal. Existence of an
exactly marginal operator leads to a series of FPs which can be smoothly
deformed into each other by tuning the marginal coupling, that is a
fixed line.

This way one can establish that theories which have the same Lagrangian
up to some irrelevant operators belong to the same universality class. A
much more spectacular example of such a matching was found in [ 59 ] ,
where it was established that even two theories with a completely
different gauge group can belong to the same universality class. Usually
this phenomenon is called Seiberg duality. This nomenclature is due to
the fact that one can view the two different UV descriptions as the
dynamics of electric and magnetic variables respectively. The name
duality might be a little bit misleading, since the two systems do
describe different physics away from the fixed point. It is however
quite impressive that they do describe the same physics in the IR.

Most statements about dualities of this kind are still conjectural, even
though a huge amount of evidence has been accumulated. It would be
desirable to gain a better understanding of this phenomenon of duality
from the branes / SYM correspondence. The basic strategy is the
following: we should identify certain brane moves as irrelevant. This
can for example be done by matching the resulting gauge theories which
are known to belong to the same universality class. Of course an
intrinsic stringy explanation of why such an brane move should leave the
IR physics unchanged would be desirable. It would basically complete the
proof of Seiberg duality. But once we have identified a certain brane
move as irrelevant, we can produce a vast variety of field theories
belonging to common universality classes, by applying the irrelevant
brane move to various configurations.

One example of such an irrelevant brane move is changing the 6 position
of the various branes involved. Since the 6 direction is the one along
which the color branes stretch, it seems reasonable to assume that the
low energy physics shouldn’t depend on the 6 positions involved.
Effectively we performed a Kaluza Klein reduction along the 6 direction
to obtain the p dimensional physics from the p+1 dimensional worldvolume
of the color branes. In a Kaluza Klein reduction we throw away
everything but the zero mode (that is the constant mode) along the
compact direction. We do not expect that our low energy physics is
sensitive to any structure (that is to the brane positions) in the KK
reduced direction. Let me show in the following how one can use this
assumption to obtain Seiberg duality and its 3d cousin, mirror symmetry,
from this brane move. After that I will briefly comment on the validity
of the assumption, that this brane move is indeed irrelevant.

##### Seiberg duality

Probably the most famous example of an IR duality of this type is the
equivalence of SUSY QCD with @xmath flavors and @xmath colors with
another SUSY QCD, also with @xmath flavors, but with @xmath colors and
additional singlet fields called mesons, coupling via a superpotential
@xmath with the quark fields. Let me explain the phase diagram of SUSY
QCD as it was discussed in [ 59 ] . For other gauge groups the phase
structure will look very similar, with @xmath replaced by the ratio
@xmath where @xmath denotes the quadratic index.

[]

Figure 8: Phase diagram for SUSY QCD

For small @xmath holomorphy and symmetries allow for a unique
superpotential whose minimum is at infinity in all the moduli (the ADS
superpotential). An instanton calculation at @xmath shows that it is
indeed generated for all @xmath . For @xmath the quantum moduli space is
described by mesons and baryons with a unique quantum constraint again
fixed by symmetries and holomorphy. For @xmath again baryons and mesons
are the right degrees of freedom. The classical moduli space stays
uncorrected. This behaviour is referred to as “s-confining” in the
literature [ 60 ] . It is a special case of Seiberg duality with a
trivial magnetic gauge group.

For @xmath a little bit below 3 ¹ ¹ 1 To be more precise: @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath with @xmath fixed and @xmath . one can establish the
existence of a non-trivial IR fixed point following the arguments of
Banks and Zaks [ 61 ] . The relation between R-charge and conformal
dimension contained in the superconformal algebra tells us that this
fixed point behaviour has to break down at @xmath . Assuming that the
non-trivial fixed point theory, usually referred to as Non-abelian
Coulomb phase, really holds in the whole regime @xmath , a beautiful and
consistent picture emerges. It is in this NACP that the dual description
comes into play. Using the same borders in the dual group one can see
that it is also in its NACP. The duality then states that this is indeed
the same fixed point. There is plenty of evidence for this conjecture

-   the ‘t Hooft anomaly matchings are satisfied

-   the moduli spaces match

-   under perturbations via superpotential terms we flow to new
    consistent dual pairs

-   the ring of chiral operators matches

For @xmath the electric theory loses asymptotic freedom and the theory
is free in the IR. For @xmath the electric theory is strongly coupled
and intractable, however extending the duality conjecture to this regime
one finds a free magnetic phase. For special values of @xmath one
encounters self-dual pairs. In the case of SUSY QCD this happens for
@xmath . As shown in [ 62 ] in more general gauge theories self-duality
might show up at @xmath for some integer @xmath (in this notation SUSY
QCD realizes selfduality at @xmath ).

It was shown by [ 38 ] that the two “dual” theories can indeed be
connected via a motion of branes in the 6 direction. One important thing
one has to remember from our discussion in Chapter 2 is the
Hanany-Witten effect [ 35 ] of brane creation when an NS5 brane passes
an D6 brane. Taking the NS5 brane all the way through the flavor branes
and then “ @xmath ” around the NS5’ brane one obtains a brane theory
that is described by the dual SYM.

##### Mirror symmetry

Another example of universality is mirror symmetry in 3 dimensions. It
was first discovered by Intriligator and Seiberg in their study of 3
dimensional @xmath theories (that is 8 supercharges). In 3 dimensions
the vector is dual to a scalar, so that both the VM and the HM just
contain 4 scalars as bosonic degrees of freedom. Supersymmetry requires
the Coulomb and the Higgs branch both to be hyper-Kahler manifolds.
There might hence be a symmetry mapping the Higgs branch of one onto the
Coulomb branch of another theory. Since the scalar one obtains from
dualizing the vector lives on a circle of radius @xmath while all the
other scalars are in general non-compact, one should expect that such a
symmetry can only exist at infinite coupling (that is in the far IR
since the coupling has mass dimension 1).

Taking into account quantum corrections the Higgs branch remains
untouched while the Coulomb branch is corrected at 1-loop. Intriligator
and Seiberg constructed theories which are mirror to each other in the
sense that their quantum moduli spaces agree in the far IR with the role
of Coulomb and Higgs branch swapped.

The implementation of mirror symmetry in string theory uses @xmath
duality of type IIB and again the irrelevance of the motion in the 6
direction. This analyzes was performed in the original HW paper [ 35 ]
and was one of the main motivations for introducing these brane setups.
Acting with S-duality on a 3d HW setup changes NS5 branes and D5 branes.
After rearranging branes in the 6 direction one winds up with a system
that has again a SYM interpretation. If we start with a theory with a
single gauge group and a lot of matter, we will end up with a product of
many gauge groups and just two fundamental matter multiplets from the
two original NS5 branes turned into D5 branes. I will present examples
later on.

E.g. the mirror of @xmath with bifundamentals and a single fundamental
in one of the gauge groups is @xmath with an adjoint and @xmath flavors.
In the HW realization we put the theory on a circle. The electric theory
is obtained via @xmath NS5 branes and one D5 brane in one of the gauge
groups. The mirror has just one NS5 brane, which yields @xmath with an
adjoint ² ² 2 Below I will give a more detailed discussion of HW setups
with a compact @xmath direction, but it is straightforward to see that a
single NS5 on the circle gives us a single gauge group with an adjoint
from the “bifundamental” starting and ending in the same group. . The
@xmath D5 branes add the @xmath matter multiplets.

Counting quaternionic dimensions of the branches is very simple. The
dimension of the Coulomb branch is just the rank of the gauge group, so
it is @xmath in the original and @xmath in the mirror. The Higgs
dimension is obtained by counting the number of HMs not eaten by the
Higgs mechanism, so it is the number of HMs minus the number of VMs,
that is @xmath for the original and @xmath . So we find the expected
agreement. Doing a 1-loop calculation one can check that not only the
dimension, but really the full hyper-Kahler metric agrees [ 63 ] .

Generalization to @xmath groups needs some “song and dance” since we now
have to deal with the S-dual of the O5. This analysis was performed in [
64 ] . We can get mirror symmetry in this case also via combined S- and
T-duality in the brane setup: consider the setup with a single NS5 and
@xmath D5s. T-dualizing this yields @xmath D2 branes probing a
background of @xmath D6 branes. In the S-dual picture we have just a
single D5 and @xmath NS5s. T-dualizing now yields D2 branes probing an
@xmath singularity [ 65 ] with one extra matter multiplet coming from
the D5. We will see later that these give indeed rise to the gauge
groups presented above. I think this is a very beautiful realization of
mirror symmetry, since it relates directly the two most prominent
backgrounds which were studied using the brane probe technique. In this
picture generalization to @xmath gauge groups is straight forward and
yields a correspondence between D2 branes probing a @xmath singularity
and D2 branes probing an O6 @xmath D6 system.

##### Combining both: gauge theory with @xmath in d=3

Mirror symmetry can be generalized to @xmath in d=3 [ 66 , 67 ] . The
mirror can be thought of as a theory of vortices. In addition one can
still perform the EGK brane move that yielded Seiberg duality in 4
dimensions, so one might expect that these theories do exhibit two
different kinds of dualities, mirror symmetry and Seiberg duality.
Indeed it was argued in [ 68 ] and [ 69 ] from the field theory point of
view, that the Seiberg duals suggested by the brane picture still hold
in the 3d setup. This way one can produce not just two but really very
many gauge theories that live in the same universality class.

##### Irrelevance of the 6 position?

I have presented several examples of theories in the same universality
class by assuming that the 6 position in HW setups is irrelevant. This
assumption was based on the fact, that in order to identify the
low-energy field theory we effectively KK reduced on the interval
thereby throwing away all modes that could probe any structure along
this direction.

This argument could be spoiled if we encounter phase transitions when
moving the branes around. Especially dangerous are points, where we move
branes past each other. In the case of a NS5 brane crossing a D5 brane
we are saved by the brane-creation mechanism and the s-rule. However
there are situations when the IR physics indeed does change with the
relative 6 position of branes. This happens when NS5 branes meet
parallel flavor branes, like it is possible in HW setups with 4
supercharges (the NS5’ is parallel to the D6 in the conventions used so
far). As examples I will discuss the enhancement of the chiral global
symmetry and the phenomenon of flavor doubling, both related to D6
branes crossing NS5’ branes. Another example of a similar phase
transition was discussed in [ 40 ] where it was shown that passing
flavor branes which are rotated with respect to each other past each
other changes the superpotential of the corresponding gauge theory.

As a first example let me discuss the appearance of enhanced chiral
symmetry as suggested in [ 70 , 71 ] . Let us consider a 4d gauge
theory. The global symmetry of flavor rotations is visible as the
decoupled @xmath gauge theory on the D6 worldvolume. With 8 supercharges
that is all we expect since the rotations of fundamental and
antifundamental @xmath chiral multiplets are linked via the @xmath
superpotential @xmath , where @xmath is the adjoint scalar from the VM.
For the same reason @xmath and @xmath gauge groups will have @xmath and
@xmath global symmetry respectively (these are the subgroups of the full
@xmath flavor rotations that leave the superpotential invariant).
However in the situation with 4 supercharges no such superpotential is
present. In the @xmath case we expect the full chiral @xmath symmetry,
while the orthogonal and symplectic gauge groups will have a full @xmath
rotation group. Generically the branes only see the @xmath remnant. If
we move all D6 branes on top of the parallel NS5’ brane they can split
(this is just a 6d HW setup). The half D6 branes will realize the full
global symmetry. For this to be possible we had to choose a very
particular 6 position of the D6 branes.

This is just a special example of the more general phenomenon of “flavor
doubling” [ 72 ] whenever a D6 brane meets an NS5’. Consider the
following cross configuration:

[]

Figure 9: A “cross” configuration. An intersection of a D4 brane, a D6
brane and an NS5 @xmath brane.

Let me identify the matter content corresponding to this configuration.
First let us recall that when a D6 brane meets a D4 brane there is a
massless hypermultiplet @xmath which transforms under the @xmath
symmetry groups which sits on the D4 and D6 branes. The number of
supersymmetries for such a configuration is 8 and so there is a
superpotential which is restricted by the supersymmetry to be @xmath ,
where @xmath is the 45 position of the D6 brane, @xmath is the 45
position of the D4 brane.

We can slowly tune the position of an NS5 @xmath brane to touch the
intersection of the D4 and D6 branes. Locally the number of
supersymmetries is now 4. At this point, both the D4 and the D6 branes
can break and the gauge symmetry is enhanced to @xmath . The @xmath
indices correspond to the two parts of the D6 branes and the @xmath
indices correspond to the two parts of the D4 branes.

As usual for the transitions which lead to breaking of the D branes, we
should look for an interpretation as a Higgs mechanism. Since, the
number of vector multiplets is increased by two, we need to look for two
more massless chiral fields. By applying the same logic as in the case
of the enhanced chiral symmetry, we see that we have four copies of
chiral multiplets @xmath . They carry charges (1,-1,0,0), (0,1,-1,0),
(0,0,1,-1), (-1,0,0,1), respectively under the gauge groups.

In addition there are bi-fundamental fields for the intersection of the
two new D4 branes, @xmath with charges (0,1,0,-1) and (0,-1,0,1),
respectively. Two more bi-fundamental fields come from the two new D6
branes. For the moment, we will ignore the bi-fundamentals for the D6
branes, since they have six dimensional kinetic terms and so are not
dynamical for the four dimensional system.

The system has 4 supercharges and we cannot exclude the possibility of a
superpotential. Studying possible deformations and comparing with
possible branches of field theory the superpotential can be uniquely
fixed to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

What happens if we rejoin the D6 brane and move it away from the NS5’?
Depending on whether we move it to the left or right, either @xmath or
@xmath will become massive, since the strings stretching between the one
D4 piece and the D6 have to stretch a non-zero distance. If we embed
this cross configuration in an HW setup realizing product gauge groups
we find that any D6 brane basically contributes a fundamental
hypermultiplet to all product factors! All but one of them will have a
finite mass. At the special points when a D6 touches an NS5’ and is
allowed to split, the fundamental hypermultiplets in the two
neighbouring groups will become massless simultaneously. We have created
a situation in which the matter content does depend on the 6 positions
of the branes involved.

#### 4.1.3 S-dual @xmath pairs revisited

After this long discussion about Seiberg duality and all its cousins we
can readress the question: what is the Seiberg dual of a finite theory?
Many of the examples of Seiberg duality include theories that can be
made finite upon adding an appropriate superpotential term. Is in these
cases the Seiberg duality an S-duality?

Just checking through several examples one finds that in general the
Seiberg dual of a finite theory is not finite [ 57 , 73 ] , so that a
@xmath S-duality cannot be true. However in all examples the dual does
have a very special property: it contains at least one marginal operator
[ 74 ] . The existence of an exactly marginal operator corresponds to
having an arbitrary coupling in the fixed point theory, parametrizing a
whole fixed line. On the fixed line of marginal couplings the theory is
superconformal, i.e. all @xmath -functions are vanishing. Following the
work of Leigh and Strassler [ 57 ] , a simple criterion for the
existence of exactly marginal operators is given by analyzing the exact
Shifman-Vainshtein [ 75 ] formula for the @xmath function. The gauge and
Yukawa @xmath functions get a 1-loop contribution and all higher loop
and non-perturbative corrections enter as linear functions of the
anomalous dimensions of the matter fields. In general setting the @xmath
@xmath functions to zero yields @xmath conditions on the @xmath
couplings, leaving at most a fixed point. If some of them are linearly
dependent, we get a line of solutions and hence a marginal operator.

Now we can make the comparison: finite models are in general S-dual to a
superconformal theory parametrized by a free coupling constant
multiplying a marginal operator. In the special case that the dual is
also finite (like in the well known @xmath example) this dual free
coupling is just the gauge coupling, whereas in general it is a
combination of gauge and Yukawa couplings. Several examples along these
lines have been presented in [ 57 , 73 , 74 ] . One of the examples
found in [ 73 ] actually seems to give a finite dual of a finite theory.
The electric model is based on the gauge group @xmath with matter fields
@xmath in @xmath vector and @xmath fields @xmath in the spinor
representations. The model with this superfield content has vanishing
one-loop gauge @xmath function. Under addition of a superpotential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

the theory becomes finite. The conjectured S-dual is based on an @xmath
gauge group with a symmetric tensor in the @xmath factor and several
bifundamentals and fundamentals. Again the 1-loop @xmath functions
vanish and the superpotential is such that according to [ 57 ] the whole
theory is actually finite. For more technical details see [ 73 ] .

### 4.2 Non-trivial RG fixed points

#### 4.2.1 Appearance and applications

##### Interacting fixed point theories

An interesting phenomenon very familiar in 4 and lower dimensions is the
appearance of non-trivial fixed points of the renormalization group.
Since the @xmath function by definition vanishes at the FP the theory at
the FP is invariant under scale transformations. In the simplest cases
the theory at the FP is free, that is the coupling vanishes. This is for
example the case for the UV fixed point of asymptotically free field
theories like QCD. Scale invariance of the free theory is somewhat
trivial. There are just no interactions present that could set any
scale. Sometimes however one encounters an interacting fixed point. In
this case, at least in the supersymmetric version, the theory is
believed to not only exhibit scale invariance, but the full conformal
invariance (which includes scale invariance). Due to the lack of any
scale and hence any mass in this (super)conformal theory, one has to
deal with a continuum of states, making any particle interpretation
impossible. All information about the theory is contained in its
correlation functions. Such conformal theories are needed to describe
critical systems and are of substantial interest in both particle and
statistical physics.

One of the big surprises coming out of the SYM - string theory
correspondence was that such fixed points can also exist in 5 and 6
dimensions. This was first noted in [ 76 ] for maximally supersymmetric
( @xmath ) 2-form “gauge” theory in 6 dimensions arising from
compactifying IIB string theory on a K3. Similar fixed points where
shown to also exist in 6d SYM theories. From the field theory point of
view such fixed points were believed to be impossible. Since the
dimension of a gauge field is 1 in any spacetime dimension, simple
dimensional analysis tells us that the gauge coupling must be
dimensionful in dimensions other than 4. While in lower dimensions the
coupling becomes stronger at low energies, in 5 and higher dimensions it
becomes weaker. Therefore all gauge theories in 5 and 6 (and higher
dimensions) were believed to be infrared free, at the same time becoming
ill defined in the UV, since for the same reasons the coupling blows up
and the theory is non-renormalizable just from naive power counting.

The caveat in this argument is that we tacitly assumed that at least at
some energy scale gauge theory is a valid description. Then it follows
automatically that at all lower scales gauge theory is also a good
description since the gauge coupling becomes even weaker and we hit the
free fixed point in the IR. The only way to avoid this is to have a
theory which is intrinsically strongly coupled, so that gauge theory is
never a good description. A heuristic way to say this is that even
though the @xmath gauge kinetic operator is an irrelevant operator
(turning it on doesn’t move us away from the free theory in the IR), we
might be able to reach an interacting theory by taking the coupling
parameter of this irrelevant operator (the gauge coupling) formally to
infinity, leaving us with a strongly coupled gauge theory. From the
field theory this only teaches us that gauge theory is not the right
arena to discuss the appearance of non-trivial fixed points in 5 and 6
dimensions. All we can do is try to write down consistency conditions
that have to be satisfied by the theory in order to have a chance to
have a well defined strong coupling limit (where we expect the fixed
point to be). These conditions where analyzed by Seiberg [ 17 , 16 ] .
In 6 dimensions one has to assure that the theory is anomaly free, while
in 5 dimensions the relevant criterion is that once we make a small
perturbation from the fixed point, that is we turn on small @xmath , the
resulting (infrared free) theory be free of UV divergencies.
Surprisingly the branes then teach us that ALL theories satisfying these
criteria in fact do give rise to non-trivial strong coupling fixed
points, as I will partly show in the following for the 6 dimensional
theories.

Another criterion is that there should exist a superconformal algebra in
the corresponding dimension with the right amount of supersymmetry.
These superconformal algebras where classified by Nahm [ 77 ] . Again
one finds that the branes realize all possible superconformal algebras.

##### Applications

Just establishing the existence of these higher dimensional fixed point
theories is certainly interesting on its own, since they were not
expected to exist. But they also have some interesting applications. For
one we can basically learn about 4d field theories from compactifying 6d
FP theories on a torus. In a certain limit the physics of the
compactified theory reduces to pure Yang-Mills theory. Let me briefly
discuss the (2,0) FP compactified on a torus and how it reduces to pure
(non-supersymmetric) QCD. Compactifying the @xmath (2,0) theory (the
theory on @xmath coinciding M5 branes) on a circle of radius @xmath one
obtains maximally supersymmetric @xmath Yang-Mills theory in 5d with
coupling @xmath (the theory on the resulting D4 worldvolume). In order
to obtain 4 dimensional, non-supersymmetric QCD we compactify on yet
another circle of radius @xmath and include a non-trivial twist by the
R-symmetry, basically choosing anti-periodic boundary conditions for the
fermions. The resulting @xmath @xmath gauge theory has gauge coupling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

according to the standard KK ansatz. Besides the gauge bosons of QCD
this theory certainly contains many other states. There are the KK modes
with masses @xmath and @xmath , the fermions with masses of order @xmath
and the scalars, which get masses at one-loop from the fermions and
hence have a mass of order

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The question is whether we can find a limit in which all these states
become very massive while keeping the QCD scale fixed.

This is indeed possible [ 78 , 79 ] . Let us first read off the QCD
scale from the information we have so far. This is we have to take into
account the running of the gauge coupling with the energy scale @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

( 4.3 ) gives us the gauge coupling at the compactification scale, hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this we read off that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now consider the limit @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath . All KK states,
the fermions and the scalars become very massive in this limit, the
lightest ones being the scalars with mass @xmath . However due to the
exponential suppression in ( 4.4 ) for sufficiently small @xmath the QCD
scale will be much smaller than any of the other masses in the problem,
leaving us with pure QCD as advertised. Note that this limit corresponds
to very weak coupling in ( 4.3 ). This is not surprising, since as
discussed above, ( 4.3 ) determines the coupling at the energy scale,
where all the other fields become important. We want this to happen far
above the QCD scale, that is at very weak coupling due to asymptotic
freedom of QCD.

A second very important application is to study the deformations of the
fixed points. As we will see in what follows this can be done very
easily using branes. A given brane setup represents a certain phase of
string theory. This will become more transparent once we have shown that
brane setups are actually equivalent to the language of geometric
compactifications. By tuning parameters of this compactification, that
is by moving around the branes, we encounter critical points as certain
branes collide, the non-trivial FP. Often at the FP we see new
deformations that allow us to perform a phase transition into a
topologically distinct vacuum of string theory.

Last but not least these FP theories play an important role in the
recent matrix conjecture [ 8 ] . As explained in Chapter 2 this
conjecture elevates the correspondence between gauge theory and
non-perturbative string theory to a principle, defining all of M-theory
in terms of the world-volume theory of certain branes. For Matrix
compactifications on a @xmath the relevant brane theory is the strong
coupling limit of the worldvolume of @xmath coinciding D4 branes, that
is the worldvolume theory of @xmath M5 branes: the (2,0) FP theory [ 27
] .

#### 4.2.2 Physics at non-trivial FP from branes

##### General idea

From what we have learned so far it should be clear that branes are the
essential tool to prove the existence of strongly coupled fixed points
in 5 and 6 dimensions. The principal idea is as follows: one considers
string theory in the background of certain branes. Since this is a well
defined theory, we can try to take the limit in which gravity and the
other bulk modes decouple. In some cases this leaves us with an
interacting theory on the brane. The strong coupling limit then
corresponds to having some branes coincide, usually exhibiting an
infinite tower of states becoming massless as we would expect from a
conformal field theory. So proving the existence of an interacting fixed
point amounts to analyzing whether string theory allows for a decoupling
limit that leaves an interacting theory on the branes. To demonstrate
this procedure let us briefly consider the brane realization of the
(2,0) fixed point that was found by [ 76 ] using a geometric picture.

I will also discuss the maximally supersymmetric cases in 5,7 and higher
dimensions as well as in 6d with (1,1) supersymmetry. In these cases the
analysis of [ 77 ] tells us that there are no superconformal algebras.
Indeed we will find in the brane picture that in these cases decoupling
of the bulk modes leads automatically to a free theory on the brane.

##### The (2,0) theory from the M5 brane

Consider a system of @xmath parallel M5 branes. In the same spirit as in
( 3.2 ) we want to decouple bulk gravity by taking the limit @xmath
infinity. We want this to do in such a fashion that the theory on the M5
branes stays interacting. Recall that the theory on the M5 is that of
@xmath @xmath tensor multiplets. This theory does not have a coupling
constant which we could keep fixed. However we do know that these tensor
multiplets couple to the strings that describe the ends of M2 branes.
The tension of these strings is @xmath where @xmath is the
characteristic distance between two M5 branes. These tensions correspond
to the vevs of the scalars in the tensor multiplet, since they are given
by the M5 positions and have mass dimension 2 in the natural
normalization. Therefor the decoupling limit will be @xmath , @xmath ,
holding @xmath fixed. At the origin of the moduli space, that is if all
the @xmath go to zero, we expect a superconformal fixed point. The
strings become tensionless and provide the continuum of massless states
of the conformal theory.

One might worry that this fixed point could be a free theory. One way to
see this cannot be the case is to consider the theory on a large circle
@xmath . The resulting theory will be 5d SYM with gauge coupling @xmath
³ ³ 3 One way to see this relation is to consider the compactification
in terms of branes. The M5 turns into a D4 with @xmath . . We see that
this is an interacting theory and the large @xmath limit even
corresponds to very strong coupling.

[]

Figure 10: Brane realisation of the (2,0) theory.

##### The other maximally supersymmetric theories

One can try to do a similar construction for SYM theories in 5,6,7 and
higher dimensions, which are also maximally supersymmetric (where this
time in 6d we have non-chiral (1,1) supersymmetry). These can be
realized as the world volume theories of D4,5,6 and higher branes. We
want to send @xmath and @xmath to infinity in order to decouple all bulk
modes ⁴ ⁴ 4 The former is required to decouple gravity while the latter
decouples the higher order terms from the DBI action. . If we would
again predict non-trivial FPs we would be in trouble since the analysis
of [ 77 ] shows that for these cases there are no superconformal
algebras. We expect a non-trivial theory once we put several branes on
top of each other. @xmath colliding branes give rise to @xmath gauge
theory. In order to obtain an interacting theory on the branes we need
to keep @xmath on the branes finite. According to ( 2.3 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the d+1 dimensional gauge theory on the worldvolume of a D @xmath
brane. Since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see that for the D7 brane @xmath and hence @xmath goes to zero in the
decoupling limit @xmath , @xmath @xmath . This still is true in higher
dimensions. We are left with a free theory!

For the D6 @xmath we see we can keep @xmath finite if we simultaneously
with @xmath take @xmath to infinity. According to [ 6 ] strongly coupled
IIA string theory is better thought of as 11d SUGRA. The duality tells
us that the 11d Planck scale @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to decouple the 11d bulk we again have to stick to a free
theory on the worldvolume. For the D5 and D4 branes a similar story is
true. In both cases @xmath can be kept finite only in the strong string
coupling limit. S-dualizing, the D5 brane turns into an NS5 brane at
weak coupling with gauge coupling @xmath which is again free in the
decoupling limit. One can slightly modify the decoupling limit by
relaxing the condition that @xmath is supposed to go to infinity. In
this case still all the bulk modes decouple. However we are no longer
left with just SYM on the brane. But whatever it is we are left with,
string theory tells us that it exists. This way Seiberg proved [ 28 ]
the existence of a 6d string theory. It has a string scale @xmath and
hence does not correspond to a conformal theory.

For the D4 brane the strong string coupling limit once more
decompactifies the 11th dimension. The D4 brane becomes an M5. Hence the
5d SYM at strong coupling grows an extra dimension. We do obtain a
non-trivial strong coupling fixed point, but it is again the 6
dimensional (2,0) theory which we encountered before.

#### 4.2.3 6d Hanany-Witten setups

##### Motivation

In order to study less supersymmetric theories we need more involved
brane setups. In what follows I will present a Hanany-Witten setup
describing fixed points in @xmath with @xmath . This setup was presented
in [ 80 ] and further analyzed in [ 81 , 71 , 82 ] . The same fixed
points where analyzed from the branes as probes point of view by [ 83 ,
20 ] and were geometrically engineered from F-theory in [ 84 ] . The
motivation for analyzing these theories instead of their more
supersymmetric cousins is threefold.

-   As described above we can learn about 4d gauge theory by putting
    these fixed points on a torus. Since the dynamics of maximally
    supersymmetric SYM in 4d is rather constrained it is definitely
    interesting to do this with less supersymmetric theories. If we
    again want to study non-supersymmetric QCD by imposing anti-periodic
    boundary conditions on the fermions, we have this time the choice to
    put different boundary conditions on fermions coming from vector and
    hypermultiplets, opening up the possibility to realize QCD with
    matter.

-   The @xmath fixed point has only one possible deformation, which
    corresponds to moving the M5 branes apart. To really study phase
    transitions we need to study the more elaborate fixed points with
    only 8 supercharges, which in general do allow several different
    perturbations, leading to a transition between distinct phases.

-   When used as matrix models these fixed points should be used to
    describe DLCQ string theories with 16 supercharges, like the
    heterotic string on a @xmath or type II string on a K3. These
    theories have a much richer dynamics and are hence more interesting
    than their more supersymmetric cousins.

##### The consistency requirement: Anomaly cancellation

As discussed above, even though field theory is not the right arena to
discuss the appearance of non-trivial FPs, it nevertheless imposes
several constraints on the existence of consistent strong coupling
limits. In 6 dimensions this criterion is anomaly cancellation. Let me
briefly review the relevant mechanism from the field theory point of
view. In what follows we will see that the branes actually know about
this mechanism and only yield anomaly free theories.

The anomaly in six dimensions can be characterized by an anomaly eight
form. For a theory with a product gauge group @xmath with matter
transforming in the representation @xmath , the anomaly polynomial reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath denotes the trace in the adjoint and @xmath is the trace in
Representation @xmath . The symbol @xmath is reserved for the trace in
the fundamental representation. @xmath denotes the number of matter
multiplets transforming in a particular representation @xmath and @xmath
is the number of multiplets transforming in the representation @xmath of
a product group @xmath . For a consistent theory, the anomaly should be
cancelled in some way: Either the anomaly polynomial vanishes or we
cancel the anomaly by a Green–Schwarz mechanism [ 85 ] . So let us look
at the anomaly in more detail. First, we want to rewrite the anomaly
polynomial using only traces in the fundamental representation.
Formally, the polynomial then looks like

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

For concreteness let me discuss the case of a single gauge group factor.
The anomaly reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath the anomaly cancels completely. If @xmath the anomaly can’t
be cancelled and the theory is sick. However if @xmath we can cancel the
anomaly by the Green-Schwarz mechanism by coupling it to a two-index
tensor field. In 6 dimensions the tensor splits into an anti-selfdual
and an selfdual part. While the former sits in the gravity multiplet,
the latter is part of the tensor multiplet. Depending on the sign of
@xmath we have to use one or the other. If @xmath we can cure the
anomaly by coupling to a tensor multiplet, for @xmath the theory is sick
without coupling to gravity. If realized in terms of branes, in the
latter case there can’t be a consistent decoupling of the bulk modes.
For a very detailed discussion of the anomaly polynomials for product
gauge groups see e.g. [ 86 ] .

In the case of @xmath gauge theory using the group theoretical identity
[ 87 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, the deadly @xmath term cancels precisely for @xmath . The
prefactor @xmath of the @xmath term is always bigger than zero, so that
we can cancel the anomaly by coupling to a single tensor multiplet.

Adding the Green-Schwarz counterterm, the action contains a coupling of
the scalar @xmath in the tensor multiplet to the gauge fields, so that
the gauge kinetic term becomes [ 17 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see that one can absorb the bare gauge coupling into the expectation
value of @xmath by just a shift of the origin. We obtain an effective
coupling

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

At @xmath we expect the possibility of a strong coupling fixed point [
17 ] .

##### The brane configuration

In order to study Hanany-Witten setups in 6 dimensions, we need as
fundamental ingredients D6 branes, on whose worldvolume we realize the
gauge theory. In addition one has the obligatory NS5 branes, between
which the 6 branes are suspended. As usual this compact interval gets
rid of one of the 7 worldvolume dimensions of the D6 brane via KK
reduction. In addition the boundary conditions for the D6 branes ending
on the NS5 branes projects out some of the fields. In total we break
@xmath of the supercharges ( @xmath by the D6 and another @xmath by the
NS5) leaving @xmath in d=6.

As usual there are two ways to introduce flavors in the setup. One is to
include the additional flavor branes, which in our case will be D8
branes. I will explain how to deal with them later. For now I will
include flavors via semi-infinite D6 branes to the right and left. With
this the players in our game are:

         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ------ -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  NS 5   x        x        x        x        x        x        o        o        o        o
  D 6    x        x        x        x        x        x        x        o        o        o
  D 8    x        x        x        x        x        x        o        x        x        x

The presence of these branes breaks the @xmath Lorentz symmetry of type
IIA down to @xmath corresponding to rotations in the 789 space and
Lorentz transformations in 012345 space. The @xmath can be identified
with the @xmath R-symmetry of the d=6 @xmath SUSY algebra. To understand
the basic issues that are different in 6d from the “usual” Hanany-Witten
setups discussed above let me first focus on the simplest setup.

[]

Figure 11: The brane configuration under consideration, giving rise to a
6 dimensional field theory. Horizontal lines represent D6 branes, the
crosses represent NS5 branes.

Figure 11 shows a configuration of @xmath D6 branes suspended between
two NS5 branes. There are @xmath ( @xmath ) semi-infinite D6 branes to
the left (right). Let us first discuss the matter content corresponding
to this setup. As usual we get an @xmath vector multiplet from the color
branes and @xmath fundamental hypermultiplets from the semi-infinite
flavor branes. But these are not all the matter multiplets we get.
According to our standard philosophy we keep all the light modes coming
from the lowest dimensional branes. In all other dimensions this meant
decoupling the worldvolume fields of the NS5 branes. But here the NS5
branes live inside the D6 brane, they also have a 6d worldvolume as the
finite D6 brane pieces we are considering. Hence we should also include
the matter from the NS5 branes.

This can also be discussed in a more quantitative manner, looking at the
precise decoupling limit. As discussed in our introduction to
Hanany-Witten setups we want to take @xmath and @xmath to infinity in
order to decouple the bulk, sent the length @xmath of the interval to
zero in order to decouple the KK modes and do this all in such a way to
keep the gauge coupling of the 6d theory fixed. According to ( 2.3 ) we
get @xmath . The theory on the NS5 branes is a theory of tensor
multiplets, so there is no gauge coupling. To see what is going on let
us translate into 11d units via ( 2.10 ). We see that @xmath . But this
is precisely the tension of the M2 branes stretching between the 5
branes. When discussing the decoupling of the (2,0) theory we found that
this quantity basically governs the interaction strength of the theory
on the 5 brane. Keeping it fixed means that we should indeed keep the
interacting modes on the 5 branes as well as those on the worldvolume of
the finite D6 brane.

So now what is this additional matter? The theory on a IIA NS5 brane is
the theory of a (2,0)– tensor multiplet. This multiplet consists of a
tensor and 5 scalars (and fermions). Because of the presence of the D6
branes, one half of the SUSY is broken and we are left with a (1,0)
theory. The tensor multiplet decomposes into a (1,0) tensor, which only
contains one scalar, and a hypermultiplet, which contains 4 scalars. The
hypermultiplet is projected out from the massless spectrum because the
position of the semi-infinite D6 branes fixes the position of the NS5
branes. Moving the NS5 brane out of the D6 brane (remember that we have
the 5 brane embedded in the D6 brane) corresponds to turning on the 3 FI
terms and a theta angle. The scalar in the tensor multiplet corresponds
to motions of the 5 branes in the @xmath direction. This is going to be
a modulus of our theory. We have two NS5 branes and therefore two tensor
multiplets, but effectively we keep only one of them because one of the
scalars can be taken to describe the center of mass motion of the
system. The vev of the other scalar gives us the distance between the
NS5 branes. On the other hand, we know that the distance between the NS5
branes is related to the inverse Yang-Mills coupling of the
six-dimensional gauge theory according to the usual KK philosophy. The
vev of the scalar hence plays the role of a gauge coupling, as expected
from field theory.

Now let us turn to the quantum picture. As in the other theories with 8
supercharges, the 1-loop information will be encoded in the bending of
the NS5 branes and there won’t be any further corrections. We in
particular expect the bending to provide us with the information about
the anomalies, since those are a 1-loop effect. Indeed the analysis of
the bending is really easy in 6d, as discussed before. Since the NS5
branes are embedded in the D6 branes there is no transverse worldvolume.
The NS5 brane can’t absorb any flux coming from the charged ends of a D6
brane. The only way we can have a consistent brane setup is if the net
charge cancels. The net charge is given by the number of D6 branes
ending from one side minus the number of D6 branes ending from the other
side. Thus, we only get a consistent picture if:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath ( @xmath ) denotes the number of D6 ending from the left
(right). The total number of flavors is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Together with the tensor multiplet from the NS5 branes this is indeed
the (only) right ⁵ ⁵ 5 For @xmath and @xmath there are also some other
possibilities since they do not have an independent fourth order Casimir
and hence @xmath vanishes automatically. Global anomalies [ 88 ]
restrict us to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The 10 flavor
case can be achieved by realizing @xmath as @xmath with an orientifold.
The other @xmath theories do not have an HW interpretation. matter
content to cancel the anomaly.

##### Realization of the fixed point

Our theory has a Coulomb branch parametrized by the vev of the scalar in
the tensor multiplet. At the origin, the effective gauge coupling
becomes infinite and we find the strong coupling fixed point. Since the
tensor multiplet corresponds to the distance between the NS5 branes this
happens precisely when they coincide. The strings from D2 branes
stretching between the NS5 branes become tensionless. Building product
groups is straight forward. Again we find FPs whenever the NS5 branes
coincide.

An interesting generalization is to put the theory on a circle. In this
case we will see an @xmath gauge group, where @xmath denotes the number
of NS5 branes. Tuning the moduli in such a way that we obtain the fixed
point theory amounts to moving all the 5 branes on top of each other.
Since the distance between the 5 branes is the effective coupling
constant of the corresponding gauge theory we see that there is always
one gauge group who’s color branes stretch around the entire circle, no
matter where we choose to bring our 5 branes together. This means that
we will always have one gauge factor with a finite gauge coupling that
becomes free in the IR and hence becomes a global symmetry. From the
field theory point of view this statement can also be seen to be true.
Defining the effective gauge couplings by absorbing the classic gauge
couplings in the vev of the scalars in the tensor multiplets, one finds
that there is always one subgroup for which @xmath becomes negative at
large @xmath [ 20 ] , so that we should start of with a finite value for
this coupling.

The value of @xmath at which this sign change happens is given by @xmath
(remember that @xmath has mass dimension 2). That is in the decoupling
limit, where we send @xmath keeping @xmath fixed, this critical value
goes off to infinity, so we do not see any effect of the finite radius.
If however we choose to also send @xmath to zero as well, keeping @xmath
fixed, we can engineer a theory with the following properties:

-   it decouples from all bulk modes, hence it is 6d

-   gauge theory breaks down at energy scales @xmath , new degrees of
    freedom become important

-   the theory contains string like excitations with tension @xmath

One usually refers to those theories as little string theories. The way
we constructed them is the T-dual of the original construction of [ 89 ]
as a generalization of Seiberg’s work [ 28 ] on the theory with 16
supercharges.

##### Including 8 branes

So far we have seen how to realize fixed points in branes. Now I will
move on to more complicated setups in order to classify all fixed points
realizable by HW setups. In [ 90 ] all anomaly free matter contents in
6d have been classified. Strictly speaking this list should be seen as
the list of all theories that could possibly have a consistent strong
coupling fixed point. The nice stringy result is that indeed all of them
do. HW setups will not be able to generate the exceptional gauge groups,
but will be very efficient at classifying those FP allowed with
classical gauge groups and products thereof. The few missing cases can
be realized via geometry [ 84 , 91 ] .

In order to build more general fixed point theories, let us now look at
the second possibility to include flavors, via D8 branes living in
012345789, as discussed in [ 71 ] . D8 branes introduce additional
complication, since D8 branes are not a solution of standard IIA theory
but require massive IIA [ 92 ] , that is the inclusion of a cosmological
constant @xmath . The D8 branes then act as domain walls between regions
of space with different values of @xmath . @xmath is quantized and hence
in appropriate normalization can be chosen to be an integer.

The presence of @xmath makes itself known to the brane configuration via
a coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the 2 form NS gauge field under which the NS5 brane is
charged and F is the 8 form field strength for the 7 form gauge field
under which the D6 is charged. From the Bianchi identity for the 2 form
field strength dual to @xmath in the presence of a D6 brane ending on a
5 brane, @xmath (where @xmath ), one gets @xmath . The @xmath function
comes from the charge of the D6 brane-end. From here we get back the old
result, that for @xmath D6 branes always have to end on a given NS5
brane in pairs of opposite charge (that is from opposite sides). However
for arbitrary @xmath this relation shows that RR charge conservation
requires that we have a difference of @xmath between the number of
branes ending from the left and from the right ⁶ ⁶ 6 Throughout this
work I will use the following conventions to fix the signs: by passing
through an D8 from left to right @xmath increases by 1 unit. In a
background of a given @xmath the number of D6 branes ending on a given
NS5 from the left is by @xmath bigger than the number of D6 branes
ending from the right. .

[]

Figure 12: Basic Hanany Zaffaroni Setup

Figure 12 shows the basic brane configuration involving D8 branes. The
@xmath D8 branes in the middle give rise to @xmath flavors for the
@xmath gauge group. In addition they raise the cosmological constant
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath . In the background of these values of
@xmath the modified RR charge conservation tells us

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

With the @xmath flavors from the semi-infinite D6 branes the total
number of flavors is @xmath still in agreement with the gauge anomaly
considerations on the 6 brane for every possible value of @xmath . So
far we have not succeeded in obtaining any new FPs, since SUSY QCD with
@xmath is just what we were already able to realize with semi-infinite
D6 branes. However as we move on we will need the D8 branes in more
elaborate setups.

##### Orientifolds

There is one more element we can incorporate in the HW brane setup, the
orientifold. Since an orientifold breaks the same supersymmetries as the
corresponding D-brane, we can introduce O8, O6 or both. Each of them
comes with two possible signs. Let us first consider the O8. We have to
distinguish two possibilities: O8 planes with negative or positive D8
brane charge (that is -16 or +16) [ 4 ] . The former are the T-dual of
the O9 projecting IIB to type I. On the D8 worldvolume they project the
symmetry group to a (global) @xmath group, while on the D6 we get a
local @xmath group. The positively charged O8 projects onto global
@xmath and local @xmath . If we want to have vanishing total D8 charge,
we should restrict ourselves to either 2 negatively charged O8s with 32
D8 branes or one O8 of each type.

There is indeed a physics reason that we should restrict ourselves to
satisfy this requirement. What becomes important is that not only the
cosmological constant jumps when we cross a D8 brane, but also the
dilaton. If the dilaton is constant to the right of a given D8 brane,
@xmath (the inverse string coupling) will rise linearly on the left. For
symmetry reasons this means that the dilaton will run with slope -8 into
an O8 from the left and leave with slope +8 on the other side. In order
to be back to slope -8 again before hitting the next O8, one has to put
precisely 16 physical D8 branes in between. One interesting application
of this behaviour is that this way the coupling may diverge at the
orientifold planes, while it is finite everywhere else and even constant
in between the 8th and the 9th physical D8. Usually one refers to this
whole setup as type I’ string theory. Of course it is no problem to
include just one O8 and fewer D8 branes by just keeping far away from
the others.

[]

Figure 13: Various possibilities to introduce O8 planes

The gauge groups corresponding to brane setups in Figure 13 have been
analyzed in the equivalent setup for 4d in [ 50 ] . If the O8 is in
between two 5 branes the ‘center’ gauge group is projected to @xmath or
@xmath respectively. All other gauge groups stay @xmath , however the
@xmath groups to the right are identified with those to the left and one
effectively projects out half of the @xmath groups. In addition to this,
in 6d we get the special situation that the O8 also changes the
cosmological constant. For symmetry reasons we have to choose @xmath on
the two sides of the orientifold. Therefore we obtain in total

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

respectively. From strings stretching in between neighbouring gauge
groups we get bifundamentals @xmath . We have taken all the D8 branes
that are required to cancel the O8 plane charge to be far away. Of
course including them we get some more fundamental matter fields and new
contributions to the cosmological constant.

The other possible situation considered in [ 50 ] is that one of the 5
branes is stuck to the O8. In this case all the groups stay @xmath ,
again with the left and the right ones identified, leading to
effectively half the number of gauge groups. In addition the middle
gauge group has a matter multiplet in the antisymmetric or symmetric
representation for positive/negative charge O8 planes. In 6d we again
have the effect of the cosmological constant and as a result get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with antisymmetric/symmetric tensor matter in the first gauge group
factor in addition to the bifundamentals.

The other realization of @xmath and @xmath groups is to introduce an O6
along the D6 branes. In discussing O6 planes we have to be careful to
take into account an effect first discussed in [ 93 ] : whenever an O6
passes through an NS5 brane, it changes its sign. Originally this was
argued for O4 and NS5 based on consistency of the resulting 4d physics.
Here we could basically do the same: without including this effect on
would construct anomalous gauge theories. The sign flip miracously
removes all anomalies, providing strong arguments in favor of this
assumption. There also exist some worldsheet arguments, that further
support the existence of the flip [ 94 ] .

Due to this sign flip the O6 also contributes to the RR charge
cancellation. Since its charge is +4 on one side and -4 on the other,
the number of D6 branes ending to the left and right also has to jump by
8. We therefor are left with product gauge groups forming an

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

chain with bifundamentals. Bringing the 3 ingredients - D8, O8 and O6 -
together, we can clearly cook up very complicated models. I will write
down some hopefully illustrative examples later on.

All these gauge theories I constructed with the help of orientifolds are
anomaly free [ 86 , 90 , 83 ] upon coupling to the tensor multiplets
associated to the independent motions of the 5 branes. Note that in the
case of the O8, already a single NS5 brane gives rise to a tensor
multiplet, parametrising the distance to the fixed plane. There is no
decoupled center of mass dynamics since presence of the orientifolds
breaks translation invariance along the 6 direction.

Again it is straight forward to put the theory on a circle. I will
restrict myself to the discussion of O8s. The O6 case is pretty obvious.
The only thing one has to take care of is that only an even number of
NS5 branes is allowed, so that the “global” groups from semi-infinite D6
branes are either both @xmath or both @xmath and we are able to close
the circle. We should either take 2 negatively charged O8s with 32 D8
branes (that is the 16 physical D8 branes and their 16 mirrors) or a
pair of oppositely charged O8s.

[]

Figure 14: Brane configuration yielding a product of two @xmath and
several @xmath gauge groups with bifundamentals and an antisymmetric
tensor.

Encoding the position of the D8 branes in a vector @xmath , where the
entries in @xmath denote the number of D8 branes in the gauge group
between NS5 brane number @xmath and number @xmath , one can write down
formulas for the resulting gauge groups. Clearly @xmath . In addition we
introduce a quantity @xmath that encodes in a similar way the
information about the orientifold: the entry corresponding to the gauge
group that includes an orientifold is 16, since an O8 carries 16 times
the charge of a D8. All other entries are zero.

Let me only discuss the case of 2 negatively charged O8s with 32 D8
branes. This will have a dual description in terms of @xmath small
instantons. The case of oppositely charged orientifolds describes a
disconnected part of the moduli space. It is dual to string theory
compactifications with reduced rank of the gauge theory, like the CHL
string [ 95 ] .

We have to distinguish three cases

-   the number of NS5 branes is odd, so one of them has to be stuck at
    one of the O8s and the others live in mirror pairs on the circle

-   the number of NS5 branes is even, one is stuck at each of the
    orientifolds and the others appear in mirror pairs

-   the number of NS5 branes is even and all of them appear in mirror
    pairs on the circle and are free to move

Let me discuss in some detail the case where @xmath , the number of NS5
branes, is odd. The other two cases can be worked out the same way [ 81
, 83 ] . As in Figure 14 we have two orientifolds on the circle, both
with negative charge. An example also explaining the notation is
illustrated in the following figure:

[]

Figure 15: Notation in the example of 7 NS5 branes on the circle

One of the 5 branes is stuck on the one orientifold. We label the 5
branes with @xmath running from 0 to @xmath as in Figure 15 ⁷ ⁷ 7 Note
that in this numbering the stuck 5 brane is number @xmath . . In
addition there are 32 D8 branes. Let again @xmath denote the number of 8
branes in between the @xmath th and @xmath th NS5 brane. Obviously
@xmath . Also symmetry with respect to the orientifold plane requires
@xmath . It is useful to slightly modify the definition of the vector
counting the D8 branes by introducing @xmath in order to take care of
the effect that for every gauge group whose color branes stretch over
the orientifold half of the @xmath branes have to be located on either
side. Therefore in these cases we define @xmath while in all other cases
@xmath .

According to the rules of how to introduce 8 branes and orientifolds ⁸ ⁸
8 The D8 branes have two effects: first they introduce a fundamental
hypermultiplet in the gauge group they are sitting in, second they
decrease the number of colors in every following gauge group to their
right by one per 5 brane in between, since the value of the cosmological
constant @xmath is changed. , we find that the gauge group is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have @xmath and @xmath matter multiplets (subscripts label the gauge
group) and @xmath tensor multiplets.

Using the symmetry property @xmath , @xmath the requirement of having a
total of 32 D8 branes @xmath can be rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which just says that 16 of the 32 D8 branes have to be on either side of
the orientifold. Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and ( 4.12 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It should come as no surprise that all these theories are anomaly free.
This was explicitely checked in [ 83 ] .

### 4.3 Extracting information about the FP theory

#### 4.3.1 Global Symmetries

So far I have discussed how to realize FP theories in a given brane
setup in the limit that all the bulk modes decouple. In the spirit of
Seiberg [ 16 , 17 ] , identifying a decoupling limit in which
interacting physics survives on the brane is basically an existence
proof for these FP theories. As I discussed earlier, this is a result,
that could not be obtained from pure field theory reasoning. Field
theory gave us consistency requirements, branes show us the existence.

But now we can move on and ask ourselves whether we can actually learn
something about the FP theories from their brane realization and our
(partial) knowledge of the “embedding” string theory. One of the facts
we can learn about are enhanced global symmetries. Some information
about the global symmetries can be gotten already from field theory:
once we perturb the FP by turning on the relevant perturbation @xmath ,
as discussed in length above, we will flow to the free IR fixed point.
Dealing with a free theory, it is straight forward to identify the
global symmetries. In our case there will be for example a global flavor
symmetry @xmath . It will be realized in the branes as the gauge group
on the higher dimensional branes, e.g. those branes whose worldvolume
fields decouple together with the bulk modes. In our case the @xmath
global flavor symmetry is realized on the worldvolume of the @xmath D8
branes.

Once we go to the fixed point (that is turn off the @xmath perturbation
and go to infinite coupling) these symmetries are still present. But
sometimes it happens that we gain some new or enhanced global symmetries
at the fixed point. This can occur if some symmetry breaking operators
become irrelevant at the fixed point. This phenomenon is well known from
field theory where it goes under the name accidental symmetries: some
symmetries which appear to be valid in the IR may be broken by higher
dimensional operators. So while in the full theory they are no good
symmetries, they become better and better approximate symmetries when we
go to the IR and at the fixed point they are exact.

Enhanced global symmetries in the brane setup are again realized as
worldvolume gauge symmetries on the decoupled heavy branes. Consider an
easy example: Take an HW setup, realizing pure @xmath gauge theory with
@xmath in d=3. That is we just suspend a single D3 brane between two
type IIB NS5 branes. The coupling is given by the separation between the
NS5 branes. This theory is known to lead to a nontrivial IR fixed point,
as can be seen following arguments like those in [ 96 ] . Going to the
IR fixed point is equivalent to going to infinite coupling, since in 3d
the coupling has dimension of mass and therefor sets the scale. Taking
the coupling to infinity amounts to looking at energies way below the
intrinsic scale, that is the far IR of our theory. The strong coupling
fixed point corresponds to taking the two NS5 branes to coincide. Since
the worldvolume theory of IIB NS5 branes is just SYM, this leads to an
enhanced global @xmath symmetry at the fixed point. This same mechanism
works in almost all other HW-like setups.

However in 6d the situation is special and we won’t get away with this
trick: as shown above in 6d the dynamics of the NS5 branes does not
decouple from the D6 brane gauge theory. In fact we needed to include
the tensors from the NS5 branes in the dynamics in order to cancel
anomalies. So coinciding NS5 branes do not correspond to global
symmetries. On the other hand the global @xmath symmetries on the D8
branes are already visible at finite coupling, that is in the free field
theory. It therefore seems that in the 6d setup we do not see enhanced
global symmetries. There is however a way to obtain such enhanced global
symmetries. Roughly speaking one can go to the fixed point by taking the
“surrounding” IIA string coupling to infinity instead of letting the NS5
branes coincide [ 82 ] .

It is well known that in the strong coupling limit the @xmath global
symmetries on @xmath D8 branes coinciding on top of an O8 plane (with
@xmath ) is enhanced to @xmath [ 97 ] . The missing gauge bosons are
realized by D0 branes stuck on the D8 brane, whose mass goes like @xmath
and hence they become massless in the strong coupling limit [ 98 ] .
This leads to fixed points with exceptional enhanced global symmetries.
The best known example is the one with no D6 branes and just one NS5
brane and 7 D8 branes all sitting on top of the O8. At strong coupling
this becomes Horava-Witten M-theory with one M5 brane sitting on the
“end of the world brane”. This is the well known realization of the
small @xmath instanton [ 99 ] .

#### 4.3.2 Deformations and Phase Transitions

It is very easy to see deformations of the fixed point theories in the
brane picture. For example we can move one of the NS5 branes away from
the fixed point. If we do this along the 6 direction, we go back on the
Coulomb branch of our theory, if we move it off along 789 we turn on
some FI terms. For the FI terms it doesn’t matter at all whether we turn
them on at the fixed point or at any point on the Coulomb branch.

More interesting are deformations that are not possible away from the
FP, that is if the Coulomb branch and a Higgs branch meet and the FP
sits at the common origin. In this case we can actually perform a phase
transition. That is we start with branes realizing the theory on its
Coulomb branch as one phase of string theory. Tuning the moduli we can
go to the fixed point. At the fixed point we see a new deformation that
was not possible before, taking us out to the Higgs branch. Tuning the
Higgs moduli away from the fixed point, we have performed a transition
to a topologically distinct phase of string theory.

Let me show one example of such a transition. In hindsight of the
relation to geometry which I will exhibit in the next Chapter, I will
call this a small instanton transition. It was first discussed in the
context of 6d brane setups in [ 82 ] .

[]

Figure 16: The small instanton transition trading 1 tensor for 29
hypers.

We start with a special case of a theory with 2 O8s and 32 D8 branes on
a circle. All of the D8s are on top of a single O8, so we will see an
@xmath global symmetry. In addition we will study a single pair of NS5
branes. The cosmological constant on each side will be @xmath
respectively, so that we have to put at least 8 D6 branes on this
interval. They will all terminate on the NS5 branes. The corresponding
gauge group can easily be read off to be @xmath . There are going to be
16 fundamental hypermultiplets from the D8 branes and one tensor
multiplet describing the position of the NS5 and its mirror on the
circle. Tuning the scalar in the tensor multiplet we can reach a fixed
point by letting the NS5 collide with its mirror at the far orientifold.
At this point we see a new deformation: one of the NS5 branes can be
moved of in 789 space. According to our rules this will still be a
@xmath gauge theory. However one obtains an additional hypermultiplet in
the antisymmetric tensor representation from the far orientifold. This
gives us @xmath new hypermultiplets. In addition one of the NS5 branes
moves freely in 789 space, corresponding to a 29th hypermultiplet. But
now the second NS5 brane is stuck at the orientifold, so there is no
tensor multiplet left ⁹ ⁹ 9 The gauge theory has @xmath and hence
doesn’t need a Green Schwarz mechanism to cancel the anomaly. . All in
all this describes a phase transition trading 1 tensor for 29 hypers.
These numbers are required for any theory that can be coupled
consistently to gravity: the contribution of a single tensor multiplet
to the gravitational anomaly in 6d is the same as that of 29 hypers. So
if the gauge theory can be coupled consistently to gravity in one phase
(and since our setup is a limit of string theory we should definitely be
able to do so), then the other phase which lost one tensor and has the
same number of vectors has to have 29 more hypermultiplets in order to
have a consistent coupling to gravity, too.

#### 4.3.3 Correlators from branes

So far we have seen that quite a lot can be learned about 6d fixed
points using the brane realization I have presented in this work. But
the things we are really interested in are the correlation functions
defining the superconformal field theory. So far they have escaped our
control.

Recently a tool has emerged that might finally help us to tackle this
goal. According to Maldacena there is a duality that relates the theory
on the worldvolume of a given brane setup to gravity in the background
of the branes. At large @xmath the gravity calculation reduces to a
classical calculation. It will be of great interest to apply these
techniques to the theories I have been discussing. Some progress in this
direction has been made in [ 100 ] where the dimensions of the chiral
operators have been found. In this way the brane setups I have presented
serve as the natural starting point for any more elaborate analysis of
the physics of these 6 dimensional theories.

#### 4.3.4 A chiral / non-chiral transition

By the very nature of Hanany-Witten setups there is a close connection
between physics in @xmath and @xmath dimensions. As I explained, if we
realize our desired @xmath dimensional gauge theory on the worldvolume
of @xmath branes on an interval, matter multiplets can easily be
incorporated by orthogonally intersecting @xmath branes. Now instead of
just using @xmath branes we can use a full Hanany-Witten setup,
corresponding to a gauge theory in two more dimensions with twice the
amount of supersymmetry. Applying this idea let me use our 6d brane
setups to learn something about 4d physics. We will follow what happens
to our setup under the same brane motions we have performed above, again
giving rise to phase transitions, this time for @xmath supersymmetric 4
dimensional vacua. As a highlight we will present a transition between a
chiral and a non-chiral phase [ 72 ] ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The brane realization of
this chiral theory was also discussed in [ 94 , 101 ] . .

Let me start with the standard ingredients realizing an @xmath theory in
4d, that is we will have to deal with NS5 branes, D6 branes and D4
branes. We will allow NS5 and D6 to be rotated from 45 into 89 space by
an arbitrary angle. As usual we will refer to NS5 branes if they live
along 012345 and NS5’ if the angle is 90 degrees, that is they live in
012378 space. When using more general branes the we will call them A,B
or C NS5 branes and the following conventions will be used for the
angles

[]

Figure 17: Notation for the angles in the product group setup.

In what follows I will at some point replace a D6 by a full 6d HW setup,
that is by D6 branes with NS5’ branes embedded in them. In our 6d
analysis we already realized that in order to get interesting phase
transitions we should really include an orientifold. This way a single
NS5’ brane will be stuck, while bringing it together with another one we
will realize a non-trivial fixed point which has a new branch opening
up.

Hence the easiest setups we are going to study have at least 2 group
factors and 3 NS5 branes: the NS5’ stuck at the orientifold and then
another NS5 and its mirror. In order to study the resulting theory it is
very helpful to first discuss the matter arising without the
orientifold. That is we first study the following setup for a product
gauge group analyzed in [ 70 ] :

[]

Figure 18: The product gauge group considered in [ 70 ] . The thick
lines are NS branes at arbitrary angle in 45-89 direction. The D6 branes
are parallel to the A and C NS5 branes.

Let me choose the B branes to be still NS5’ branes (just fixing the
overall orientation). Let @xmath denote the number of A, B and C type
NS5 branes respectively. The resulting SYM will have @xmath gauge group
with bifundamental matter @xmath and @xmath and fundamental chiral
multiplets @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath from the D6 branes in the
first and second group factor respectively. In addition there will be
adjoints @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath they will be massive and can be
integrated out.

According to [ 70 ] the @xmath case then leads to a superpotential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the @xmath case leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following, I will identify these superpotentials by their triple
number, @xmath . The coefficients in the superpotential are determined
in terms of the angles as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As usual all these statements can be verified by studying allowed brane
motions and comparing with the classical moduli spaces of the gauge
groups in the presence of these superpotential terms.

Now we are in a position to introduce the orientifold. I will put an O6
on top of the middle NS5’ brane, so that the NS5’ is embedded inside the
O6 and we are basically dealing with a 6d HW setup. In principle we can
also include an O6’. However this won’t be related to any 6d theory. In
order to be symmetric with respect to the orientifold we have to
restrict ourselves to

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath and @xmath (the A branes have to be mirrors of the C branes)

-   equal number of A branes and C branes, that is we consider only
    @xmath configurations

-   one can only include an O6 or an O6 @xmath (the B NS5 @xmath brane,
    carrying one unit of NS charge, has to be self-mirror)

Since one possible deformation will be to move the NS5’ brane along the
orientifold (corresponding to a baryonic branch of the gauge theory) I
will also have to study setups with @xmath . This will again allow me to
uniquely fix the matter content and the interactions by comparing to the
flat directions expected from classical field theory. So we want to
consider the following possible setups:

[]

Figure 19: Theories with orientifolds and their deformations

On the left in figure 19 we find the two possible projections of the
product gauge group setup, the right hand side displays two possible
setups involving just 2 NS5 branes and an orientifold, which arise as
possible deformations of the theories on the left, as we will see in the
following. Let us briefly summarize the resulting gauge groups and
matter contents. A more detailed discussion of this identification will
be presented in the following sections.

The configuration in the upper right corner of figure 19 is just the
@xmath setup analyzed in [ 50 ] . The corresponding gauge group is
@xmath ( @xmath ) depending on the sign of the orientifold projection.
Rotating the NS5 branes breaks @xmath to @xmath by giving a mass to the
adjoint chiral multiplet in the @xmath vector multiplet. We are left
with an @xmath ( @xmath ). Note that this mass is already infinite at
@xmath , since this time it is given by the angle between the outer NS5
branes which is twice the angle @xmath between outer NS5 and NS5 @xmath
that determined the mass before. Rotating further I claim that instead
of the adjoint tensor that became infinitely heavy a new tensor with the
opposite symmetry properties is coming down from infinite mass. As usual
the way to prove this is to compare the possible brane moves with
results from classical field theory. Note that if we were dealing with D
branes instead of the NS5 branes the rotation we performed would
precisely change their worldvolume gauge theory from @xmath to @xmath .
It’s therefore reasonable to assume that something similar happens to
the NS5 branes, too. This way we identify the gauge group corresponding
to the brane configuration in the lower right corner of figure 19 to be
an @xmath ( @xmath ) gauge theory with a symmetric (antisymmetric)
tensor.

In the two pictures on the left the two @xmath factors are identified
under the orientifold projection. One adjoint field is present, whose
mass is given by the angle @xmath between NS5 and NS5 @xmath brane. In
addition there are degrees of freedom that gave rise to bifundamentals
in the product gauge groups. According to the analysis of [ 72 ] one
finds that in the orientifolded theories the O6’ will give rise to a
full flavor ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 that is the tensor and its conjugate of symmetric
or antisymmetric tensors for the O6 @xmath , depending on the sign of
the projection. The really interesting case is the one with the O6. This
now is part of a 6d HW setup. The O6 changes sign when passing through
the NS5’. This means that in order to conserve RR charge it has to have
8 half D6 branes embedded in it on one side. The corresponding matter
content will be an antisymmetric tensor, a conjugate symmetric tensor
and 8 fundamentals. Analyzing the field theory one indeed finds two
baryonic branches corresponding to moving the NS5’ to the @xmath or
@xmath side of the O6 and leaving one of the two theories on the right
side of figure 19 respectively. Note that this is a chiral theory with
anomaly free matter content. The 8 fundamentals are precisely what we
need to cancel the contribution from the tensors.

Now we have all the ingredients we need in order to perform the
transition. We perform the “small instanton transition” very similar to
how it was performed in the 6d case and follow through what happens to
our 4d physics.

[]

Figure 20: A small instanton transition which lead to chirality change
in the spectrum. An NS5 @xmath brane comes from infinity in the @xmath
direction and combines with the stuck NS5 @xmath at the origin. At this
point they can both leave the origin in the @xmath direction. The
resulting four dimensional theory is no longer chiral.

Consider the configuration depicted in figure 20 A. It realizes the
chiral theory I just described. I included two other NS5’ branes far
away so that they have no effect on the dynamics. We would like to bring
them in from infinity in order to perform the transition. We will call
them upper and lower branes, respectively. The original NS5 @xmath
brane, to which the four dimensional system is attached, will be called
central.

The NS5 @xmath branes are not allowed to move in the 456 directions,
since they can only move off the orientifold as a mirror pair. On the
other hand, the relative motion of the NS5 @xmath branes along the
@xmath direction corresponds to a change in the two tensor multiplets in
the 6d theory. There is, however, an option for a pair of NS5 @xmath
branes to move in the 456 directions. We can move two NS5 @xmath branes
to touch in the @xmath direction. At this point, the orientifold planes
from above and below the pair of NS5 @xmath branes are identical, as is
clear from figure 20 . From a six dimensional point of view such a
motion corresponds to taking one of the gauge couplings to infinity and
thereby obtaining strings with vanishing tension - a non trivial fixed
point. The pair of NS5 @xmath branes can then move in the 456
directions, as in figure 20 B. The resulting six dimensional gauge group
is now completely broken.

Let us go back to reinterpret this transition in our four dimensional
system. When the NS5 @xmath branes are far, we have our chiral theory.
When the NS5 @xmath branes move in the 456 directions, the theory is
different. We can read it off from figure 20 B. We have @xmath with a
symmetric tensor for the @xmath group and a pair (chiral and its
conjugate) of bi-fundamental fields. Note that this is a non-chiral
theory as advertised.

## Chapter 5 The equivalence of the various approaches

As mentioned in the beginning there are several ways discussed in the
literature to embed gauge theories in string theory. So far I have only
discussed in detail the Hanany-Witten approach. The advantage of this
approach is that the setups and especially their moduli and deformations
have a very intuitive meaning. One just has to move around flat branes.
In this section I’d like to show that indeed all the approaches are
equivalent, in the sense that the resulting string theories are dual to
each other. This way I will show that the phase transitions I studied in
the previous chapter by moving branes together and apart again in a
different fashion can indeed be interpreted on the dual side as a
transition from one geometrical compactification to a topologically
distinct vacuum. This analysis will hopefully provide one further step
towards an understanding of the dynamical processes relating the various
string vacua, finally leading to a determination of the true vacuum of
string theory.

### 5.1 The duality between orbifold and NS5 brane

The basic relation for our discussion will be the observation of [ 65 ]
that string theory in the background of an NS5 brane is T-dual to string
theory on an A-type ALE space. This is already an example of an
equivalence between branes as probes and geometrical engineering in the
restricted case of theories with 16 supercharges. Embedding a given 6d
field theory in string theory via probing flat IIA/B with an NS5 brane
or by engineering it via IIB/A on an ALE space is guaranteed to give the
same results, since these two setups are actually equivalent as string
backgrounds.

Let me discuss this duality in some detail. I will mostly follow the
reasoning of [ 102 , 103 ] . In order to apply T-duality we should look
for a @xmath isometry of our solution. @xmath does have some @xmath
isometries, but the corresponding radius grows as we move away from the
orbifold point, so that at infinity it becomes infinite. The would be
dual should then be some geometry with a vanishing circle at infinity
and hence would be hard to interpret.

In order to make some progress we consider a slight modification of the
original geometry to something that looks asymptotically like an @xmath
fiber over @xmath and still has the A @xmath singularity at the origin ¹
¹ 1 The decoupled physics in 6d won’t depend on the radius of the
circle, as one could see by recalling once more the decoupling limit. It
is only encoded in the local singularity and not in the global
structure. . These are precisely the properties of a @xmath centered KK
monopole in the limit that all the centers coincide. Now we just
T-dualize the @xmath isometry we introduced by hand. One finds that the
dual metric is the NS5 brane metric as advertised. A short-cut argument
is that T-duality exchanges the two @xmath fields in 9d generated by the
component of the metric and the B-field around the circle respectively.
Since the KK-solution is the monopole of the former while the NS5 brane
is the monopole of the latter, the two solutions get interchanged under
T-duality, too.

### 5.2 Hanany Witten versus branes at orbifolds

#### 5.2.1 The orbifold construction

Now we want to move on to the more interesting case of 8 supercharges.
Let me first demonstrate that Hanany-Witten setups are equivalent to
branes at orbifolds, a particular realization of the branes as probes
idea. Here I will follow the discussion in [ 82 , 81 ] . We consider D5
branes moving on top of a @xmath orbifold space.

At this point it is necessary to actually work out the field theory of
@xmath D @xmath ² ² 2 Of course we have to restrict ourselves to @xmath
so that the transverse space is big enough to carry an 4d ALE space.
This restriction again just reflects the classical fact that theories in
above 6 dimensions have at least 16 supercharges. branes moving on the
orbifold. So let me briefly review the relevant analysis due to Douglas
and Moore [ 19 ] .

Even though the orbifolded space is singular, string theory physics on
the orbifolded space is smooth. String theory automatically provides
additional modes in the twisted sectors that resolve the singularity. In
the case of an orbifold these twisted sectors are taken care of by
including also the @xmath @xmath mirror images of each original D @xmath
brane. At the orbifold point the original D @xmath coincides with all
its mirrors, so that we start off with maximally supersymmetric SYM in
@xmath dimensions and @xmath gauge group. In this theory we impose the
projection conditions by throwing away everything that is not invariant
under @xmath . Since we chose our @xmath action in such a way that it is
a subgroup of @xmath (remember that this is what we mean by the orbifold
limit of an ALE space), we are guaranteed that the remaining spectrum
will be that of a theory with 8 supercharges, so it is enough to study
only the bosons and the fermions just follow by SUSY. The @xmath acts

-   on the @xmath subgroup of the R-symmetry, acting on the scalars and
    fermions given in the obvious way by embedding of the geometric
    action in internal spacetime (the scalars are the spacetime Xs!)

-   on the @xmath Chan Paton indices according to some representation of
    @xmath .

If we want to describe D3 branes which are free to move away from the
orbifold fixed point we should restrict ourselves to embed the orbifold
group into the Chan Paton factors via the regular representation @xmath
of @xmath , that is the @xmath dimensional representation that accounts
for every mirror once. Note that this representation is reducible and
decomposes in terms of the irreducible representations @xmath as @xmath
. Doing so we take into account the D3 branes and all its mirrors, as is
required if we want to have branes that are free to move away from the
fixed point. Other representations can be considered as well (at least
at a classical level) and lead to fractional branes [ 19 , 104 , 105 ,
106 ] . We will have more to say about these in what follows. For the
moment let’s restrict ourselves to the regular representation.

We get the following actions on the fields ( @xmath labelling the
columns, of length @xmath , of vector indices transforming under the
same irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath and @xmath a vector
index of the @xmath R-symmetry.

Vectors:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

leaving a @xmath gauge group, since @xmath contains the identity only
for @xmath . For our case of @xmath all the @xmath are one dimensional,
since @xmath is abelian. Together with the gauginos and eventually the
scalars corresponding to motions transverse to the ALE space and
transverse to the brane for @xmath ³ ³ 3 e.g. a D3 brane in 0123 with
the ALE space in 6789 will have a complex scalar corresponding to 45
motions that does not transform under the spacetime action of the
orbifold and is hence projected as the vectors. , they will combine into
full VMs.

Scalars:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the Clebsch Gordan coefficient in the decomposition
of @xmath , where where 4 denotes the 4 dimensional representation of
the scalars under the R symmetry. We hence obtain @xmath scalars
transforming as bifundamentals under the @xmath th and @xmath th gauge
group. For @xmath this is interpreted as an adjoint. For @xmath , @xmath
and we obtain bifundamentals in neighbouring gauge groups. Together with
the fermions these scalars will form HMs.

#### 5.2.2 The classical branches

Having constructed the field theory corresponding to D5 branes on top of
the singularity we can move on and study its classical branches. The
Higgs branch corresponds to moving the branes away from the singularity,
its metric will be the metric of the ALE space (the resolved orbifold)
itself. Non-trivial fixed points will occur when the branes actually sit
on top of the singularity. For @xmath we will also have a Coulomb branch
from the scalars in the VM. This will have to be interpreted in terms of
“fractional branes”. For @xmath , that is in 6d, there is no such
Coulomb branch associated to the VM. However we already found before
that in 6d we need to couple the gauge theory to tensor multiplets in
order to cancel the anomalies. These bring in new scalars which
parametrize a branch that is now referred to as the Coulomb branch (even
though it has quite a different interpretation from in the other cases).
In the HW setup these tensors were automatically provided by the NS5
brane motions. In the orbifold construction they correspond to degrees
of freedom coming from reducing the 10d two-form on the vanishing two
cycles. Of course these degrees of freedom are also there in fewer than
6 dimensions. But as in the HW case, taking the limit in which the bulk
fields decouple we find in @xmath that these extra matter multiplets
decouple as well, whereas in @xmath we have to keep them since their
interaction strength is of the same magnitude as the 6d SYM coupling.

#### 5.2.3 Including D9 branes and orientifolds

Let me for a moment just discuss the classical theory, so that we do not
have to worry about anomalies and charge cancellation. We are hence free
to study @xmath D5 branes in the background of @xmath D9 branes and an
ADE singularity. Without the D9 branes the Higgs branch still describes
the ALE space itself. Without the ADE singularity, the Higgs branch
corresponds to the moduli space of @xmath @xmath instantons, since a D
@xmath brane is just the instanton within the D @xmath brane [ 45 ] .
This can be put together naturally to the statement that the theory with
ALE space and the D9 branes together yield a theory whose Higgs branch
is the moduli space of @xmath @xmath instantons on the ALE [ 19 , 83 ] .
Kronheimer and Nakajima [ 107 ] have introduced these theories as a
hyper-Kahler quotient construction previously, exactly with the goal of
describing these moduli spaces. It is beautiful to see that they
naturally appear in the classical analysis of brane theory. Of course
the same Higgs branch arises in any other D @xmath D @xmath system with
the D @xmath brane wrapping the ALE space.

Besides the obvious data @xmath and @xmath we need one more piece of
information: the Wilson lines at infinity. Since @xmath at infinity is
the discrete ADE group @xmath such non-trivial Wilson lines can exist.
They are characterized by a matrix @xmath representing @xmath in the
gauge group. That is @xmath is given by @xmath , where @xmath are the
irreducible representations of @xmath and @xmath some integers, so that
@xmath really is a representation of @xmath . In addition for @xmath to
be an element of the @xmath gauge group it better be an @xmath matrix,
so we have to demand that @xmath where the @xmath are the dimensions of
the corresponding representation. To keep the notation readable I will
from now on focus on A-type (that is abelian @xmath ) orbifold groups
only, so that all @xmath . The formulas for the general case can be
found in [ 83 ] . In addition one could also include non-trivial first
Chern classes. They would correspond to turning on B fluxes in the type
IIB background. For simplicity I will also neglect those. From here on
it is a tedious but straightforward analysis to find the resulting gauge
group. It is @xmath where ⁴ ⁴ 4 @xmath denotes the inverse Cartan metric
of @xmath , that is for @xmath @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As matter we have bifundamentals under neighboring gauge groups and
@xmath fundamentals in the @xmath th gauge group. This indeed coincides
with the hyper-Kahler construction. Now let us discuss the quantum
theory. According to [ 20 ] anomaly freedom of the above gauge theory
demands @xmath . This is no big surprise: we are not allowed to put any
D9 branes in type IIB.

Similarly one can discuss @xmath @xmath instantons. In the brane picture
this is done by introducing an additional O9 plane. Here anomaly freedom
will demand @xmath , since we are now dealing with type I. However the
classical construction can still be carried out for any @xmath ,
yielding again a description of instanton moduli spaces in terms of the
classical Higgs branch of a given gauge theory. The resulting gauge
group is modified slightly:

-   For @xmath even there is an additional discrete choice for @xmath
    due to the fact that the space-time gauge group is really @xmath and
    not @xmath . The @xmath is generated by the element @xmath in the
    center of @xmath which acts as @xmath on the vector, @xmath on the
    spinor of negative chirality, and @xmath on the spinor of positive
    chirality. Because only representations with @xmath are in the
    @xmath string theory, the identity element @xmath can be mapped to
    either the element @xmath or @xmath in @xmath .

-   The orientifold projection will of course change the gauge group.
    This is again a straight forward exercise in applying projection
    operators and one finds for example for @xmath odd:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    The matter content consists of hypermultiplets transforming
    according to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath

-   the @xmath s pick up an additional contribution from a vector @xmath
    basically reflecting the orientifold charge so that we obtain

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Choosing @xmath one reproduces the right classical theory whose Higgs
branch is the moduli space of instantons, while @xmath yields an anomaly
free gauge theory once we couple to the additional tensor multiplets
from the 2-form fluxes. Choosing the anomaly free theory one finds that
one misses some degrees of freedom that are necessary to describe the
Higgs branch. All in all 29 hypermultiplet degrees of freedom a missing
for every tensor present on the Coulomb branch. We again interpret this
as a small instanton transition. The Higgs branch describes the D5
dissolved as an instanton inside the D9. If the instanton shrinks down
to a point we reach a non-trivial fixed point. From there the Coulomb
branch opens up, described by the anomaly free gauge theory living on
the worldvolume of the D5. The new branch is parametrized by the vev of
the scalars in the tensor multiplets, which as I mentioned arise in this
setup from reducing the 10d two form on the vanishing cycles.

More intuitive is the same process for the @xmath small instanton. Here
the Higgs branch still corresponds to an M5 dissolved inside an M-theory
end of the world brane carrying an @xmath gauge theory [ 108 , 109 ] .
However the Coulomb branch this time has a real geometric
interpretation, moving of the 5 brane into the bulk. As we have seen,
both these cases are also beautifully realized in the HW setup. Here the
@xmath as well as the @xmath small instanton’s Coulomb branch are
visible as motions of the 5 brane.

#### 5.2.4 Applying T-duality

Of course it is no coincidence that we find the same small instanton
transition in both realizations. In fact the two approaches are related
by a simple T-duality. Considering an HW setup on a circle and
T-dualizing this 6-direction, the NS5 branes turn into the orbifold
singularity as above [ 65 ] , the D6 becomes the the D5, the small
@xmath instanton. The O8s and D8s turn into O9s and D9s. We reproduce
precisely the same low-energy theories if we identify the @xmath and
@xmath I defined in the HW setup as the number of D8 branes in the
@xmath th gauge group and the contribution of the orientifold charge to
the @xmath th gauge group, with the @xmath and @xmath defined above,
basically carrying the information about the non-trivial Wilson lines at
infinity. The @xmath choice for even @xmath (number of NS5 branes in the
HW setup) corresponds to the choice of having all NS5 branes free to
move or one stuck at each of the orientifold planes. These
identifications reflect the well known fact [ 4 ] , that under T-duality
the Wilson lines translate into brane positions.

Note that this way a small @xmath instanton transforms into a D6 brane
in the HW setup with the NS5 branes playing the role of the singularity.
On the other hand taking the strong coupling limit of the HW the O8
turns into an M-theory end of the world brane. So the strong coupling
limit of HW perfectly captures the small @xmath small instanton as well,
but this time the NS5 branes are the instantons (after all they become
M5 branes in 11d) while the D6 branes in 11d turn into the singularity.
This way one can reproduce the theories of [ 91 ] describing small
@xmath instantons colliding on top of an A or D type singularity by HW
setups.

#### 5.2.5 Adiabatically expanding to d=4 @xmath

As I explained in the last chapter, a HW setup in d dimensions is
closely related to a HW setup in d+2 dimension with twice the amount of
supersymmetry, by replacing the flavor system in d dimensions by a whole
HW setup in d+2. This was how we realized the chiral / non-chiral
transition in 4d by performing the 6d small instanton transition. This
correspondence of course has an equivalent in the geometric language:
having analyzed string theory on ALE spaces, one can next consider
theories on an ALE fibration over a @xmath . These will also lead to
theories with half the amount of supersymmetry in 2 less dimensions. In
the limit of large base size one can apply the 6d results fibrewise.
This is usually referred to as the adiabatic argument.

### 5.3 Branes and geometry: obtaining the Seiberg-Witten curve

#### 5.3.1 The 3 approaches

As we have seen, the branes as probes and the HW approach to field
theories are actually equivalent. In both cases we cook up a certain
string background whose low energy field theory realizes the gauge setup
we want. But then it turns out that these two string backgrounds are
dual to each other. This duality allowed us to analyze certain aspects
in one or the other frame: e.g. deformations were obvious in the HW
setup, the identification of the Higgs branch as the moduli space of
@xmath instantons on an ALE space can easily be motivated from the
orbifold point of view. Let me finally show in the example of
Seiberg-Witten theory that this kind of relation also extends to the
third approach, geometrical engineering. This will complete our
dictionary from phase transitions enforced by brane motions to the
purely geometrical language of string compactifications ⁵ ⁵ 5 A similar
connection has been established in 5d in [ 110 ] . .

The three approaches to engineer gauge theories have already been
mentioned in general in the introduction. Let me show in more detail how
they work in the special case of @xmath theories in 4d. I will
especially focus on the quantum aspects, that is I will identify the
quantum contributions and show how they can sometimes be solved for.

##### Geometrical Engineering

In the introduction I already discussed how geometric engineering works
in principle and how to engineer 6d theories with 16 supercharges. Now
we want to go down to @xmath in d=4. So we have to compactify two more
dimensions and break half of the supersymmetry. This is done via the
adiabatic expansion. That is we look at non-compact Calabi-Yau
manifolds, which locally look like an ALE fibration over a 2d base. The
simplest base is just a @xmath , but we will also need bases built out
of several @xmath s with non-trivial intersection patterns.

Let me first discuss the case of a @xmath base. If we choose the ALE
fiber to be of A @xmath type, we will start with an @xmath gauge theory
in 6 dimensions. The massless states arise from D2 branes wrapping the
vanishing cycles of the ALE in the orbifold limit. Taking into account
the fibration structure only the monodromy invariant states survive. It
turns out that if one deals with a genus @xmath base with ADE
singularity one expects to have ADE gauge symmetry with @xmath adjoint
hyper multiplets [ 111 , 112 , 113 ] . That is for our case of genus
zero we only keep a pure @xmath SYM as desired. For @xmath one obtains
the finite @xmath spectrum and for higher @xmath we would loose
asymptotic freedom.

Decoupling gravity is again achieved by effectively decompactifying the
Calabi-Yau manifold and focusing on the local singularity structure.
However this time there are two scales involved, the size of the base
@xmath and the characteristic size of the fibers, so that some care is
required.

As an illustrative example [ 114 ] consider the geometric engineering of
a pure @xmath gauge symmetry which is related to an @xmath singularity
in @xmath . Locally, one needs a vanishing 2-sphere @xmath , around
which the D-branes, being the @xmath bosons, are wrapped. This @xmath
has to be fibered over the base @xmath in order to have @xmath
supersymmetry in four dimensions. The different ways to perform this
fibration are encoded by an integer @xmath , and the corresponding fiber
bundles are the Hirzebruch surfaces @xmath . The mass (in string units)
of the @xmath bosons corresponds to the area of the fiber @xmath ,
whereas the area of the base @xmath is proportional to @xmath ( @xmath
is the four-dimensional gauge coupling at the string scale). Now let us
perform the field theory limit which means that we send the string scale
to infinity. Asymptotic freedom implies that @xmath should go to zero in
this limit; thus the Kähler class of the base @xmath must go to zero:
@xmath . Second, in the field theory limit the gauge boson masses should
go to zero, i.e. @xmath . In fact these two limits are related by the
running coupling constant,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the local geometry is derived from the following double scaling
limit:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Clearly, this picture can be easily generalized to engineer higher rank
ADE gauge groups. In this case there is not only one shrinking @xmath in
the fiber, but several such that the fiber acquires a local ADE
singularity. For the close comparison with the Hanany-Witten set up, it
is also interesting how product gauge groups can be geometrically
engineered [ 115 ] . For concreteness consider the group @xmath with a
hypermultiplet in the bifundamental representation. To realize this we
have an @xmath singularity over @xmath and an @xmath singularity over
another @xmath . The two @xmath ’s intersect at a point where the
singularity jumps to @xmath . This can be seen in 6 dimensions as
symmetry breaking of @xmath to @xmath by the vevs of some scalars in the
Cartan subalgebra of @xmath . It is straightforward to generalize this
procedure to an arbitrary product of @xmath groups with matter in
bi-fundamentals. One associates to each gauge group a base @xmath over
which there is the corresponding @xmath singularity; to each pair of
gauge groups connected by a bi-fundamental representation one associates
an intersection of the base @xmath ’s, where over the intersection point
the singularity is enhanced to @xmath .

Now it is interesting to see how the quantum effects are incorporated.
Basically we took care of the 1-loop effects by the double scaling
limit, the non-perturbative effects are due to worldsheet instantons,
that is non-trivial embeddings of the string worldsheet in the target
space. Actually the way this appears in string theory is slightly more
involved. From the field theory point of view all the information we
want is encoded in the so called prepotential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the classical gauge coupling, the logarithmic term
describes the one-loop correction due to the running of the gauge
coupling and the last term collects all non-perturbative contributions
from the instantons with instanton numbers @xmath . This is the function
that is solved for by the SW solution.

The way this prepotential appears in IIA string theory is by a classical
computation (that is no @xmath corrections). We only get corrections
from worldsheet instantons. This is basically due to the fact that the
dilaton, which controls the @xmath corrections, sits in a hypermultiplet
and therefore doesn’t talk to the prepotential which controls the
vectormultiplets. For a Calabi-Yau it has the following structure [ 116
] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we work inside the Kähler cone @xmath . The polynomial part of the
type-IIA prepotential is given in terms of the classical intersection
numbers @xmath and the Euler number @xmath , whereas the coefficients
@xmath of the exponential terms denote the rational instanton numbers of
genus 0 and multi degree @xmath . For our non-compact version of the CY
there are just two moduli, namely @xmath and @xmath and the
corresponding instanton numbers @xmath denote instantons wrapping the
base @xmath times and the fiber @xmath times.

Now we want to see that in the double scaling limit ( 5.3 ) the string
prepotential gives us back the field theory prepotential with the right
logarithmic one-loop behaviour. First note that in this limit the @xmath
yield precisely the logarithmic terms from the 1-loop corrections (well,
after all that’s how we chose our limit. ). The worldsheet instantons
wrapping non-trivially around the base will yield the non-perturbative
contributions.

But how can we sum them up? What comes to our rescue is mirror symmetry.
Type IIA on a given Calabi Yau is dual to IIB on the mirror Calabi Yau.
The two hodge numbers counting “shape” and “size”, @xmath and @xmath get
interchanged. It is interesting to see where the quantum corrections
come from. As I already mentioned, the @xmath corrections will only
affect the HM moduli space. In addition worldsheet instantons will
correct moduli associated with @xmath , since they are associated with
the non-trivial two cycles. But this means that the vector multiplet
moduli space on the IIB side is exact!

  IIA         @xmath   @xmath      IIB         @xmath   @xmath
  ----------- -------- -------- -- ----------- -------- --------
  VM @xmath   x        0           VM @xmath   0        0
  HM @xmath   0        x           HM @xmath   x        x

All we have to do now is find the mirror of our non-compact Calabi Yau.
There is a well defined description of how to perform this so called
“local mirror map” [ 114 ] . This way we can solve for the SW curve by a
classical computation in string theory. To give the SW curve a
geometrical interpretation we once more perform a T-duality, taking the
singularity of the IIB fiber into an NS5 brane [ 117 ] . This way the
beautiful final answer is obtained: The SW curve appears as the physical
object a IIA NS5 brane wraps on.

[]

Figure 21: Solving in Geometric Engineering via Local Mirror Symmetry

##### Fractional Branes

Above I have shown how to construct the field theory of @xmath D @xmath
branes on top of an orbifold singularity. Their Higgs Branch was
identified as moving the branes away from the singularity, breaking the
@xmath gauge group to its diagonal @xmath subgroup. But, as I mentioned,
for @xmath we will also see a Coulomb branch, corresponding to the
scalars in the VM, along which the gauge group is generically broken to
@xmath . How do we see this Coulomb branch in the brane at orbifolds
description? I will explain this in the case of D3 branes relevant for
the discussion of @xmath in 4d. Generalizations to other D @xmath branes
should be obvious.

The answer was given in [ 104 ] (see also [ 19 ] ): on the Coulomb
branch, a single D3 brane splits into @xmath fractional branes of equal
mass @xmath . These fractional branes can be interpreted as D5 branes
wrapping the vanishing cycles of the orbifold. Therefore they are stuck
to the singularity in the orbifolded part of spacetime, but are free to
move in the transverse space, giving rise to the Coulomb branch. The
example considered in [ 104 ] was D0 branes moving on an ALE space. In
the orbifold limit these new degrees of freedom supported on the Coulomb
branch are precisely those that are necessary for the Matrix description
of enhanced gauge symmetry for M-theory on the ALE space.

Looking just at a single fractional brane is achieved by embedding the
orbifold group into the Chan Paton factors via a representation other
than the regular one. This is consistent with the fact, that only by
choosing the regular representation can we describe objects that are
free to move away from the orbifold. This identification can be proven
by an explicit world-sheet calculation [ 19 ] showing that the
fractional branes carry charge under the RR fields coupling to D5
branes. This charge vanishes if and only if one chooses the regular
representation. So instead of just obtaining fractional branes by
splitting D3 branes to move on to the Coulomb branch, one can just add
these fractional branes by hand. This is the approach chosen in [ 118 ,
119 ] to explain the wrapped membranes in Matrix theory. We will give a
more detailed analysis of the branches, parameters and the quantum
behaviour of these theories as we proceed.

##### Hanany-Witten

The 4d Hanany-Witten setup and its solution via the M-theory lift has
already been discussed in great detail in Chapter 2. Let me summarize
Witten’s solution I reviewed there in the form of a diagram like in the
other case, so that we are able to compare:

[]

Figure 22: Solving HW setup via M-theory

#### 5.3.2 A T-duality for bent branes and branes ending on branes

From our discussion of the 6d case we are by now used to the idea that
branes as probes are dual to HW setups. The T-duality as in the 6d setup
will work the same for D4 branes suspended between NS5 branes and D3
branes at ADE singularities, as long as in the HW setup the brane
connects all the way around the circle. In 6d we were forced to only
consider those setups from anomaly reasons. Here they only correspond to
the very special case of finite theories at the origin of the Coulomb
branch. To understand the more general cases we will need a
generalization of the notion of T-duality to the case of branes ending
on branes and bent branes. This will be the purpose of this section. To
summarize what we will find: the dual of a brane living on a interval
bounded by two other branes will turn out to be the fractional brane
discussed in the context of branes at orbifolds. Or again phrased in our
diagrammatic language:

[]

Figure 23: Duality relation between HW setup and fractional branes

Consider again @xmath D3 branes at a transverse @xmath singularity, that
is we take the D3 branes to live in the 0123 space and put these on top
of an @xmath singularity. Since the D3 branes can move away from the
singularity we should choose to embed the orbifold group in the Chan
Paton factors via the regular representation, that is include the D3
brane and all its @xmath images. The corresponding gauge group is @xmath
. Upon T-duality in the 6 direction this can be mapped into an elliptic
Hanany-Witten setup, that is @xmath NS5 branes living in the 012345
directions, with @xmath D4 branes living in 01236 space suspended
between every pair of consecutive NS5 branes on the circle. Let us label
the NS5 branes with @xmath . This is just the T-duality between branes
at orbifolds and HW setups I discussed above in detail for the 6d case.

But now consider a setup where we have just @xmath D4 branes stretching
between the @xmath th and the @xmath th NS5 brane and no other D4
branes. By just comparing the resulting gauge theory (a single @xmath )
it is natural to assume that the same T-duality in the 6 direction as we
used above now translates this into @xmath fractional branes in the
sense of [ 104 ] , that is @xmath D5 branes wrapping the vanishing
homology two-cycle @xmath ⁶ ⁶ 6 where @xmath [ 104 ] of the @xmath
orbifold in the dual picture. Or again in the language of [ 104 ] , we
consider the same orbifold group, but this time choose to embed the
orbifold group into the Chan Paton factors via the 1d irreducible
representation @xmath associated with the @xmath th node of the extended
Dynkin diagram. Or more generally, if we have @xmath D4 branes
connecting the @xmath th NS5 brane with the @xmath th NS5 brane the dual
setup will again be given by a @xmath orbifold, this time with the
orbifold group embedded in the Chan Paton indices via a general
representation @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a first check note that even in this more general case the resulting
gauge groups and matter contents agree: both constructions yield a
@xmath gauge group with hypermultiplets transforming as bi-fundamentals
under neighboring gauge groups. Similarly we can compare the classical
parameters and moduli. First consider the case of all @xmath , where the
duality is well established. This theory has two branches, a Coulomb
branch and a Higgs branch. As free parameters we can add FI terms @xmath
, for each gauge group factor which are triplets under the @xmath
symmetry and totally lift the Coulomb branch. Since we have @xmath gauge
group factors we have in addition k gauge coupling constants @xmath ,
which at least in the classical theory are additional free parameters.
Together with the @xmath -angles they form the complex coupling
constants @xmath

On the orbifold side the Higgs branch just corresponds to moving the D3
branes away from the orbifold point in the ALE space. Therefore the
Higgs branch metric coincides with the metric of the transverse ALE
space. Since all the @xmath are equal in the HW setup all the D4 brane
pieces can connect to form @xmath full D4 branes which can then move
away from the NS5 branes in the 789 direction. As usual, the 4th real
dimension of this branch is given by the @xmath component of the gauge
field on the D4 branes.

When the D3 branes meet the NS5 branes in 789 space, that is at the
origin of the Higgs branch, they can separate into the pieces which are
then free to move around 45 space along the NS5 branes giving rise to
the Coulomb branch. In the orbifold picture the same process is
described by the @xmath D3 branes splitting up into @xmath fractional
branes. These are now localized at the singularity in 6789 space, but
are also free to move in the 45 space. Now consider turning on the FI
terms @xmath . For the orbifold this corresponds to resolving the
singularity by blowing up the @xmath th vanishing sphere @xmath . The
mass of the states on the Coulomb branch (which are after all D5 branes
wrapping these spheres) become of order @xmath . The Coulomb branch is
removed as a supersymmetric vacuum. In the dual picture the FI terms
correspond to motion of the NS5 branes in 789 space. This resolves the
singularity since the 5 branes no longer coincide and again the mass of
states on the Coulomb branch (which in this case are D4 branes
stretching between the displaced NS5 branes) is of order @xmath .

Last but not least we have to discuss the coupling constants. On the HW
side they are simply given in terms of the distances @xmath between the
NS5 branes in the 6 direction, or to be more precise

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the string coupling constant and string
length of the underlying type IIA string theory respectively. Since we
are dealing with a theory with compact 6 direction we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the radius of the 6 direction. The easiest case to
consider is if all @xmath , that is the NS5 branes are equally spaced
around the circle. In this case we get @xmath . Applying T-duality to
type IIB this means that @xmath since @xmath , in accordance with the
orbifold analysis [ 19 , 120 ] . The same configuration can be also
viewed as @xmath fractional branes, that is @xmath D5 branes wrapping
the @xmath th vanishing cycle. According to [ 120 ] in this case the
coupling constant is given in terms of fluxes of two-form charge on the
vanishing sphere

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

At the orbifold the values of the B-fields are fixed to yield again
@xmath [ 104 ] . Next consider the case where all the NS5 branes
coincide. In 6d this will correspond to an enhanced gauge symmetry on
the NS5 brane. As shown in [ 121 ] this only happens if the B-flux is
zero on the dual side, again in accordance with our formulas. ⁷ ⁷ 7 The
one gauge factor with the finite gauge coupling is asymptotically
non-free. In the IR it is just a global symmetry. At higher energies new
6 dimensional degrees of freedom come in from the self-intersection of
the NS5 branes - it is impossible to put bent branes on a circle without
any selfintersection. Under T-duality these @xmath Wilson lines
translate into the positions of the NS5 branes on the circle, as
expected.

It is easy to see that this discussion generalizes without any problems
to arbitrary values of @xmath . In addition we can introduce D6 branes
in the HW setup living in 0123789 space to give extra matter. These
simply T-dualize into D7 branes wrapping the ALE space in the dual
picture.

One may wonder whether this is consistent as a quantum theory. Since, as
we discussed above, the fractional branes are charged under the RR gauge
fields we need ‘enough’ non-compact space in the transverse dimensions
for this to be consistent. Since we are dealing with @xmath SUSY there
are only two kinds of corrections, one-loop and non-perturbative
corrections. All higher loop contributions vanish exactly. The one loop
beta function gives rise to the usual logarithmic running of the
coupling constant. The instanton contributions have been summed up by
the Seiberg-Witten solution.

On the HW side it is well known how to incorporate quantum corrections.
In the full string theory the D4 brane ending on the NS5 brane actually
has a back-reaction on the NS5 brane leading to a logarithmic bending of
the NS5 brane. Since the coupling constant is given in terms of distance
between the NS5 branes this fact just reflects the 1-loop correction,
the running of the gauge coupling.

The non-perturbative effects in this case are given by Euclidean D0
branes stretching along the 6 direction [ 46 , 47 , 48 ] using the well
known relation that SYM instantons inside a D @xmath brane are
represented by D @xmath branes [ 45 ] . Like the D4 branes themselves
these Euclidean D0 branes can of course split on the NS5 branes and
become fractional D0 branes [ 48 ] . According to the same T duality in
the 6 direction we applied to the D4 branes they should become
fractional D(-1) branes, that is Euclidean D1 branes wrapping the
vanishing cycles. This fits nicely with the picture that this way the
instanton corrections on the orbifold side are again given by D @xmath
branes living inside the D @xmath brane.

But how does the 1-loop effect arise in the orbifold picture? Note that
the fractional branes carry charge under the appropriate RR fields, as
can be born out by a world-sheet computation of the corresponding
tadpoles [ 19 ] . They represent a charge sitting in the space
transverse to the D3 brane and transverse to the orbifold. In our
example this is the 2 dimensional 45 space. In two dimensions the
Green’s functions are given by logarithms. Therefore we would expect a
theory of a charged object in 2 dimensions to be plagued by divergences.
To be more precise we have the following trouble: we want to consider
effectively a 3 brane sitting in 6d spacetime. Since the transverse
space is only 2d, the corresponding 4-form vector potential @xmath grows
logarithmically.

From the D5 brane point of view the 3 brane vector potential couples to
the world-volume theory via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

After compactification on @xmath this leads to a term in the 3 brane
action of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

But recall that we identified @xmath as the gauge coupling @xmath . The
growing of @xmath can be absorbed by introducing an effective running
coupling constant. The divergences we encounter are just due to the
1-loop running of the gauge coupling! Charge neutrality, which is
obtained if we choose the regular representation, corresponds to
finiteness [ 19 , 120 ] . In this way we can see that the correct
dependence of the beta function on @xmath and @xmath is reproduced. This
can most easily be seen by observing that the charge clearly depends
linearly on the number of fractional branes and is zero when @xmath ,
corresponding to the case where the fractional branes can all combine to
form a full brane. The relative contributions originate from the
(self-)intersection numbers of the spheres @xmath given by the
(extended) Cartan matrix (here for @xmath ).

In this way the bending of the branes directly translates into the
fall-off of the RR field in transverse space in the orbifold picture.
The correspondence also holds in other dimensions (for D5 branes the
transverse space is 0 dimensional and we need neutrality reflecting
anomaly freedom of the underlying gauge theory, in 5,4,3,2,… dimensions
we get linear, logarithmic, @xmath , @xmath , … fall off for the field
strength). This reflects the appropriate running of the gauge coupling
just as in the HW picture.

#### 5.3.3 Unifying the different approaches

Now we are in a position to put all the three approaches together into
an unifying picture. To visualize what we are about to do, let me first
show a diagram that summarizes the connection. I will then explain the
dualities involved step by step.

[]

Figure 24: Connection between the various approaches. The non-compact
Calabi Yau spaces are ALE spaces fibered over a sphere (or several
intersecting spheres). These can be T-dualized via T-duality on the
fiber. The last T-duality, connecting to the HW picture is the one
discussed in this work.

In Figure (24 ) the connections are displayed diagrammatically, putting
together the pieces of Figures (21 ), (22 ) and (23 ). For the geometric
engineering approach of [ 114 ] the starting point is IIA string theory
on a non-compact Calabi-Yau which is an ALE space fibered over some base
(a non-compact version of a K3 fibration). Quantum corrections can be
solved by using mirror symmetry to a IIB picture. A T-duality on the ALE
fiber can be used to map this to a IIA NS5 brane wrapping the
Seiberg-Witten curve [ 117 , 114 ] . While in this approach the solution
is obtained via mirror symmetry, this last T-duality leads to the very
nice interpretation of the SW curve: it appears as the physical object
the 5 brane is wrapping.

Applying the same T-duality, which we have just applied to the IIB
solution, directly on the ALE fiber in the IIA setup (which is the
starting point for the geometric engineering approach), followed by an
S-duality in the resulting IIB string theory, it is straight-forward to
connect this to a setup of D5 branes wrapping the base of the fibration.

Using the T-duality between fractional branes and branes ending on
branes proposed above one can translate this into the very intuitive
language of a HW setup [ 35 ] , which finally can be solved for by
lifting to M-theory [ 44 ] . This way we not only obtain the same
solution (the SW curve), but also the same physical interpretation: the
SW curve appears directly as the space an M5 brane wraps on ⁸ ⁸ 8 In the
spirit of [ 122 ] the difference between IIA and M5 brane is irrelevant,
since the radius of the transverse circle does not affect the low-energy
SYM on the brane. .

In the following we will discuss the steps in the above chain of
dualities in more detail. There are two important points one should
account for. For one thing there are the quantum corrections. Since we
are dealing with @xmath there are only two types of these corrections:
the 1-loop contribution which gives rise to the logarithmic running of
the gauge coupling and the instanton corrections. It is interesting to
see how these quantum effects are incorporated in the various pictures
and how they are finally solved for.

The other thing one should treat with some care is how the singularity
type affects the gauge group. In all the examples we are considering
there are always two pieces of information, which we will refer to as
the singularity types determining the “gauge group” and the “product
structure”. This is easiest to understand in a particular example.
Consider @xmath D3 branes at an @xmath singularity. This gives rise to
an @xmath gauge group. In this example @xmath determines the “gauge
group” (the size and type of the single gauge group factors) and @xmath
the “product structure” (we have @xmath @xmath factors). Since in the
various duality transformations we are using we repeatedly map branes
into singularities and vice versa it is quite important to distinguish
which ingredient in the picture determines gauge group and which
determines product structure. In the cases where the gauge group is
determined by a geometric singularity, generalization to D or E type
singularities leads to @xmath or @xmath gauge groups, while in the cases
where the product structure is determined by a geometric singularity the
generalization to D or E type just leads to a more involved products of
@xmath groups determined by the corresponding extended Dynkin diagram.
For example in the D3 brane case @xmath D3 branes at an @xmath
singularity lead to an @xmath gauge group.

HW @xmath fractional branes: This is the duality between branes ending
on branes and fractional branes I have discussed above. A system of
@xmath NS5 branes with @xmath D4 branes suspended between the @xmath th
and the @xmath th NS5 brane is dual to an @xmath orbifold singularity
with @xmath fractional branes associated to the @xmath th shrinking
cycle. While in the HW setup the gauge group is determined by the D4
branes and the NS5 branes determine the product structure, the
corresponding roles are played by D3 branes and the orbifold type in the
dual picture. That is, the vanishing 2-cycles are given by spheres
intersecting according to the extended Dynkin diagram. The gauge group
can be generalized to D type by including orientifold planes on top of
the D-branes. It is not known how to achieve E type gauge groups this
way. Using an E type orbifold in the fractional branes only affects the
product structure.

The 1-loop quantum effects correspond to bending of the NS5 branes in HW
language and get mapped to the logarithmic Green’s functions in the
orbifold picture, as discussed in the previous section. Non-perturbative
effects are due to Euclidean D0 branes, which are mapped by the same
T-duality into Euclidean D1 branes wrapping the vanishing 2-cycles
(fractional D-instantons).

Fractional branes @xmath IIA on non-compact CY: We can now apply a
different T-duality on the setup described by the fractional branes.
First we S-dualize, taking the @xmath D5 branes into NS5 branes and the
Euclidean D1 branes into fundamental strings (that is world-sheet
instantons). Performing a T-duality in the overall transverse space
(that is 45 space) the NS5 branes turn into an @xmath singularity
according to the duality of [ 65 ] which we have already used several
times. The vanishing 2 cycle, which is still the space built out of the
@xmath spheres intersecting according to the extended Dynkin diagram,
stays unchanged. The fact that the NS5 branes only wrap parts of this
base ( @xmath NS5 branes on the @xmath th sphere @xmath ) translates
into the fact that the type of the ALE fibers over the base changes from
one sphere to the other. From the IIA point of view this looks like
T-duality acting on the fibers as described in [ 117 ] . Since now
everything is geometric, generalizations to E type are straight forward:
the product structure is determined by the intersection pattern of the
@xmath spheres, the ADE type of the fiber determines the gauge group.
This way we can even engineer products of exceptional gauge groups.

The non-perturbative effects are now due to world-sheet instantons, as
expected. The log-corrections coming from one loop are incorporated in
the particular limit one has to choose to decouple gravity [ 123 ] . The
system can be solved via local mirror symmetry.

## Chapter 6 Open problems and directions for further research

### 6.1 Brane Boxes

As I mentioned in the beginning there is a natural generalization of HW
setups: the brane box [ 41 ] . In order to branegineer generic models
with 4 supercharges, one should consider living on a rectangle bounded
by two kinds of NS5 branes. Only recently it has become clear [ 43 ]
that these models are indeed consistent also at the quantum level. This
calculation is done using a generalization of the HW - branes as probes
T-duality I have presented here. Brane boxes are T-dual to D3 branes at
a @xmath orbifold, where this time @xmath , so that we are left with
@xmath instead of @xmath . Again a brane on a single box is T-dual to
fractional branes characterized by a given irreducible representation of
the orbifold group [ 124 ] , just as in the case I was discussing.

A tadpole associated to a generic orbifold element without any fixed
plane corresponds to a charge in a 0d space. So it has to vanish. Indeed
it was shown that vanishing of these generic tadpoles is equivalent to
anomaly freedom. However there are also tadpoles corresponding to a
twists that leave a 2d fixed plane. For the same reasons as I discussed
in the previous chapter one should interpret the resulting logarithmic
divergence as the running of the gauge coupling. Vanishing of these
tadpoles therefore is not necessary for consistency but implies
finiteness. This condition once more corresponds to a no-bending
condition for the brane boxes.

It would definitely be desirable to perform the “lift to M-theory” for
the brane boxes. For one this should explain the anomaly in terms of
bending and hence explore some yet unknown aspects of brane physics. It
is still the wrong limit to actually solve the theory, but again it
should be possible to solve for all the holomorphic quantities. Some
intrinsic @xmath phenomena such as dynamical supersymmetry breaking can
be studied this way and find their natural place in string theory. It is
obvious that such a lift has to be performed via a SUSY 3-cycle instead
of the SUSY 2-cycle. The conditions for SUSY 3-cycles have also been
worked out in [ 51 , 52 ] . These equations are technically much more
involved, but hopefully the lift can be performed ¹ ¹ 1 After this work
has been finished, we performed this lift in [ 125 ] in a very special
class of models. .

### 6.2 Maldacena Conjecture

Recently a really remarkable proposal has been made by Maldacena [ 33 ]
generalizing the aspects of the brane / SYM correspondence I have been
discussing so far. It states that the worldvolume theory of a brane is
really dual to string theory in the background of the brane. For
macroscopic systems (that is large number of coinciding branes) the
curvature of the brane solution becomes small, so that supergravity is a
good approximation of string theory. Taking the limit @xmath reduces the
worldvolume theory to SYM, while we focus in to the near horizon region
of the soliton, leading to the statement that large @xmath @xmath @xmath
SYM is dual to supergravity in an @xmath background.

This conjecture already led to a variety of beautiful results. Again it
basically helps to understand aspects string theory as well as of field
theory. As I explained in Chapter 2 it is the most promising approach
for actually solving some of aspects of field theory that so far have
escaped our control. On the other hand we have learned several new
aspects about quantum gravity. As I mentioned it is the first
realization of the concept of holography, which is supposed to be a
genuine property of quantum gravity. So it seems that there are still
many aspects of brane physics that need to be explored. Hopefully in the
end we will find a true understanding of the fundamental problems we set
out to solve.

## Summary

In this work I discussed several applications of the connection of
non-perturbative string theory and SYM theory. In Chapter 1 I reviewed
the physics of D-branes as one example of a non-perturbative effect in
string theory. Their dynamics is dominated by gauge theory. This fact
can be used to engineer certain string backgrounds which yield
interacting SYM theories as their low-energy description.

In Chapter 2 I then introduced one of the approaches in detail, the HW
setup. I gave a summary of the identification of the classical gauge
theory, showed how quantum effects manifest themselves in the brane
picture and how to solve them.

This way of embedding gauge theories into string theories has several
interesting applications. These were the topic of Chapter 3. First I
discussed dualities in field theory and showed how they arise as a
natural consequence of string duality. As a second application I used
branes to prove the existence of non-trivial fixed point theories in 6
dimensions and to study their properties. Some of these fixed points
describe phase transitions between two different brane configurations.
From a 4d point of view these 6d transitions can induce a chiral
non-chiral transition.

In Chapter 4 I discussed the relation of the HW setup with the other
approaches of embedding gauge theory into string theory, especially the
branes as probes approach. The different ways of embedding gauge
theories in string theory are shown to be actually T-dual as string
backgrounds. For one this allowed us to explore several new aspects of
T-duality, like T-duality for bended branes and branes ending on branes.
In addition this relation can be used to show that the transitions found
in the brane picture can as well be understood as transitions between
topologically distinct compactifications of string theory.

Some open problems and directions for further research were mentioned in
Chapter 5.

## Acknowledgements

I’d like to thank H. Dorn for advising me during this thesis and D Lüst
for his help and collaboration. Large parts of my work have been done
together with Ilka Brunner. I am especially grateful to her. I also
thank Amihay Hanany, Andre Miemiec, Douglas Smith and George Zoupanos
for the good collaboration. In addition I thank M. Aganagic, B. Andreas,
G. Curio, J. de Boer, J. Distler, M. Faux, S. Kachru, A. Krause,
S. Mahapatra, T. Mohaupt, H.-J. Otto, Y. Oz, C. Preitschopf,
R. Reinbacher, W. Sabra, I. Schnakenburg and E. Silverstein for useful
discussions.