In this thesis we discuss some aspects concerning the construction of a
4D effective theory derived from a higher dimensional model. The first
part is devoted to the study of how the heavy Kaluza-Klein modes
contribute to the low energy dynamics of the light modes. The second
part concerns the analysis of the spectrum arising from non standard
compactifications of 6D minimal gauged supergravities, involving a warp
factor and conical defects in the internal manifold.

To prepare the background for such topics, first we review standard
Kaluza-Klein theories and brane world models.

Afterwards, in Part I, which contains original results, we introduce the
study of the heavy mode contribution. We do so by discussing scalar
models in arbitrary dimension and then by treating in some detail a 6D
Einstein-Maxwell theory coupled to a charged scalar and fermions. The
latter model has some interesting features as it can lead to a chiral
low energy 4D effective theory, which is similar to the electroweak part
of the Standard Model of Particle Physics. In this first part of the
thesis our main interest is in the interaction terms. We point out that
the contribution of the heavy KK modes is generally needed in order to
reproduce the correct predictions for the observable quantities
involving the light modes. In the 6D Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar model the
contribution of the heavy KK modes are geometrically interpreted as the
deformation of the internal space.

In Part II we introduce 6D minimal gauged supergravities, which are
supersymmetric and non-Abelian extensions of the 6D model of Part I. We
begin by summarizing the main features and possible applications of
these models. Moreover we review warped brane solutions with 4D Poincaré
invariance, and a compact and axisymmetric internal manifold, which, in
a simple case, turns out to have conical defects. Afterwards we present
our original contribution to such a scenario: we study fluctuations
about these axisymmetric warped brane solutions. Much of our analysis is
general and could be applied to other scenarios. We focus on bulk
sectors that could give rise to Standard Model like gauge fields and
charged matter. We reduce the dynamics to Schroedinger type equations
plus physical boundary conditions, and obtain exact solutions for the
Kaluza-Klein wave functions and discrete mass spectra. The power-law
warping, as opposed to exponential in 5D, means that zero mode wave
functions can be peaked on negative tension branes, but only at the
price of localizing the whole Kaluza-Klein tower there. However, the
codimension two defects allow the Kaluza-Klein mass gap to remain finite
even in the infinite volume limit. In principle, in this scenario, not
only gravity, but Standard Model fields could ‘feel’ the extent of large
extra dimensions, and still be described by an effective 4D theory.
