This thesis is a study of two dimensional noncritical string theory. The
main tool which is used, is the matrix model.

There are several chapters. After a general introduction there follows
an introduction to the Liouville model where the fundamental issues of
its formulation are discussed. In particular, the special states are
introduced. Then, in chapter three, some calculations of partition
functions on genus one are given. These use field theory techniques. The
results are compared with the matrix model. In chapter four the matrix
model itself is introduced. Some of the concepts and relations which are
used in later chapters are explained. Chapters five and six include
comments on two important subjects: nonperturbative issues and string
theory at finite radius. Chapter seven is devoted to zero momentum
correlation functions as calculated in the matrix model. One important
result is a set of recursion relations. Chapter eight extends the
treatment to nonzero momentum. The main result is a clear identification
of the special states. The chapter also includes some comments on the
Wheeler de Witt equation. Chapter nine introduces the matrix model
@xmath algebra. This organizes the results of previous chapters. In
particular, a simple derivation of the genus zero tachyon correlation
functions is given. Chapter ten extends the results of chapter nine to
higher genus. It is seen how a deformation of the algebra is responsible
for much of the higher genus structure. Some very explicit formulae are
derived. Then, in chapter eleven, the Liouville and matrix model
calculations are compared. Finally, chapter twelve is devoted to some
general conclusions.
