In this thesis, we report on different aspects of integrability in
supersymmetric gauge theories. Our main tool of investigation is
supertwistor geometry. In the first chapter, we briefly review the
basics of twistor geometry. Afterwards, we discuss self-dual super
Yang-Mills (SYM) theory and some of its relatives. In particular, a
detailed twistor description of self-dual SYM theory is presented.
Furthermore, we introduce certain self-dual models which are, in fact,
obtainable from self-dual SYM theory by a suitable reduction. Some of
them can be interpreted within the context of topological field
theories. To provide a twistor description of these models, we propose
weighted projective superspaces as twistor spaces. These spaces turn out
to be Calabi-Yau supermanifolds. Therefore, it is possible to write down
appropriate action principles, as well. In chapter three, we then deal
with the twistor formulation of a certain supersymmetric Bogomolny model
in three space-time dimensions. The nonsupersymmetric version of this
model describes static Yang-Mills-Higgs monopoles in the
Prasad-Sommerfield limit. In particular, we consider a supersymmetric
extension of mini-twistor space. This space is in turn a part of a
certain double fibration. It is then possible to formulate a
Chern-Simons type theory on the correspondence space of this fibration.
As we explain, this theory describes partially holomorphic vector
bundles. It should be noticed that the correspondence space can be
equipped with a Cauchy-Riemann structure. Moreover, we formulate
holomorphic BF theory on mini-supertwistor space. We then prove that the
moduli spaces of all three theories are bijective. In addition, complex
structure deformations on mini-supertwistor space are investigated
eventually resulting in a twistor correspondence involving a
supersymmetric Bogomolny model with massive fields. In chapter four, we
review the twistor formulation of non-self-dual SYM theories. The
remaining chapter is devoted to a more detailed investigation of
(classical) integrability of self-dual SYM theories. In particular, we
explain the twistor construction of infinite-dimensional algebras of
hidden symmetries. Our discussion is exemplified by deriving affine
extensions of internal and space-time symmetries. Furthermore, we
construct self-dual SYM hierarchies and their truncated versions. These
hierarchies describe an infinite number of flows on the respective
solution space. The lowest level flows are space-time translations. The
existence of such hierarchies allows us to embed a given solution to the
equations of motion of self-dual SYM theory into an infinite-parameter
family of new solutions. The dependence of the self-dual SYM fields on
the additional moduli can be recovered by solving the equations of the
hierarchy. We in addition derive infinitely many nonlocal conservation
laws.
