# Chapter 1 Introduction

The standard model of the elementary particle physics almost perfectly
explains many present experiments. Especially, the agreement with the
recent precision experiments in LEP is significant. The unified
description of electromagnetic interaction and weak interaction [ 1 ] is
now established ¹ ¹ 1 More rigorously, the final establishment will be
done by LEPII experiment. . These interactions are described as the
gauge interaction of the symmetry @xmath (electroweak symmetry) which
contains four massless gauge bosons. This gauge symmetry is
spontaneously broken to the electromagnetic gauge symmetry @xmath , and
three gauge bosons (weak gauge bosons) get their mass by the Higgs
mechanism [ 2 ] . The mass of these gauge bosons explains why the weak
interaction is short range. The electroweak symmetry forbids the mass of
quarks and leptons. Quarks and leptons cannot be massive till the
electroweak symmetry breaking is achieved. Therefore, the mechanism of
the mass generation must tightly be related with the mechanism of the
electroweak symmetry breaking.

In the standard model, electroweak symmetry is spontaneously broken by
the vacuum expectation value of elementary Higgs field. The magnitude of
vacuum expectation value decides the masses of weak gauge bosons. The
masses of fermions (quarks and leptons) are generated through the Yukawa
interactions between the fermion fields and Higgs field. The mass mixing
among the quarks with the same electric charge is also generated. This
mixing is the origin of Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) mixing angles
and CP violation in the weak interaction [ 3 ] .

This mechanism of electroweak symmetry breaking and fermion mass
generation contains many arbitrary parameters. The masses of fermions,
CKM mixing angles, and CP violating phase cannot be predicted in the
framework of the standard model. This suggests that there are some
unknown physics which explain the origin of fermion masses as well as
the origin of CKM mixing and CP violation in the weak interaction. We
must make some efforts to find this new physics, though it is a
difficult problem.

The approaches to solve this problem may be classified into two
categories. One is the solution in the grand unified theories (GUTs) [ 4
] . The Yukawa couplings as well as the gauge couplings must be unified
at some very high energy scale in this theories. The variety of the
Yukawa couplings at the low energy is due to the complex particle
contents. The interactions originated by the physics at the Plank scale
may also be important [ 5 ] . This type of solutions kinematically
explain the variety of fermion masses.

Another solution dynamically explains the fermion masses. The extended
technicolor theory [ 6 ] is contained in this category. The theory is
based on the technicolor theory [ 7 ] in which the electroweak symmetry
is dynamically broken by the technifermion condensates due to the strong
coupling technicolor interaction. In the technicolor theory the
interaction which correspond to the Yukawa interactions are the
effective four-fermion interactions between the ordinary fermions and
technifermions. In the extended technicolor theory, the effective
four-fermion interactions are dynamically generated. The variety of the
fermion masses is originated in the dynamics of extended technicolor
interaction. The top condensation model [ 8 ] and composite model of
quarks and leptons are also contained in this category.

To our regret, both approaches are not completely successful. While the
approach with GUTs can describe the fermion masses, CKM mixing angles,
and CP violation, the potential of vacuum is very complicated one, and
many fine-tuned parameters should be contained in it. We must consider
the physics at GUT scale and above to answer the question why the
potential is so complicated.

The dynamical approach also is not successful. One of the reason is that
the non-perturbative treatment of the strong coupling gauge theory is
quite difficult. Since our knowledge of the dynamical spontaneous
symmetry breaking is very limited, we must put some postulates to make
models. Other reason is that the model tends to become very complicated
one to explain the complicated fermion mass spectrum. Many people are
disgusted by complicated model with many postulations.

There is no definite reason to select which approach is better, though
recent precision experiments at LEP favor the GUT approach (with
supersymmetry) but not dynamical approach. It is interesting that the
dynamical approach predicts new rich physics (new particles, new
interactions) just above the present accessible energy. It is now the
time to extensively study this approach, since many intended experiments
can be accessible to this new physics.

It is very important to estimate the non-perturbative behavior
(dynamics) of the gauge theory for the dynamical approach. In this
thesis we treat an interesting gauge theory which can be applied as the
dynamics of the extended technicolor theory. It is called tumbling gauge
theory [ 9 ] in which many dynamical gauge symmetry breakings with
different energy scales are expected. Natural existence of such many
different mass scales has been expected as the source of many different
fermion masses. We formulate this theory by using the effective action
in one-gauge-boson-exchange approximation, and estimate the strength
(energy scale) of the effective four fermion interactions due to the
massive gauge boson exchange. The strength is directly related with the
fermion masses.

The strength is also important to solve the flavor-changing neutral
current (FCNC) problem. In the naive model, extended technicolor theory
generates large FCNC interactions. The extended technicolor gauge bosons
and the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons cause too large @xmath - @xmath
mixing, for example. We may avoid this problem by devising the gauge
group and the representation of fermions, but the model should become
very complicated one. This problem can simply be solved if the
technicolor dynamics is the one with large @xmath , where @xmath is the
anomalous dimension of composite operator @xmath composed by the
technifermion field @xmath [ 10 ] .

Two types of large @xmath dynamics have been proposed. One is the gauge
theory with slowly running coupling (so called walking gauge theory) [
11 ] and another is the gauge theory with strong four-fermion
interaction [ 12 ] . Since many effective four-fermion interactions are
induced in tumbling gauge theory, the second type of large @xmath
dynamics is likely be realized. But we show that the effective
four-fermion interaction is too weak to realize sufficiently large
@xmath . This result is important for the model building of the extended
technicolor theory.

We see that the massive gauge bosons can be neglected, when we consider
the low energy dynamics. The critical gauge coupling of the fermion pair
condensation and the anomalous dimension @xmath do not change, whether
the massive gauge bosons are considered or not. The massive fermions
which get their masses in the process of tumbling can also be neglected,
when we consider the low energy dynamics. The critical gauge coupling of
the pair condensation channel with the massive fermions is too large to
be formed the condensate. Although such decoupling of the heavy
particles has already been proved based on the the perturbation theory,
we non-perturbatively show that in the tumbling gauge theory by using
our formalism in the one-gauge-boson exchange approximation.

This thesis is developed as follows. In the next chapter, we review the
fundamental properties of realization of symmetry in nature. The
fundamentals about spontaneous symmetry breaking and Higgs mechanism is
reviewed. In chapter 3, the fundamental properties of dynamical symmetry
breaking is described. Various techniques of the non-perturbative
treatment of dynamics are reviewed. In chapter 4 and 5, the technicolor
models and its phenomenology are reviewed, respectively. The relation
with present precision experiments is also considered. In chapter 6, our
formalism of tumbling gauge theory is developed. In chapter 7, the
strength of effective four-fermion interaction is estimated, and the
possibility of the large anomalous dimension dynamics is discussed. The
non-perturbative decoupling is also discussed. Chapter 8 is devoted to
the conclusion.

## Chapter 2 Realization of Symmetry

The symmetry is an important concept in the elementary particle physics.
Many hadrons composed by the quarks have been classified and understood
by virtue of the symmetry in QCD. We know that some decay processes of
hadrons are forbidden by the conservation law, and the conservation law
is directly connected with the symmetry. To find the symmetry in nature
has been a very important task to understand the particle spectrum and
interactions.

The symmetry is described as the invariance of Lagrangian under the
transformation ¹ ¹ 1 More accurately, we should consider the action
instead of the Lagrangian. But here, we consider the Lagrangian for
simplicity. . For example, the Lagrangian of complex-valued scalar field

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

has a global symmetry, since this is invariant under the global
transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the parameter of transformation. We can extend this
symmetry to the local one by introducing gauge field @xmath . The
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is invariant under the local transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the coupling constant of the gauge interaction.

The current and charge of the symmetry are defined as follows. Consider
the general fields @xmath and the (infinitesimal) transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where index @xmath denotes the flavor of the fields and @xmath is the
index of the transformation. The current is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the corresponding charge is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

by using this current.

We can show that the divergence of the currents are the variation of the
Lagrangian by using Eular-Lagrange equation, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Lagrangian is transformed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, if the Lagrangian is invariant under the transformation ² ² 2
For the invariance of the action, the variation of the Lagrangian do not
always have to vanish. The form of the total divergence, @xmath , is
also acceptable. , the divergence of the current vanishes. The current
corresponding to the symmetry transformation is called Noether current.
The vanishing of the divergence of the current suggests the conservation
of corresponding charge, because the charge is independent of time,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here we assume as the boundary condition that the fields and its
derivatives vanish at infinity.

The charges generate the transformation when we consider the fields as
operators in canonical quantization,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The charge of the state is defined as the eigenvalue of the charge
operator with respect to the corresponding state vector. The
transformations are classified by the algebra of the charge operators.
If the charge operators, for instance, satisfy the algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

the transformation forms the group @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath run over @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , and @xmath is the
Levi-Civita symbol. Therefore, the symmetry can be classified by the
group theory. The charges form the generators of the group.

The symmetry of the system (Lagrangian) can be realized in nature in two
ways: Wigner phase or Nambu-Goldstone phase. The generators of the
symmetry annihilate the vacuum state in the Wigner phase, but not in
Nambu-Goldstone phase. Namely,

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.15)
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

where the vacuum state is defined by the annihilation operators of the
asymptotic fields of the theory. The double quotations in eq.( 2.16 )
means that the formula is just a symbolic one.

Wigner phase is the naive realization of the symmetry. In this phase the
charge of the state is conserved in the physical processes. Since the
Hamiltonian @xmath commutes with the charge,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the eigenstates of the charge @xmath with
eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath , respectively. This means that the
transition amplitude do not vanish only if the charges of initial and
finial state is equal to each order.

But it is not the case in the Nambu-Goldstone phase. If there exists at
least an operator @xmath which satisfies the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

the symmetry is realized as Nambu-Goldstone phase. The generator @xmath
does not annihilate the vacuum state, and then it is not the
well-defined one. Since @xmath commutes with the energy-momentum
operator, the state @xmath must proportional to the vacuum state @xmath
³ ³ 3 Here, we postulate that the vacuum state is an unique zero energy
state. But the result is not changed, if the other independent zero
energy states exist. . Therefore,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is a constant. In the last equality, we use the fact that
there is no constant Lorentz vector in the theory. If the generator
@xmath is well-defined one, then the constant @xmath must be zero.
Namely, if the generator @xmath does not annihilate the vacuum state,
then the generator is not well-defined one. In this phase the symmetry
is spontaneously broken, and the charge of the state as the eigenvalue
of the generators cannot be defined. The generator @xmath is called the
broken generator.

The symmetry is realized in the different way from the charge
conservation in the Wigner phase. The massless Nambu-Goldstone bosons
corresponding to the broken generators exist in particle spectrum.
Nambu-Goldstone theorem says that if the conditions

1.  Existence of the translational invariance and Lorentz covariance.

2.  Existence of the conserved current @xmath .

3.  Existence of the operator @xmath which satisfies @xmath (finite).

are satisfied, the massless Nambu-Goldstone boson exists and it couples
to the current.

The proof is the following. Because of the current conservation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

is independent of @xmath , where @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The left-hand side of eq.( 2.20 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.22)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we use the translational invariance. In the last equality, the sum
of states is divided into two parts: one particle states and others. In
addition, we recover the invariant measure of the integration in the
part of the one-particle states. Because of the delta function and the
independence of @xmath , there must exist a state of @xmath except for
the vacuum state. From the spectral condition of the field theory, this
means the existence of massless one particle state. The state @xmath ,
Nambu-Goldstone boson state, must satisfy the condition

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we use the Lorentz covariance and the finiteness of the vacuum
expectation value. This equation means that the Nambu-Goldstone boson
couples to the current @xmath . It is apparent that the number of
Nambu-Goldstone bosons equals to the number of independent broken
generators.

Consider an example of the Lagrangian with spontaneous symmetry
breaking. The Lagrangian is the same as eq.( 2.1 ) but the sign of the
mass term is different.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is invariant under the transformation of eq.( 2.2 ). We introduce
the two real fields as @xmath . The transformation properties of the
fields @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The potential of the fields @xmath and @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the minimum point is at @xmath , @xmath (We can always set @xmath by
using the transformation of eq.( 2.2 )). This value of @xmath is
translated as the vacuum expectation value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The physical field @xmath which has positive squared mass is given by
the shift @xmath . The mass of @xmath vanishes by this shift. The
current of symmetry is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

by this physical field, and we can see that @xmath couples to the
current as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the lowest order of the perturbation (Consider the fields as the
asymptotic ones.). Therefore, @xmath is the field of Nambu-Goldstone
boson.

If the local symmetry is spontaneously broken, the corresponding gauge
boson becomes massive. This is called Higgs mechanism. Consider the
Lagrangian of eq.( 2.3 ) but with negative squared mass.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Lagrangian is invariant under the transformation of eq.( 2.4 ), but
this symmetry is spontaneously broken by the vacuum expectation value of
@xmath just the same as the above example. By the shifting @xmath , the
mass term of gauge boson @xmath is generated from the first term of the
Lagrangian. The mass is controlled by the gauge coupling and the vacuum
expectation value of @xmath : @xmath .

The complete calculation for the gauge boson mass in the second order of
the gauge coupling is as follows. We rewrite the Lagrangian as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The generating functional is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath means the connected Green function containing only the loop
effect due to the field @xmath . We used the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any operators @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the effective action
for the gauge field in the second order of @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is a gauge parameter. Therefore, the propagator of gauge
boson is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and neglect the loop effects. The propagator has a pole at @xmath . It
is important that both the direct contribution of vacuum expectation
value (eq.( 2.37 )) and the current-current correlation (eq.( 2.38 ))
contribute to the propagator. In the next chapter we treat the
spontaneous symmetry breaking without the vacuum expectation value of
elementary field. In that case, the contribution of current-current
correlation is essential. We can see that if the massless particles
couple with the currents (massless pole @xmath in eq.( 2.38 )), the
gauge bosons which couple to the current become massive (Schwinger
mechanism).

## Chapter 3 Dynamical Symmetry Breaking

The symmetry of Lagrangian is spontaneously broken by the non-zero
vacuum expectation value of the operator which is not invariant under
the transformation of the symmetry. The operator is not always be the
elementary field, but also the operator composed by the elementary
fields (composite operator). The spontaneous symmetry breaking which is
triggered by the vacuum expectation value of the composite operator is
called dynamical symmetry breaking.

It is believed that the dynamical symmetry breaking is realized in the
theory of strong interaction (quantum chromodynamics, QCD). The
Lagrangian of the theory is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath denote the gluon fields ( @xmath , and @xmath are the
Gell-Mann matrixes.) which couple with the quark fields @xmath ( @xmath
) with coupling constant @xmath . If the quark masses @xmath vanish, the
global chiral symmetry @xmath exists. The transformation of the symmetry
is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

As long as we consider the light (compared with the typical scale of QCD
dynamics) quarks, u-quark and d-quark (and s-quark), this is a good
approximate symmetry. It is believed that this chiral symmetry is
dynamically broken to the symmetry @xmath by the quark pair condensation
@xmath due to the QCD dynamics. The composite operator @xmath is not
invariant under the chiral symmetry but invariant under the @xmath
transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we consider u and d quarks (u,d, and s quarks) ( @xmath @xmath ) and
neglect their masses (chiral limit), there should be three (eight)
pseudo-scalar massless Nambu-Goldstone bosons. The pseudo-scalar mesons,
@xmath and @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and “
@xmath ”), can be identified as the Nambu-Goldstone bosons. The masses
of these mesons are understood as the effect of the explicit chiral
symmetry breaking due to the quark masses. The effect can be
perturbatively included, if the masses of the quarks are small enough
(chiral perturbation) [ 13 ] . The interactions between these mesons at
low energy (low energy @xmath - @xmath scattering, for example) are
described as the interactions of the Nambu-Goldstone bosons which are
determined only by the symmetry (low energy theorems). The correction
due to the explicit breaking is perturbatively considered. The fact that
the picture of the chiral perturbation can satisfactory describe the low
energy phenomenology of QCD is the reason why we believe the existence
of the pair condensation in QCD.

In next section, we try to calculate the value of the pair condensation
in QCD by using Schwinger-Dyson equation [ 14 ] and operator product
expansion [ 15 ] . The Schwinger-Dyson equation (self-consistent
equation for quark propagator) is solved in ladder approximation, and
the non-trivial solution is converted into the pair condensation @xmath
by using the operator product expansion. In section 2, we calculate the
decay constant of Nambu-Goldstone boson which corresponds to the vacuum
expectation value of the elementary scalar field in the previous
chapter. The Pagels-Stokar formula [ 16 ] , which gives decay constant
as a functional of the quark propagator, is introduced there. In section
3, we discuss the Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis effective action [ 17 ] by
which the general treatment of spontaneous symmetry breaking is
possible.

### 3.1 Schwinger-Dyson equation and quark condensation

We consider the Schwinger-Dyson equation [ 14 ] for the quark and gluon
propagators. We want to solve the equation, and get the full quark
propagator. The equation is

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the full propagators (bare) of quarks and
gluons

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

(The left-derivative of the Grassmann variable is understood.) and
@xmath is a full gluon-quark-quark vertex (bare)

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

The matrixes @xmath are the generators of @xmath ( @xmath ). The indexes
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath denote flavor, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath denote
the color of quarks, and @xmath , @xmath denote the color of gluons. We
are assuming that the gauge symmetry @xmath is not broken. The
propagators of the quarks and gluons are set to diagonal in the color
space. The functional @xmath is the generating functional of the Green
functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the source fields.

We can derive eq.( 3.1 ) as follows. The equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

is satisfied as the field equation of quarks. This equation means that
the expectation value of the derivative of the action by quarks should
vanish. It is rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Differentiating with respect to @xmath and dividing by @xmath give

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.18)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

By setting @xmath , and assuming

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

From the definition of @xmath and @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get the Schwinger-Dyson equation for quark propagator eq.( 3.1 ). The
Schwinger-Dyson equation for gluon propagator, eq.( 3.1 ), can also be
obtained in the same way.

The eq.( 3.1 ) and eq.( 3.1 ) can be written as follows in momentum
space.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath ( @xmath ), @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

All the quantities in eqs.( 3.23 ) and ( 3.24 ) are bare ones. The
Schwinger-Dyson equation for renormalized quantities is

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.34)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.35)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

Z-factors and @xmath should be fixed by the renormalization conditions,
for example,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we solve the equation. We consider the case that the chiral symmetry
is exact, @xmath . The flavor dependence of the propagator will
disappear, and the global @xmath symmetry will not be broken ¹ ¹ 1 We
simply assume this. . Take the full vertex function (bare) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and take the gluon propagator in eq.( 3.23 ) as free one. Then the
equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we set @xmath . This approximation is called ladder approximation.
The equation of the quark propagator is independent of the equation of
the gluon propagator. Though there is no reason for supporting this
approximation , it is taken only for the analytic treatment of the
equation. Since the result is gauge dependent ( @xmath dependent), we
can not do the quantitative discussion. We believe that this
approximation does not destroy the qualitative feature.

The quark propagator can be generally written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

We get two equation for @xmath and @xmath from eq.( 3.39 ). By taking
trace, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

and by taking trace after multiplying @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the Euclidean space ² ² 2 It is a non-trivial problem whether we can
go to the Euclidean space or not. Here, we simply assume that we can do
that. , they become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we take Landau gauge @xmath ³ ³ 3 When we consider QED, to take
Landau gauge makes the ladder approximation consistent with the
Ward-Takahashi identity. , @xmath and

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.47)
  -- -- -- --------

This non-linear equation can not be solved analytically. We use the
bifurcation theory [ 18 ] to estimate the existence of the non-trivial
solution. We expand the non-linear equation around the trivial solution
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is called the mass
function. Bifurcation theory says that if this expanded equation has
only one non-trivial linearly independent solution when @xmath , the
full equation has only one non-trivial solution (up to sign) when @xmath
or @xmath . The linearized equation can be transformed to the
differential equation with boundary conditions as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This can be easily solved. The general two linearly independent
non-trivial solutions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . These solutions satisfy the boundary conditions if @xmath
. When @xmath , the two solutions are not linearly independent.
Therefore, we know that the non-linear equation has only one non-trivial
solution (up to sign) when @xmath or @xmath . @xmath is called the
critical coupling.

The non-linear equation is expected to have the non-trivial solution
when @xmath [ 19 ] . By replacing the @xmath in the denominator of eq.(
3.47 ) into the constant @xmath ( @xmath ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation can be transformed to the differential equation and
boundary conditions as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ultraviolet cut off. By changing the valuable @xmath
to @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is called hypergeometric differential equation which can
be solved analytically. The general solution is

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.58)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

for @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.59)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

for @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are the
constants. The function @xmath is hypergeometric series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the infrared boundary condition, eq.( 3.55 ), @xmath must be zero.
The value @xmath is finite unlike the solution when @xmath (eq.( 3.52
)). The ultraviolet boundary condition eq.( 3.56 ) is not satisfied
unless @xmath . The non-trivial solution which satisfy the boundary
condition is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are real and complex constants,
respectively, and @xmath . We are assuming that @xmath is the real
function. The asymptotic form for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath dumps as @xmath .

Next, we connect the solution of the Schwinger-Dyson equation to the
pair condensate of quark @xmath . We use the technique of operator
product expansion [ 15 ] . The quark propagator is expanded as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.64)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the renormalization point. The first term in right-hand
side is the effect of the explicit chiral symmetry breaking by which the
chirality is flipped without the vacuum expectation value of operators.
Since we are neglecting the explicit breaking now,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can calculate the asymptotic form of the Wilson coefficient function
@xmath by the perturbation theory. If the operator expansion is good,
the relation

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

should be satisfied. The Green functions can be calculated in tree level
as (fig.( 3.1 ))

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

and (fig.( 3.2 ))

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.68)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

where @xmath is the gluon free propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, when @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.70)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

By taking trace for the indexes @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the color degrees of freedom of quarks ( @xmath ).

This result is improved by using the renormalization group equation. The
improvement makes it to depend on the renormalization point @xmath . The
Wilson coefficient function satisfies the following renormalization
group equation.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimension of the Wilson coefficient function, @xmath
and @xmath are the anomalous dimensions of the operator @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, and @xmath is the running coupling. This equation
means the fact that the renormalization point dependence of the both
side of eq.( 3.64 ) should be the same. We multiply the function @xmath
to the Wilson coefficient given by the perturbative calculation to
include the renormalization point dependence. By substituting it into
the renormalization group equation in @xmath limit, we get

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath , is specified by assuming that the right-hand side
is only depend on @xmath but not @xmath explicitly. Namely,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the running of the coupling is very slow, we can replace it by a
constant @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a constant @xmath . In this case, we can explicitly write the
asymptotic form of the Wilson coefficient function as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Treating the running coupling as a constant is a convenience
approximation to consider the effect of anomalous dimension.

We now return to the pair condensate @xmath . From the eq.( 3.65 ), we
get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

By substituting the result of eq.( 3.78 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use the solution of Schwinger-Dyson equation in Landau gauge (
@xmath and @xmath in eq.( 3.41 )). If @xmath , the pair condensate
vanishes. But if @xmath is non-trivial and has the asymptotic behavior

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

then the condensate takes finite value.

We have tried to calculate the value of the pair condensate in QCD.
Since the mass function @xmath and the anomalous dimension can not
perfectly be estimated, we can not proof the existence of the pair
condensate in QCD. If we believe the existence of the pair condensate,
the anomalous dimension can be obtained form eq.( 3.81 ) and eq.( 3.63
). Since eq.( 3.63 ) suggests that the asymptotic behavior of mass
function is @xmath (up to log), we know that the anomalous dimension
must be unity, @xmath , for the finite condensate. This value of @xmath
is large compared with the naive expectation from the perturbative QCD.

The Schwinger-Dyson equation which is considered in this section is
called QED-like, since the non-abelian effect of gauge interaction
(non-abelian vertex) is not included. The form of the equation is just
the same in QED, except for the Casimir coefficient @xmath . The effect
can be approximately included by replacing the coupling constant by
running coupling (Higashijima approximation [ 20 ] ). The approximation
results the small anomalous dimension @xmath . We can expect that the
slower running coupling means the larger anomalous dimension @xmath .

### 3.2 Decay constant of Nambu-Goldstone bosons

The Nambu-Goldstone theorem says that the Nambu-Goldstone bosons couple
with the broken currents as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

The value @xmath is generally referred as the decay constant, because
the pions as the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons couple with the weak
currents and decay to the leptons.

In the following we consider QCD in which the chiral symmetry is
spontaneously broken by the quark condensate. The currents which couple
with the Nambu-Goldstone bosons are the axial currents @xmath . The
above amplitude can be written as (fig.( 3.3 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the full quark propagator, and @xmath is the
Bethe-Salpeter amplitude. Bethe-Salpeter amplitude describes the
coupling between the quarks and the Nambu-Goldstone boson. By
differentiating both side with respect to @xmath and taking limit @xmath
, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.84)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

To discuss the ladder approximation of this formula, we consider the
Schwinger-Dyson equation for the axial vertex (fig.( 3.4 ))

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set of the horizontally one-particle irreducible
diagrams. The axial vertex can be decomposed in two parts as (fig.( 3.5
))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term is the @xmath pole contribution of Nambu-Goldstone boson,
and the second term is the another contribution which is regular at
@xmath . The functions @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are regular at
@xmath . By substituting this to the Schwinger-Dyson equation, we get

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

It is expected that each of the functions @xmath and @xmath satisfies
the independent equation in the limit @xmath , since they appear as the
different order of @xmath in eq.( 3.86 ). Therefore, we get in @xmath
limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first equation is called Bethe-Salpeter equation for the
Nambu-Goldstone boson vertex.

The vertex @xmath can be eliminated from eq.( 3.84 ) by using eq.( 3.91
).

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

where @xmath means @xmath . Moreover, the derivative of @xmath can be
eliminated by using eq.( 3.90 ) (fig.( 3.6 )).

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

Now we consider the ladder approximation of this formula. In ladder
approximation with Landau gauge, the renormalization of the axial vertex
is trivial. We can show that by using the chiral Ward-Takahashi identity
⁴ ⁴ 4 Here, we neglect the contribution of the chiral anomaly.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the fact that the renormalization of the quark field is trivial (
@xmath ) as we have already shown in previous section. Therefore, we
should set @xmath in eq.( 3.91 ) and get @xmath . The eq.(
LABEL:pre-Pagels-Stokar-2 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation also can be get by simply neglecting the second term in
eq.( 3.84 ). Neglecting the derivative of Bethe-Salpeter amplitude
corresponds to neglecting the effect of the axial vector resonance in it
⁵ ⁵ 5 The mixing between the axial vector resonance and Nambu-Goldstone
boson is proportional to @xmath .

The Bethe-Salpeter amplitude at zero momentum transfer, @xmath , can be
expressed by the mass function @xmath . By taking the limit @xmath in
eq.( 3.94 ), we extract the contribution of Nambu-Goldstone boson pole
in the axial vertex function, and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are taking ladder approximation with Landau gauge,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

By substituting this equation into eq.( 3.95 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is expressed in the Euclidean momentum space. If the
@xmath symmetry is not broken, the decay constant matrix becomes
diagonal. In that case, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formula is called Pagels-Stokar formula [ 16 ] . We can obtain the
value of the decay constant, if the ladder Schwinger-Dyson equation for
quark propagator is solved.

### 3.3 Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis effective action

In this section we introduce the Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis (CJT)
effective action [ 17 ] . The Schwinger-Dyson equation for quark
propagator is systematically derived from this effective action. It is
also useful when we consider the more complicated system like that we
will estimate in chapter 6 and 7.

The generating functional for the Green functions in QCD is

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the local sources, and @xmath is the
non-local source. The normalization @xmath is understood. The connected
Green functions like @xmath are obtained by differentiating @xmath with
respect to @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s. The full quark propagator is
obtained by differentiating it with respect to @xmath . We integrate out
the quark and gluon fields and define the CJT effective action.

Using the derivative with respect to the sources gives

  -- -------- -- -- -------- ---------
     @xmath                  (3.101)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- ---------

We introduce the full quark propagator @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -- -------- ---------
     @xmath                  (3.102)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- ---------

At this stage, @xmath need not be the full propagator, but we will
ensure it later. The integration out on the gluon field gives the set of
connected two-particle irreducible (2PI) vacuum diagrams @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -- -------- ---------
     @xmath                  (3.103)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- ---------

The fact that @xmath is the full propagator makes the set of the vacuum
diagrams to be the two-particle irreducible one. Now we can integrate
out the quark fields.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.104)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Carrying out the functional derivatives and setting @xmath and @xmath to
zero gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where denotes the trace in the functional space in addition to the trace
in the spinor and flavor spaces. The generating functional for the
connected Green functions, @xmath , is obtained as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we neglect a constant @xmath . Now we can say that @xmath is
really the full propagator, since

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Legendre transformation gives the CJT effective action as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.108)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In momentum space it becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The difference on the constant and over all factor @xmath (four
dimensional volume) is neglected.

Since @xmath in the real system, the condition eq.( 3.109 ) becomes the
stationary condition of the effective action. The condition is
equivalent to the Schwinger-Dyson equation for propagator. If we take
the 2PI vacuum diagram in fig.( 3.7 ), namely

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the condition gives the Schwinger-Dyson equation in ladder approximation
(cf. eq.( 3.39 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The effective action formalism is convenient for the systematic
analysis. We will use this formalism in chapter 6 and 7 to estimate the
dynamics of the tumbling gauge theory.

## Chapter 4 Technicolor model

The standard model which describes the three fundamental interactions
(electromagnetic, weak, and strong interactions) is consistent with
almost all the experiments. Especially, the agreement with the recent
precision experiments in LEP is excellent. It is believed that we
finally get the true theory of electromagnetic and weak interactions.

The theory of the electromagnetic and weak interactions is based on the
gauge principle. The gauge symmetry of these interactions is the
electroweak symmetry @xmath which describes the four massless gauge
bosons. The gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken to the
electromagnetic gauge symmetry @xmath by the vacuum expectation value of
the Higgs field. The three of four gauge bosons become massive by the
Higgs mechanism, and they mediate the weak interaction. The mass
explains the fact that the weak interaction is the short range one.
Residual one gauge boson remains massless, and it mediates the
electromagnetic interaction.

It is interesting that the electroweak symmetry forbids the mass of the
quarks and leptons, since it is the chiral symmetry. Electroweak
symmetry must be broken also to generate the mass of the quarks and
leptons. In the standard model, they get their masses through the Yukawa
interactions like

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the quark or lepton, @xmath is the Higgs field, and
@xmath is the index of the doublet of the @xmath symmetry. The vacuum
expectation value of the Higgs field, @xmath , which breaks the
electroweak symmetry gives the mass to the fermions as @xmath . The
vacuum expectation value of the Higgs field is not only the origin of
the mass of the weak bosons, but also the origin of the mass of the
quarks and leptons.

The standard model, however, has some theoretical problems in it. In the
next section, we will explain it as the motivation for technicolor
theory in which the vacuum expectation value of the Higgs field is
replaced by the fermion pair condensate @xmath . In section 2, the one
family model of the technicolor theory is explained as an example.

### 4.1 Motivation for technicolor

One of the problems of the standard model is the fact that the masses of
the quarks and leptons are not predicted. The angles of the quark mixing
and CP violating phase are not also predicted, since the origin is the
same of the masses [ 3 ] . There is no principle to predict the Yukawa
couplings which are given as the free parameters. We still do not know
the origin of mass. The existence of certain new physics should be
expected at the high energy beyond the standard model.

There is also the problem which is called fine tuning problem, or
naturalness problem, or hierarchy problem [ 21 ] . The parameters in the
Higgs potential must be fine tuned, if the standard model is looked upon
as an effective theory. Suppose that the standard model is valid until
certain high energy scale @xmath (GUT scale, for example.). Then the
Higgs potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

receive the radiative correction as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

up to the log correction. The vacuum expectation value of the Higgs
field @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This value must be the electroweak scale @xmath GeV to give the
realistic weak boson mass. We must take the mass @xmath a large value,
and fine tune to cancel the large value @xmath (like @xmath ) ¹ ¹ 1 This
manipulation is the same of the renormalization. But here, @xmath is the
physical ultraviolet cut off. . This work must be iterated order by
order in loop calculation. This unnatural situation means that we still
do not know the mechanism of the electroweak symmetry breaking (Why the
scale is so small?). The “natural” physics beyond the standard model
should exist.

Technicolor theory [ 7 ] is one of the candidate of the new physics. It
is a “natural” theory, and has a possibility to explain the mass
generation. The Higgs field as an elementary particle is eliminated and
the new fermions (technifermions) are introduced with the additional
strong interaction (technicolor interaction). The technifermions are not
the singlet of the electroweak symmetry @xmath so that the condensate
@xmath due to the technicolor interaction spontaneously breaks the
symmetry. The vacuum expectation value of the elementary Higgs field is
replaced by the fermion pair condensate @xmath . Namely, the electroweak
symmetry is dynamically broken ² ² 2 This is very similar to the chiral
symmetry breaking in QCD due to the quark condensate. . The
Nambu-Goldstone bosons which are eaten by the weak bosons are the
composite particles of the technifermions. The physical Higgs particle
is also the composite one. Its width will be very broad, since it
strongly decays to the pair of the Nambu-Goldstone bosons.

Consider the hierarchy of the scales between the weak scale and the
scale of certain new physics. If we renormalize the gauge coupling
constants at the renormalization point @xmath , then we have the running
gauge couplings at one-loop level as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the gauge coupling of technicolor interaction, @xmath is
the gauge coupling constant by which the scale of new physics is
specified. Both coefficients @xmath and @xmath take positive values so
that the gauge interactions are the asymptotically free ones, and these
magnitude is supposed to be of the order unity. The technicolor
condensate scale @xmath (weak scale) and the new physics scale @xmath
are roughly defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These scales are defined as the scales at which the non-perturbative
effects of the gauge interactions become important. The hierarchy @xmath
can be obtained by choosing @xmath without the fine tuning. For example,
consider the case @xmath . Then, we can choose @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

without the fine tuning. The point is that the large difference of the
scales only comes through the form of logarithm.

To generate the masses of the quarks and leptons, we must introduce new
interactions which act the role of the Yukawa couplings in the Standard
model. The technifermion condensate breaks the chiral symmetry in the
technifermion sector, but it does not break the one in the ordinary
fermion sector. These two chiral symmetry should be connected to
generate the ordinary fermion mass through the technifermion
condensation. The new interactions should reduce these two chiral
symmetry to a single one. The typical form of the new interaction is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the ordinary fermion, and @xmath is the index of
the @xmath doublet. @xmath and @xmath are the coupling constants and
@xmath is the appropriate energy scale. This interaction is not
invariant under the independent chiral rotation of the ordinary fermions
or the technifermions, but it is invariant under the simultaneous chiral
rotation of both fermions (Of course, it must be invariant under the
electroweak gauge transformation). The ordinary fermions get their
masses

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

through the technifermion condensate @xmath ³ ³ 3 The mean field
approximation is used. We will treat it more rigorously in next chapter.
. The variety of the masses, the quark mixing angles, and the CP
violation in the weak interaction originate from the structure of the
coupling @xmath . As the origin of these interaction, there is an
interesting idea so called extended technicolor theory [ 6 ] .

In extended technicolor theory, the technicolor gauge interaction is
extended to generate the above interactions as the effective four
fermion interactions. The extended gauge multiplets contain both
ordinary fermions and technifermions.

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.12)
  -- -- -- --------

When the extended gauge group is spontaneously broken to the technicolor
gauge group by the effect of certain dynamics, the gauge bosons which
cause the transition of the ordinary fermions to the technifermions (so
called sideways gauge bosons) become massive. Such gauge bosons generate
the effective four fermion interaction like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Firtz transformation gives the four fermion interaction as eq.( 4.10 ).

The mass difference between the ordinary fermions is due to the
difference of the scales @xmath and the couplings @xmath and @xmath . It
is naturally expected that the mass difference between the different
generations comes from the difference of the scales @xmath , and the
mass splitting in each generation comes from the difference of the
couplings @xmath and @xmath . The mass splitting in a weak doublet comes
from the difference of @xmath , since @xmath must be common in a weak
doublet according to the gauge invariance. For example, @xmath for
u-quark should be different from the one for d-quark: @xmath .
Therefore, the extended gauge theory should be the chiral gauge theory
with many (at least three) mass scales.

No concrete realistic model of the extended technicolor theory has been
proposed until now, since the dynamics of the gauge theory, especially
for the dynamics of the chiral gauge theory, is not completely
understood. The dynamics of the tumbling gauge theory is expected as the
dynamics of the extended technicolor gauge interaction. The theory is a
class of the chiral gauge theory in which many mass scales are expected.
It will be discussed in detail in chapter 6.

In next section we introduce a model so called one-family model [ 22 ] .
While the model is not realistic, it is worth studying to get the
insight about what phenomenology generally appears in the technicolor
theory.

### 4.2 One-family model

Consider the technicolor gauge group @xmath , and introduce the one
family technifermions (with right-handed techni-neutrino)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

as the fundamental representation of the gauge group. Here, @xmath means
the @xmath doublet with hypercharge @xmath , and so on. The one-family
technifermion is considered to cancel the gauge anomalies ⁴ ⁴ 4 In view
of the gauge anomaly cancellation, the one-doublet model in which the
one weak doublet technifermion is introduced is more simple. But since
the technifermions have the unusual electric charge @xmath in that case,
it is not cosmologically acceptable. . The technifermions condensate is
expected as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

like the quark condensate in QCD. There is the (approximate) chiral
symmetry @xmath in the technifermion sector, and it is spontaneously
broken to @xmath by the condensates. Therefore, @xmath Nambu-Goldstone
bosons should exist. The contents are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . There are @xmath colored pseudoscalars: @xmath
and @xmath are the color octets (index @xmath ), @xmath and @xmath are
the color triplets (index @xmath ) which are called leptoquarks. @xmath
are identified as the would be Nambu-Goldstone bosons which are eaten by
the weak gauge bosons. There are four other color singlet
Nambu-Goldstone bosons: @xmath and @xmath . @xmath and @xmath is called
axions which are the singlets of both QCD and QED.

The current of the broken chiral symmetry is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the generators of @xmath , and the decay constant of the
Nambu-Goldstone bosons @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The current contains the weak axial current @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of the weak doublet and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

since the normalization @xmath . Therefore, the mass of the weak bosons
due to the Higgs mechanism is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This means that the larger @xmath results smaller @xmath .

The condensate @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath ) is
related with the decay constant. If we assume the Euclidean mass
function of the technifermion as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the typical scale of the dynamics, then we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The condensate is calculated by the integration of the propagator, and
the decay constant is calculated by using the Pagels-Stokar formula. We
find the relation ⁵ ⁵ 5 This is the naive relation. To tell the truth,
the condensate should depend on the renormalization point, but the decay
constant do not. We must use the technique of the operator product
expansion for more rigorous arguments.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.25)
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Similar relation @xmath is obtained from the argument of the naive
dimensional analysis in the chiral perturbation theory [ 23 ] .

To generate the mass of ordinary fermions, the technicolor interaction
is extended. The multiplet of the extended gauge group should be very
complicated one to generate the realistic mass spectrum. No one knows
the realistic gauge group and representations. Here, we naively consider
the extended gauge group @xmath and the fundamental representations as
follows to explain the general idea of the mass generation.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The right-handed neutrinos are introduced for simplicity. We assume the
dynamics which hierarchically breaks the extended gauge group to the
technicolor gauge group. Three hierarchical masses scales are assumed
for each generations: @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . At the scale @xmath
, @xmath breaks to @xmath , and the first generation is decoupled from
the gauge multiples. Some gauge bosons get mass of order @xmath at this
stage. It is the same for second and third generations. Then, the
up-type quarks, for instance, get the following masses.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The down-type quarks have the same mass spectrum with up-type, since we
are considering the vector-like extended gauge group. So this naive
model is not realistic. If we consider the flavor dependent condensation
like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can get the mass splitting in a weak doublet. But these splitting of
the condensates cause the large effect on the @xmath parameter, in
general. This will be discussed in the next chapter in detail.

Since the chiral symmetry of the technifermion is explicitly broken by
the extended technicolor and the standard gauge group, some
Nambu-Goldstone bosons in ( 4.15 ) become massive
(pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons) ⁶ ⁶ 6 The extended technicolor
interaction and the standard strong and electroweak interactions are
considered perturbatively. . These masses can evaluated by the Dashen’s
formula [ 24 ] ⁷ ⁷ 7 This formula is derived by using the current
algebra and PCAC relation.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the charge corresponding to the Nambu-Goldstone boson
@xmath , and @xmath is the Hamiltonian density. But here, we briefly
estimate it in the effective theoretical point of view ⁸ ⁸ 8 A detailed
estimation has been given in ref. [ 25 ] .

We can consider the coupling between the color octet Nambu-Goldstone
bosons and gluons as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Namely, we assume the standard gauge coupling of the elementary colored
scalar field. The mass is obtained by evaluating the diagram of fig.(
4.1 ).

Since the Nambu-Goldstone bosons are the composite particles, we assume
the form factor as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the momentum of the gluon and @xmath is the mass of the
vector boundstate composed by the technifermions which can mix with
gluons. We get the value as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

by the naive scaling up from the @xmath meson mass in QCD. Then, we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath (Casimir coefficient), and we set @xmath . This is the same
for color triplet Nambu-Goldstone bosons. We get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.40)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The mass of the triplet is smaller than that of the octet, because of
the difference of the Casimir coefficient. The mass of the charged
Nambu-Goldstone bosons is also estimated in the same way by considering
photon instead of gluon. The result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.41)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The mass of @xmath and @xmath is expected to be very small, since they
do not couple with the gluon and photon. Only the explicit breaking of
the chiral symmetry due to the weak interaction, the extended
technicolor interaction, and the other additional interactions mediated
by the massive particles is the small source of their mass. The explicit
breaking due to the extended technicolor interaction is highly model
dependent. If these masses can not become large, and the coupling of
these bosons with the ordinary fermions (Yukawa coupling) is not small
enough, this model is phenomenologically ruled out.

The Yukawa couplings between the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons and
ordinary fermions are estimated by considering the diagram of fig.( 4.2
).

We use the mass function of eq.( 4.22 ), and the formula of
Bethe-Salpeter amplitude

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has already derived in the previous chapter. The coupling depend
on the generation and flavor of the ordinary fermions as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the indexes of the flavor and @xmath is the
index of the generation. On the other hand, we get the mass of ordinary
fermions by evaluation the diagram of fig.( 4.3 ).

We get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore he have the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is nothing but the Goldberger-Treiman relation ⁹ ⁹ 9 In QCD, the
Yukawa coupling of the nucleons with the pions, @xmath , is given by the
Goldberger-Treiman relation @xmath [ 26 ] , where @xmath is the axial
vector coupling of nucleon and @xmath is the mass of nucleon. . This
formula is similar to the mass formula in the standard model, @xmath ,
where @xmath is the vacuum expectation value of the elementary Higgs
field.

There is another important couplings for the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone
bosons. Since the axial current have the anomaly, in general, we have
the coupling like in fig.( 4.4 ) [ 27 ] .

This coupling is important for the production and decay of the
pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons. The strength of the coupling can be
obtained as follows.

We have the anomalous Ward-Takahashi identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means the explicit breaking (See chapter 2), @xmath and
@xmath are the gauge field strength, @xmath and @xmath are the
corresponding gauge coupling constant, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the generators of the gauge interactions @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath
matrixes acting on the one family technifermions). We neglect the effect
of the explicit breaking as the first approximation of the perturbation
on it. Consider the matrix element

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the gauge fields corresponding the the
strength @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The right-hand side becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the lowest order of the perturbation on the gauge interactions. To
evaluate the left-hand side, we assume

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

since the Nambu-Goldstone theorem says that the Nambu-Goldstone boson
couple with the current as eq.( 4.17 ). By assuming of this operator
relation, the higher contribution, the axial vector resonance, for
instance, is neglected. Therefore, the following result is valid only
for the low energy pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons. Then,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.51)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we used the Lehmann-Symanzik-Zimmermann reduction formula.
Therefore, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the vertex of the diagram of fig.( 4.4 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the two gauge bosons are the same ones (for example, @xmath ), the
factor @xmath must be multiplied.

Finally, we briefly review the experimental bound on the mass of the
pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons. The quarkonium can decay into the axions
@xmath and @xmath , through the anomaly induced vertex as fig.( 4.5 ).

From @xmath decay, we have the bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the axions with decay constant @xmath (one-family model) [ 28 ] .
The colored Pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons can be produced in hadron
collider by the process in fig.( 4.6 ).

We have the bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the color octet stable particles [ 29 ] . The leptoquarks, @xmath
and @xmath , can be produced in @xmath -channel at the @xmath collider
HERA. We have the bound [ 30 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The charged color singlet Pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons, @xmath , can be
produced in pair at LEP. We have the bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the bound on the charged Higgs [ 31 ] .

## Chapter 5 Phenomenology of the Technicolor theory

In this chapter we discuss the phenomenological bounds on the
technicolor models. Flavor-changing neutral current (FCNC) problem is
discussed in the first section. The solution of the problem by the large
anomalous dimension dynamics is explained in the second section. The
bound from the recent precision experiments is discussed in the third
section. The prediction of the technicolor theory on the oblique
correction @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath will be compared with the
experiments. The bound through the non-oblique correction is also
discussed in the fourth section.

### 5.1 Flavor-changing neutral current problem

In naive model of the extended technicolor theory,
pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons mediate large FCNC. The Yukawa couplings
between the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons and the ordinary fermions
depend on the models of the extended technicolor interaction. Consider
the general two doublet Higgs system with Yukawa coupling

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath . If we consider the one-family model, the fields @xmath
and @xmath can be identified as the fields which contain @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. Assume that only @xmath get the vacuum
expectation value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, we get the quark mass matrixes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These mass matrixes should be diagonalized to go to the mass eigenstate.
It can be done by the bi-unitary chiral transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Though the Yukawa couplings of @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath ) become
diagonal by this transformation, the Yukawa couplings of @xmath ( @xmath
and @xmath ) do not always simultaneously become diagonal. Therefore,
@xmath can mediate the FCNC at tree level, in general. For example, it
causes the large mixing of @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath transition) as
fig.( 5.1 ).

There exists FCNC in the standard model, but it is the small one loop
effect suppressed by the GIM mechanism [ 32 ] . The prediction of the
standard model on the FCNC is consistent with the experiments. So, this
tree level contribution is dangerous. The off diagonal element of the
Yukawa couplings, @xmath and @xmath , must be very small, or the mass of
@xmath is heavy. We have the constraint so that this tree level
contribution is smaller than the contribution of the standard model. The
stringent constraint comes from the @xmath - @xmath mixing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is naturally expected that @xmath is of the order of the Yukawa
coupling of the strange quark @xmath , where @xmath (at @xmath ). Then
we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

We must naturally explain why the off diagonal elements of the Yukawa
couplings are so small, if the masses of the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone
bosons are smaller than a few hundred GeV. In the naive model, many
pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons are possibly lighter than a few GeV, which
is estimated in previous chapter.

The gauge bosons of the extended technicolor interaction can also
mediate the FCNC. The massive gauge boson exchanges generate the
effective four fermion interactions like fig.( 5.2 a), where quarks are
at the eigenstate of the gauge interactions. These four fermion
interactions become the FCNC interaction, when we go to the mass
eigenstate of the quarks. The four fermion interaction of fig.( 5.2 a)
results @xmath - @xmath mixing as fig.( 5.2 b).

We have the constraint for the mass and coupling of the gauge boson

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The squared coupling @xmath is the largest one in @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are the extended technicolor effective
gauge couplings for the left-handed fermions and the right-handed
fermions, respectively.

The mass of the gauge boson @xmath likely to be equal to the mass of the
sideways boson which is related with the strange quark mass ¹ ¹ 1 In the
naive one-family model in the previous section, the sideways bosons of
the strange quark is associated with the broken off diagonal generator
in @xmath breaking. The gauge boson which mediates FCNC is associated
with the broken diagonal generator of the breaking. . Namely, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use @xmath by assuming the one-family model. There are about
three order excess from the bound of eq.( 5.10 ).

In general, in the naive extended technicolor model, there are large
additional FCNCs which are mediated by the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons
and the extended technicolor gauge bosons. This is called FCNC problem
in the extended technicolor theory [ 34 ] . Of course, we can consider
the complicated models to avoid FCNCs: complicated representation of the
extended technicolor multiplet, complicated breaking pattern of the
extended technicolor gauge group, etc. But it is unnatural. Technicolor
theory had once died of this problem. But it was pointed out that if we
consider the special dynamics for the technicolor, the masses of the
pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons and the extended technicolor gauge bosons
can be large without the change of the masses of the ordinary fermions
and weak bosons. The dynamics is called the large anomalous dimension
dynamics [ 10 ] . In next section, we explain how the dynamics solves
the problem.

### 5.2 Technicolor with large anomalous dimension

We know that the non-Abelian gauge theory has the nature of the
asymptotic freedom. The gauge interaction goes down at the high energy.
This is the reason that the mass function of the technifermion dumps as
@xmath for large Euclidean squared momentum @xmath . If the technicolor
interaction does not quickly go down at the high energy, the dump of the
mass function becomes slow as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the anomalous dimension @xmath , where @xmath is the typical scale
of the dynamics (Remember the discussion in section 3.1 and eq.( 3.81
).).

Two kind of explicit models with large anomalous dimension are proposed.
One is the gauge theory with slowly running coupling (walking coupling)
[ 11 ] , another is the system of the gauge plus strong four fermion
interaction (gauged Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model) [ 12 ] . Walking dynamics
can realize the large anomalous dimension @xmath . More large anomalous
dimension @xmath can be realized in the gauged Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model,
since the four fermion interaction does not go down at high energy.

As we will explain in the following, if the anomalous dimension is
large, the masses of the ordinary fermions and the
pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons are extensively enhanced, while the decay
constant of the Nambu-Goldstone boson (mass of the weak boson) is
unchanged. Enhancement of the ordinary fermion mass allows us to
consider the heavy extended technicolor gauge bosons. This is the idea
to solve the FCNC problem by the large anomalous dimension dynamics [ 10
] .

The mass function of the ordinary fermions can be calculated as (fig.(
5.3 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the technifermion full propagator, @xmath is the
sideways gauge coupling, and @xmath is the sideways massive gauge boson
propagator.

In section 3.1, we estimated the full technifermion propagator at the
large momentum as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we take the Landau gauge in the technicolor interaction (see eqs.(
3.65 ) and ( 3.78 ).). We get the ordinary fermion mass which is defined
by @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.17)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we set @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is the mass of the sideways
gauge bosons, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is expected to be of the order unity ( @xmath is the beta
function). The naive estimation in the previous chapter by the mean
field approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponds to the case @xmath (QCD-like dynamics). If the running
coupling of the technicolor interaction is constant (as an extreme limit
of the walking dynamics), we get the asymptotic behavior of the
technifermion mass function as @xmath , and get @xmath (Remember the
discussion in the last of the section 3.1.). In that case, the mass of
the ordinary fermion is proportional to @xmath instead of @xmath .
Namely, the mass of the ordinary fermion is enhanced by the anomalous
dimension. Therefore, heavier sideways gauge bosons are allowed. The
mass of the sideways bosons which is related with the strange quark mass
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bound from the @xmath - @xmath mixing, eq.( 5.10 ), can be satisfied
if @xmath is of the order of unity.

The masses of the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons are enhanced by this
dynamics. The mass can be estimated by considering the diagram of fig.(
5.4 ).

The diagram denotes that the explicit chiral symmetry breaking by the
gauge interactions (strong, electromagnetic, weak, extended technicolor
interaction, or the others which are spontaneously broken) makes the
mass of the Nambu-Goldstone boson. Consider the case that the chiral
symmetry is explicitly broken by the additional gauge interaction which
is spontaneously broken, for example. This is the case for the axions,
@xmath and @xmath , in the one-family model (Corresponding chiral
symmetries are broken by the Pati-Salam gauge interaction [ 33 ] .). The
mass can be estimated as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.21)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The index @xmath is not summed over. Since the Bethe-Salpeter amplitude
at the zero momentum transfer can be written by the mass function of the
technifermion as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

by using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

in Euclidean space, where @xmath is the dimensionless constant which is
expected to be of the order of unity, and the trace of the generators
should not be zero if the considering gauge interaction breaks the
chiral symmetry ² ² 2 The contribution which is proportional to @xmath
comes from the other diagrams, since @xmath . . If the anomalous
dimension is small, the squared mass is proportional to the small factor
@xmath . But if @xmath , the suppression by @xmath is disappeared.
Suppose that @xmath ³ ³ 3 The experimental lower bound on the mass of
the Pati-Salam gauge boson [ 35 ] . Pati-Salam gauge interaction in the
technifermion sector breaks the chiral symmetries which are related with
the axions. . Then, the mass of the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone boson is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , but

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , where we set @xmath and @xmath (one family model). The
pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons become heavy, and the FCNCs mediated by
them are suppressed.

The order of the decay constant of the Nambu-Goldstone boson is not
affected whether the anomalous dimension is large or not. We can
estimate the decay constant by using the Pagels-Stokar formula (eq.(
3.99 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider the mass function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

As far as the anomalous dimension @xmath is not extremely near @xmath ,
the variation of the anomalous dimension does not change the order of
the decay constant. The reason is that the integral of the Pagels-Stokar
formula is infrared dominant. The decay constant is the quantity which
is determined mainly by the low energy behavior of the dynamics.

In this way, the FCNC problem can be solved by considering the large
anomalous dimension dynamics for the technicolor interaction. The
walking gauge coupling is obtained by assuming large number of
technifermions (large @xmath ) so that the @xmath -function becomes very
small. But it should be noted that the number of the
pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons increases together with the number of the
technifermions. The large number of pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons are
dangerous for FCNC, even if they are heavy. And it should be noted that
the value of the decay constant decreases as the increasing of the
number of the technifermion weak doublets. We know that the small value
of the decay constant means the light pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons.

In the gauged Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model, the four fermion interaction
must be the effective interaction which is mediated by some massive
particles, since the four fermion interaction is not renormalizable ⁴ ⁴
4 Recently, it is shown that the system of the gauge plus four fermion
interaction can be renormalizable in ladder approximation [ 36 ] . .
Someone consider that the origin of the strong four fermion interaction
is the extended technicolor interaction. But it is not clear that such
strong four fermion interaction can be realized as the low energy
effective interaction of the gauge theory ⁵ ⁵ 5 We do not consider the
gauge symmetry breaking by the vacuum expectation value of the
elementary scalar fields. . This is the main topics of this thesis,
namely, whether the effective strong four fermion interaction is
possible or not in the tumbling gauge theory which is a candidate of the
dynamics of the extended technicolor theory. We will discuss this topics
in and after the next chapter.

### 5.3 Technicolor and precision experiments I

The electroweak theory is precisely tested on the Z-pole at LEP. The
experiments with extremely high precision makes possible to test the
one-loop radiative correction. Since the new physics beyond the standard
model affects on the low energy phenomena through the radiative
correction, we can obtain some constraint on the new physics. Recently,
the radiative correction on the electroweak interaction due to the new
physics is parametrized by three parameters, @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath [ 37 ] . These three parameters describe so called oblique
correction due to the new physics which is characterized by a certain
high energy scale in comparison with the electroweak scale.

The radiative correction on the self-energies of the electroweak gauge
bosons is called oblique correction (fig.( 5.5 )).

In the standard model the non-oblique correction is suppressed by the
factor @xmath relative to the oblique correction, where @xmath is the
mass of the quarks and leptons. Consider the radiative correction on the
four fermion process due to the Higgs field (fig.( 5.6 )).

The order of the oblique correction of fig.( 5.6 a) to the amplitude is
@xmath , where @xmath is the Weinberg angle. The factor @xmath comes
from the Z-Higgs coupling. The order of the vertex correction of fig.(
5.6 b) is @xmath . The factor @xmath comes from the Yukawa coupling
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the vacuum expectation value of the
Higgs field. The contribution of the box diagram fig.( 5.6 c) is also
suppressed by the same factor. The order of the contribution is @xmath .
Essentially, as far as we consider the light quarks and light leptons as
the incoming and the outgoing particle, the non-oblique correction can
be neglected. But the heavy top quark can generate the large non-oblique
correction, even if it does not appear as the incoming and outgoing
particle (Now we know that the top quark is heavier than the Z-boson.).
For example, consider the contributions of the diagrams of fig.( 5.7 ).

These non-oblique correction should be considered.

If we consider the new physics which is characterized by the very high
energy scale @xmath , the oblique correction is parametrized only by
three parameters. There are four kind of vacuum polarization of gauge
bosons in the electroweak theory: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
where indexes @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath mean the @xmath gauge bosons,
and index @xmath means the @xmath gauge boson. The @xmath symmetry
ensures the relation @xmath . The new physics contribution is defined by
subtracting the contribution of the standard model

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the masses of the top quark and Higgs are unknown, we must fix the
masses as an reference point of the subtraction. The true value of these
masses may be different from the reference value. The difference is
treated as the contribution of the new physics. We simply write @xmath
as @xmath from now on.

If the scale of the new physics @xmath is sufficiently large, four
@xmath can be expended as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.31)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Up to the order @xmath , the correction to the Lagrangian becomes as
follows.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.32)
                       @xmath            
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the fine structure constant, and @xmath and @xmath are
the sine and cosine of the Weinberg angle, respectively. Here, we used
the relations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which come from the @xmath symmetry. There are six parameters ( @xmath s
and @xmath s) in the Lagrangian. Three of the six parameters can be
absorbed into the gauge couplings and vacuum expectation value as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore, these are not the physical quantities. After that, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath denotes the @xmath - @xmath kinetic mixing, @xmath denotes the
breaking of the custodial symmetry [ 38 ] (The deviation of the @xmath
parameter from unity), and @xmath also denotes the breaking of the
custodial symmetry. @xmath is the next order of the @xmath expansion in
comparison with @xmath . These three parameters, @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , are the physical parameters which values should be restricted
by the experiments.

The physical quantities can be written with the new physics
contribution. For example, the total width of the Z-boson is obtained as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the prediction of the standard model and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath denote weak isospin, electric charge,
and effective number of color with respect to the fermion of flavor
@xmath , respectively [ 37 ] . The measured total width with small error
restricts the values of @xmath and @xmath to a band in @xmath - @xmath
plane. The @xmath parameter appears only in @xmath , if we consider only
the physical quantities which have already precisely measured.
Therefore, @xmath parameter is not important at present.

Technicolor theory predicts the existence of the pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone
bosons and the vector boundstates (techni- @xmath ) at high energy.
These particle contribute to the @xmath , @xmath (and @xmath )
parameters. Now, we briefly estimate the prediction of the technicolor.

Calculation of the one-loop diagram of fig.( 5.8 a) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the masses of the technifermions of weak
isospin @xmath and @xmath , respectively, and @xmath is the hypercharge
of the weak doublet.

The summention is taken over all the weak doubles. The contribution of
the one doublet is @xmath , if the masses are degenerate in the doublet.
The non-perturbative effect of the technicolor interaction is not
included in this estimation. But we know the tendency that @xmath is
proportional to the number of the techni-doublet and @xmath . Namely,
large technicolor sector results large value of @xmath . The difference
of the mass in the weak doublet can not be the large source of the
change of the value of @xmath . The dependence is not the power but only
logarithmic, since @xmath denotes the kinetic mixing of @xmath and
@xmath .

If the dynamics of the technicolor is postulated as the QCD-like one, we
can estimate the value of @xmath including the non-perturbative effect
by scaling up in energy. The boundstates due to QCD, @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath mason and so on, contribute to the vacuum polarization @xmath .
The contribution of the techni- @xmath and techni- @xmath and so on is
obtained by scaling up the experimental data in the low energy to the
high energy. The value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

is obtained [ 37 ] , where @xmath is the number of the doublet. This
value is about two times larger than the value from the above naive
estimation. In the technicolor theory with large anomalous dimension, it
is expected that @xmath . Namely, @xmath will take the value between the
values of the above two estimation, since the constant technifermion
mass in naive estimation is expected to be the case @xmath (For
numerical estimation, see ref. [ 39 ] .).

The naive estimation of @xmath parameter by the calculation of the
one-loop diagram of fig.( 5.8 b) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the same formula for @xmath ( @xmath ). The difference of the
masses in a doublet cause the large effect, since the dependence is in
power. If we consider the technicolor model in which the custodial
symmetry is not broken in the technifermion sector (equal values of the
condensates in a doublet), @xmath parameter can be very small. Only the
effect of the heavy extended technicolor bosons makes the deviation of
@xmath from zero.

Now, we compare the above estimation with the bound from the
experiments. Especially, the experimental restriction on the value of
@xmath is important, since @xmath reflects the “size” of the technicolor
sector. It should also be noted that the experiments can directly
restrict the technicolor sector itself. This is not the test of the
extended technicolor theory, but the technicolor theory. The bound from
FCNC which is discussed in the previous section is the model dependent
one, since FCNC strongly depends on the model-dependent extended
technicolor interaction.

The bound from the experiment is displayed in fig.( 5.9 ) with the
prediction of the technicolor theory.

The reference values of the masses of the top quark and Higgs are taken
as @xmath and @xmath . We use the following experiments: total width of
Z-boson, R-ratio at the Z-pole, b quark forward-backward asymmetry,
@xmath polarization asymmetry, the left and right couplings in the deep
inelastic neutrino scattering, and atomic parity violation of @xmath [
40 ] . We see that the technicolor theory predicts too large @xmath ,
and it is disfavored by the experiments. The technicolor theory with
large technicolor sector (large @xmath , @xmath ) is strongly disfavored
by the experiments.

At present, there are no definite solution of this difficulty. The mass
difference in the doublets of the technifermions can give the negative
contribution to @xmath . But if we set the mass difference so that the
@xmath parameter becomes small enough, the value of @xmath parameter
becomes too large to be consistent with the experiments. It is difficult
to simultaneously suppress @xmath and @xmath parameters. It is pointed
out that the Majorana technifermions can give the negative contribution
to the @xmath parameter [ 41 ] without drastical changing of the @xmath
parameter. But the contribution is very small ( @xmath and @xmath at
every set with two Majorana technifermions.), and the many Majorana
technifermion are needed to be consistent with the experiment.

We can consider the special dynamics to avoid this difficulty. The large
anomalous dimension dynamics and the dynamics of the chiral gauge theory
are the candidates. But it is the difficult work to find the good
dynamics, since we do not have the enough technique to treat the
non-perturbative effect.

The cancellation between the oblique corrections by assuming the
contribution from the other additional new physics can be expected.
Extended technicolor interaction, the additional broken gauge
interactions inspired by GUTs, and so on can be the additional new
physics. But the model will become very complicated and unnatural one.

For the completeness, the non-oblique correction should be considered in
addition to the oblique correction. It is pointed out that the
non-oblique correction due to the extended technicolor interaction is
large, when the top quark is heavy [ 42 ] . The non-oblique correction
may cancel out the oblique correction. In next section we estimate the
effect of the non-oblique correction in the extended technicolor theory.

### 5.4 Technicolor and precision experiments II

It is pointed out that the non-oblique correction to the @xmath vertex
is generally large in the extended technicolor theory [ 42 ] . In this
section, we explicitly calculate the non-oblique correction in a naive
model of the extended technicolor theory. We show that the non-oblique
correction is too large to be consistent with the experiments.

Many extended technicolor gauge bosons become massive, in the process of
the breaking of the extended technicolor gauge symmetry. Some of them
called sideways cause the transition of the ordinary fermions to the
technifermions, some of them called horizontal connect the ordinary
fermions themselves, and the others called “diagonal” diagonally
interact with both the ordinary fermions and technifermions. The
sideways bosons must exist in the realistic model to generate the quark
and lepton masses, while the existence of the horizontal and the
“diagonal” bosons is rather model-dependent. We consider the effect of
the sideways and the “diagonal” from now on. The lightest sideways and
“diagonal” gauge bosons are associated with the top quark. They make the
largest contributions to the radiative corrections.

Consider four fundamental representations of the extended technicolor
gauge group @xmath containing the top and the bottom quark and the
technifermions @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Two left-handed representations form an @xmath doublet and two
right-handed representations are @xmath singlets. (We assume that the
extended technicolor gauge group commute with the weak interaction gauge
group.) After the breaking of extended technicolor gauge group down to
the technicolor gauge group @xmath , the massive sideways and “diagonal”
gauge bosons are generated.

In this model the mass of top quark is equal to the mass of bottom
quark, because of the common mass and coupling of the sideways and
@xmath . In the realistic model, however, the right-handed top quark and
the right-handed bottom quark must be contained in the different
representations of the extended technicolor gauge group to realize the
different sideways couplings. Therefore, the extended technicolor gauge
theory must be a chiral gauge theory. However, realistic representations
of extended technicolor gauge group are not known yet. Instead of
considering explicit extended technicolor model, we here simply assume
different extended technicolor couplings for top and bottom right-handed
fundamental representations, while keeping the technicolor interaction
vector-like. We also assume that @xmath . This is a good toy model for
the isospin breaking, although the extended technicolor gauge symmetry
is destroyed. More explicitly, we set the sideways coupling @xmath for
the left-handed quarks, @xmath for the right-handed top quark, and
@xmath for the right-handed bottom quark, where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scale @xmath is the mass of sideways and the relation @xmath (naive
dimensional analysis) is used, where @xmath is the decay constant of the
Nambu-Goldstone bosons of the technicolor chiral symmetry breaking.
Large top quark mass indicates large value of @xmath or small value of
@xmath . We assume that the sideways effect can be treated
perturbatively in loop calculation, namely, @xmath and @xmath . This
relations restrict the value of @xmath . For the realistic bottom quark
mass, @xmath is restricted by @xmath .

The “diagonal” couplings are fixed through the relation to the sideways
couplings. For technifermion, we obtain the “diagonal” coupling by
multiplying the factor @xmath to their sideways couplings. For quark, we
obtain it by multiplying the factor @xmath to their sideways couplings.
These factors come from the normalization and traceless property of the
diagonal generator. The “diagonal” interaction is also chiral.

The sideways bosons yield potentially a large non-oblique correction to
the @xmath vertex. By using the approach of the effective Lagrangian,
the correction to the left-handed and the right-handed couplings of the
bottom quark are derived as (Chivukula et al. in ref. [ 42 ] )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the cosine and sine of the Weinberg angle,
respectively. The suppression factor @xmath is not small for large
@xmath . The diagram corresponding to this correction is shown in fig.(
5.10 ).

The “diagonal” boson “ @xmath ” also yields the non-oblique correction
through the mixing with @xmath boson [ 43 ] . The mixing is parametrized
by three parameters @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we set the “diagonal” mass equal to the sideways mass. Within the
leading order of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath in the four-fermion
amplitude, the non-oblique correction to the @xmath vertex is obtained
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We get @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath by calculating one-loop diagrams of
fig.( 5.11 ) with constant fermion mass.

The results are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.49)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because the diagonal generator is traceless, the kinetic mixing
parameters @xmath and @xmath are naturally finite. The mass mixing
parameter @xmath should be naturally finite if we use the dynamical
fermion mass having momentum dependence. To include the effect of
dynamical mass, we set the momentum cutoff to the fermion mass in the
individual loops, and get a finite @xmath . The diagram corresponding to
the correction of eq.( 5.47 ) is shown in fig.( 5.10 ).

The effect of technicolor resonances and Pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons
is not included in this one-loop calculation of @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . It can be expected that these effects do not change the sign
and the order of magnitude of the correction unless we consider a
special model. Actually in the estimation of the oblique correction due
to the technicolor dynamics, the @xmath parameter estimated by the QCD
scale up is just twice of the one estimated by the one loop calculation,
and the loop effect of pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons is small without
many light pseudo-Nambu-Goldstone bosons [ 37 ] . Although these effects
are important when we rigorously compare the theory with experiments, it
can be expected that these effects are not important to show the
importance of the non-oblique correction due to the extended technicolor
gauge bosons. Therefore, we do not consider these effects in the
estimation of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

The @xmath dependence of the both contributions to the left-handed
coupling of the bottom quark are shown in fig.( 5.12 ).

We set @xmath TeV, @xmath GeV (one family model), @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath GeV, and @xmath TeV. The region of @xmath in which the
perturbative loop calculation is reliable is @xmath . The @xmath
dependence of the sideways contribution is quadratic and strong. As for
the “diagonal” contribution, it is approximately quadratic, but the
dependence is very weak and the contribution is almost constant within
the possible region of @xmath . Both contributions are positive and do
not cancel each other. The “diagonal” contribution is @xmath % of the
sideways contribution when @xmath . We can approximately write the
“diagonal” contribution when @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

which should be compared with eq.( 5.45 ) with @xmath .

Both the sideways and the “diagonal” contributions to the right-handed
@xmath coupling, eqs.( 5.45 ) and ( 5.47 ) are suppressed at least by
the power of @xmath . Namely, these contributions are suppressed by the
power of @xmath compared with the contributions to the left-handed
coupling. Therefore, the contributions to the right-handed coupling are
not important unless the predictions are highly sensitive to the change
of right-handed coupling. We ignore it from now on.

Both sideways and “diagonal” bosons also contribute to the oblique
correction, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . However, since the contribution
is the two-loop effect, it is small in comparison with the contribution
due to the technicolor dynamics. For example, the “diagonal”
contribution to the @xmath parameter is @xmath for @xmath TeV, @xmath
GeV, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath GeV, and @xmath TeV, which is small in
comparison with the contribution @xmath due to the technicolor dynamics.

The non-oblique corrections eqs.( 5.45 ) and ( 5.47 ) change the
predictions. For example, the total @xmath width can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the one-loop prediction of the standard model and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath are written by the standard model
parameters as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath denote weak isospin, electric charge,
and effective number of color with respect to the fermion of flavor
@xmath , respectively [ 37 ] . The predictions for the R ratio on @xmath
pole and forward-backward asymmetry of @xmath quark are also changed in
the same way as @xmath . We analyze the experiments by using three free
parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and get an ellipsoid in @xmath -
@xmath - @xmath space. The region inside the ellipsoid is favored by the
experiments. We do not consider the experiments which are parametrized
by @xmath parameter, for simplicity.

The cross section of the ellipsoid of @xmath C.L., which contains a
best-fit point, is shown in fig.( 5.13 ). The following experiments are
considered; total @xmath width, @xmath ratio on @xmath pole,
forward-backward asymmetry of @xmath and @xmath , polarization asymmetry
of @xmath , deep inelastic neutrino scattering ( @xmath and @xmath ),
and atomic parity violation @xmath [ 40 ] . The most favorable values
are @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The favorable region in @xmath -
@xmath plane becomes larger than the one from two parameter analysis.
Fig.( 5.14 ) shows the favorable regions in @xmath - @xmath plane (
@xmath C.L.) when @xmath is fixed in several values. We find that the
new physics contribution to the left-handed coupling of b quark must be
smaller than @xmath in @xmath C.L. This value is much smaller than the
extended technicolor contributions which is shown in fig.( 5.12 ).

Fig.( 5.15 ) shows the cross sections of ellipsoid at several values of
@xmath .

We also see that the extended technicolor contributions are at the
outside of the ellipsoid of @xmath C.L.

We showed that the non-oblique corrections to @xmath vertex which are
naturally expected to exist in the realistic extended technicolor model
are too large to be consistent with the experiments. The reason is that
only the predictions to the total Z width, the R ratio on Z pole, and
the forward-backward asymmetry of the b quark which relate with the
@xmath vertex are modified. There must be some mechanisms which reduce
or cancel this non-oblique correction in order that the extended
technicolor model is consistent with the experiments.

In the phenomenological test of the extended technicolor models we must
consider both non-oblique and oblique corrections. The physics which
simultaneously reduce both oblique and non-oblique corrections is
expected in model building of the extended technicolor theory.

## Chapter 6 Tumbling gauge theory

Tumbling gauge theory [ 9 ] contains the many hierarchical scales. No
elementary scalar fields are needed to realize the hierarchical gauge
symmetry breaking. Many effective four fermion interactions with the
hierarchical scales are generated in the process of “tumbling”.
Therefore, the theory has been considered as the candidate of the
dynamics of the extended technicolor theory. Tumbling gauge theory is
the special kind of the chiral gauge theory. It is also a good property
to be the dynamics of the extended technicolor theory, since the
extended technicolor theory should be the chiral gauge theory for the
realistic fermion masses, as we have already explained in chapter 4. In
this chapter, we formulate the tumbling gauge theory by using the
Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis (CJT) effective action [ 17 ] , which have
already introduced in section 3.3.

The chiral gauge theory is the gauge theory with the fermions ¹ ¹ 1
Here, we do not consider the elementary scalar fields. which
representation is not real as a whole. As an example of the chiral gauge
theory, consider the one generation of the standard model.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , for instance, means the @xmath triplet, the @xmath
doublet, and @xmath ( @xmath is the charge of @xmath ). All the fermion
fields are written as the left-handed chiral fields. If we take the
complex conjugate of this representation, we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

(Remember that all the representation of the @xmath group is real.) If
we consider only the @xmath gauge group, this representation is
equivalent to the original one as a whole There are same number of
@xmath and @xmath . We call this representation real or vector-like one
with respect to @xmath . But, the conjugated representation are not
equivalent to the original one when we consider the @xmath gauge group.
We call such representation chiral representation. The standard model is
a chiral gauge theory.

In the chiral gauge theory, the cancellation of the gauge anomaly is
non-trivial. It must be canceled so that the theory is renormalizable.
We must impose the condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any combination of the generators of the gauge symmetry, @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath , where the generators are represented as the large
matrixes which act on the space of the whole fermion contents. It is
famous that the non-trivial cancellation is accomplished in the standard
model.

The tumbling gauge theory can be formulated by using the CJT effective
action. Let us consider the non-Abelian gauge group @xmath and
left-handed fermions in the irreducible representation @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . We consider the chiral representation and impose the
cancellation of the gauge anomaly. And we consider the situation that
the fermion contents are compatible with asymptotic freedom. In order to
know the remaining symmetry at the low energy and the symmetry breaking
scales, we must solve the dynamics of this theory. We consider the CJT
effective action which includes only one gauge boson exchange vacuum
diagram, and introduce the most attractive channel (MAC) hypothesis [ 9
] .

For simplicity, we assume that @xmath is a simple group. It is
convenient to represent all the left-handed fermions as a Majorana
fermion field

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the generators of @xmath acting on this field are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the generator which acts on the space of the whole
fermion contents. Then the effective action can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the full propagator of the Majorana field @xmath
and @xmath is the set of all two-particle irreducible (2PI) vacuum
diagrams (fig.( 6.1 )).

The full propagator @xmath contains the mass function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

When we consider the one gauge boson exchange diagram in fig.( 6.1 )
only, we get the Schwinger-Dyson equation (gap equation) in ladder
approximation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

as a stationary condition of this effective action (See section 3.3),
where @xmath is the gauge coupling constant and @xmath is the free gauge
boson propagator. We take Landau gauge so that the ladder approximation
is consistent with the Ward-Takahashi identity (See section 3.1.). In
Landau gauge, @xmath does not contain the @xmath -matrix, and it becomes
the function of @xmath . The mass function @xmath can be decomposed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

corresponding to the channel of the pair condensation @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , where @xmath ’s denote the representation of the condensates.

It is enough to consider the linearized gap equation to estimate the
scale of the condensate. By linearizing the equation with respect to the
mass function, each condensation channels can be treated separately ² ²
2 We get the independent equations for each channels. There is not the
mixing of the channels. , since we can decompose the mass function as
eq.( 6.7 ). We concentrate on the channel @xmath from now on. We get the
linearized gap equation of the channel

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the index of the representation @xmath , @xmath is the
coefficient of the second Casimir operator of representation @xmath ,
and @xmath . The integration is performing in Euclidean space and the
angular integration has already done. The effective coupling of the
channel @xmath is defined by @xmath . When the gauge group @xmath is not
a simple group but a direct product group, the effective coupling
becomes the sum of the effective couplings with respect to each gauge
interactions. We call the channel with the largest effective coupling
most attractive channel (MAC). The above gap equation has a non-trivial
solution when @xmath exceeds the critical value @xmath , as we estimated
in section 3.1.

We can obtain hierarchical condensation scales in the MAC hypothesis.
The quantities in the (exact) effective action, the gauge coupling
@xmath , for instance, are renormalized quantities with scale
dependence. Here we approximately replace the gauge coupling constant
@xmath by the running coupling @xmath of the one-loop perturbative
calculation, where @xmath is a reference of the energy scale. As the
running coupling becomes large in the low energy region, the effective
coupling of the MAC reaches “firstly” the critical value @xmath at a
certain scale @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the condensate of this channel is likely to emerge or become
non-negligible in comparison with the reference of the energy scale
@xmath . We here assume the MAC hypothesis that the condensate is formed
in not all the attractive channels but only in the MAC. Since the MAC
condensation is gauge non-singlet in general, the symmetry breaking
takes place not only on the global symmetry but also on the gauge
symmetry itself. Some gauge bosons and fermions get their masses of the
order of @xmath by this symmetry breaking. The physics below the scale
@xmath can be described by an effective theory containing gauge bosons
of reduced gauge symmetry and massless fermions.

In the original tumbling scenario, the particles which get masses of
order @xmath are neglected and it is naively assumed that they decouple
from the low energy dynamics. In the effective theory the scale @xmath
has a meaning of the ultraviolet momentum cutoff. The values of the
running gauge couplings in the theory above and below the scale @xmath
must coincide with each other at the scale @xmath because of the
continuity of the theory and the uniqueness of the fundamental scale of
the theory. We can apply the above effective action argument to the
effective theory and find the MAC and the next condensation scale @xmath
. The effective theory below the scale @xmath has a further reduced
gauge symmetry. In this way, the gauge symmetry can be broken one after
another by itself and the scale hierarchy @xmath , @xmath , @xmath can
be generated (“tumbling”). The sequence of the gauge symmetry breaking
continues until the representation of the massless fermions becomes real
as a whole, provided that the asymptotic freedom of the gauge coupling
holds. The sequence of the condensation scales (not always taking with
the gauge symmetry breaking) terminates when all the fermions with
attractive gauge interaction become massive.

As an example, consider the gauge group @xmath and the chiral
representations @xmath and @xmath which can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

These fermions are the left-handed fermions. This representation is the
same as the one generation in the @xmath GUT [ 44 ] . The gauge anomaly
is canceled out, and the theory is asymptotically free. The following
channel of the pair condensation can be considered.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since there is no singlet in the right-hand side (representation of the
condensate), the pair condensates should break the gauge symmetry. The
coefficients of the effective couplings of each channels @xmath are as
follows.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The MAC is the channel @xmath . The condensation of the representation
@xmath breaks the @xmath gauge symmetry to the @xmath gauge symmetry.

The fermion contents after the breaking is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condensed fermion is @xmath , and it has the Majorana mass of the
order of the @xmath breaking scale. Other fermions remain massless at
this stage.

The @xmath gauge coupling becomes large at low energy, and the
subsequent pair condensation occurs. The MAC is the singlet channel
@xmath , and the @xmath gauge symmetry is not broken. The two fermions
@xmath and @xmath form a Dirac massive fermion. All the fermions except
for the singlet @xmath become massive. No subsequent condensation
occurs.

The above estimation is not the rigorous one, since there are some
assumptions: the ladder approximation, the MAC hypothesis, and
neglecting the massive particles in the effective theory. Moreover, we
did not specify the regularization scheme and the renormalization. In
fact, the explicit momentum cut off regularization in the above argument
is dangerous, since it breaks the chiral gauge symmetry ³ ³ 3 We have
not known the regularization scheme which preserve the chiral gauge
symmetry. But, recently a method which use the infinite number of the
Pauli-Villars fields is proposed [ 45 ] . We hope that the
regularization method proceeds our understanding on the chiral gauge
theory. Especially, we hope the lattice calculation. . More rigorous
treatment is needed to apply this dynamics to the physics. In this
thesis, we believe that the result is at least qualitatively good, while
it may not be quantitatively good.

It is interesting whether the gauge group of the standard model can be
included or not in the low energy effective theory of the tumbling gauge
theories. It is systematically estimated for the tumbling gauge theories
with simple gauge group @xmath [ 46 ] . Assuming the simple group means
to consider the grand unified theory with the extended technicolor. The
restrictions of the asymptotic freedom and the gauge anomaly
cancellation reduces the number of the models which should be
considered. The result is the discouraging one. There are no candidate
which includes the gauge group of the standard model in the low energy
effective theory. If we replace the MAC hypothesis into more rigorous
one, we may have another pattern of the tumbling and may get the
candidates.

In the next chapter, we consider the tumbling including the massive
particles which get their masses in the process of tumbling. After the
second stage of the tumbling, there exist massive fermions and the
effective four fermion interactions which are mediated by the massive
gauge bosons.

## Chapter 7 Tumbling and technicolor

As we explained in chapter 5, the technicolor dynamics should be
accompanied with the large anomalous dimension to avoid the
flavor-changing neutral current problem. Two explicit dynamical models
with large anomalous dimension are proposed. One is the gauge theory
with very slowly running coupling (walking dynamics) [ 11 ] , and
another is the gauge theory with strong four fermion interaction (gauged
Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model) [ 12 ] .

It is also explained that the dynamics of the tumbling gauge theory is a
candidate of the dynamics of the extended technicolor theory. The
effective four fermion interactions with hierarchical scales can be
translated to the hierarchy of the masses of the ordinary fermions.
Moreover, if the four fermion interactions between the technifermions
can be strong, the large anomalous dimension is realized. In the
following, we estimate the strength of the effective four fermion
interactions in the tumbling gauge theory, and get the simple formula to
give the values of the coupling constants of the interactions. We also
discuss of the decoupling of the massive gauge bosons which get their
masses in the process of tumbling from the low energy dynamics. The
decoupling of the massive fermions which get their masses in the process
of tumbling is also discussed. The decoupling of the massive particles
has already been proved in the perturbative point of view [ 47 ] . But
it is still non-trivial in the non-perturbative point of view.

### 7.1 The massive gauge boson effect

In the process of tumbling, gauge bosons associated with the broken
generators become massive. In the ordinary scenario, these massive gauge
bosons are assumed to decouple from the low energy dynamics, and they
are only perturbatively considered as the weak effective four fermion
interactions in the low energy region. However, if the four fermion
interaction can be strong, their non-perturbative effect must be
considered.

Consider a certain stage of tumbling such that the gauge group @xmath
breaks to @xmath at the scale @xmath . For simplicity, we regard the
groups @xmath and @xmath as the simple ones. Extension to the direct
product groups is straightforward and we will discuss it later. The
gauge bosons with respect to the generators of @xmath become massive in
this process. The representation of the fermions are denoted by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath in the theory above the scale @xmath , and by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath in the theory below the scale @xmath .

The effective action below the scale @xmath is given by decomposing the
effective action at the scale @xmath . Above the scale @xmath , the
effective action with respect to the channel @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the functional

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

comes from the fermion integration, the functional

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (7.3)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

comes from one gauge boson exchange vacuum diagram, @xmath is the gauge
coupling constant in the theory above the scale @xmath , and @xmath is
the group index of the condensate of representation @xmath composed of
@xmath and @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Since we take the Landau gauge, the mass
function is the function of @xmath instead of @xmath . . This effective
action has already been linearized with respect to @xmath , therefore we
get the linearized gap equation in ladder approximation directly by
differentiating with respect to @xmath . We are assuming that the
condensation in MAC emerges at the scale @xmath and gauge group @xmath
is broken to @xmath , according to the formulation which is explained in
the previous chapter.

The mass function @xmath is decomposed into the irreducible components
of the group @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the group index of the representation @xmath . The
fermion representation can also be decomposed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The decomposed mass functions correspond to all the possible condensates
composed of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . But the correspondence is not one to one. For example,
if both pairs, @xmath and @xmath , contain the same representation
@xmath , the mass function @xmath is the sum of two independent mass
functions of the two channels with certain weight. This means the mixing
of the two channels of @xmath and @xmath ² ² 2 The mixing is caused by
the exchange of the massive gauge bosons corresponding to the broken
off-diagonal generators which cause the transition @xmath and @xmath ,
for example. The other contributions are diagonal. . Except for these
mixings, the correspondence is one to one. We ignore the mixings for
simplicity from now on.

Accordingly, the effective action is decomposed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

There are no cross terms of the decomposed mass functions of the
different representations. We concentrate on a channel @xmath for a
while. Because the functional @xmath linearly contains a gauge boson
propagator, it can be decomposed into two parts concerning @xmath and
@xmath , respectively as

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (7.8)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The contribution of the unbroken gauge interaction is known as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge coupling in the theory below the scale @xmath
. As a matching condition we have @xmath . The above decomposition has
to be done at the scale @xmath , then we obtain the value of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can get the effective action below the scale @xmath by giving masses
of the order of @xmath to the gauge bosons @xmath and the fermions which
would become massive in this process.

We can relate @xmath to the coupling constant of the effective four
fermion interaction. The gap equation with respect to the channel @xmath
is given by differentiating the effective action with respect to @xmath
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we approximate the massive gauge boson propagator as @xmath and
the integration is performed in Euclidean space. Here we ignore the
massive fermions which get their masses of the order of @xmath at the
breaking of @xmath . The effect of the massive fermions will be
discussed in the next section. This is the linearized gap equation of
the gauged Nambu-Jona-Lasinio model in the ladder approximation and we
defined the effective couplings of gauge and four fermion interaction as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. This four fermion coupling measures the size of the
contribution of the massive gauge boson to the dynamics of this channel.

The solution of this gap equation and phase diagram (fig.( 7.1 )) are
given in ref. [ 48 ] .

The critical line can be obtained as follows. The eq.( 7.12 ) with
@xmath (expanding the Schwinger-Dyson equation around the zero of the
mass function) can be transformed to the differential equation and
boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the squared Euclidean momentum: @xmath (We write @xmath
as @xmath .), and @xmath is the scale which will be set to zero in the
following. We neglect the group indexes for simplicity. The effect of
the four fermion interaction comes in only through the ultraviolet
boundary condition (see eqs.( 3.49 ), ( 3.50 ), and ( 3.51 ).). Although
the bifurcation theory [ 18 ] can not be used to obtain the critical
line, because we have two parameters @xmath and @xmath , it can be
obtained as a condition to exist the non-trivial solution. It is enough
to consider the above linearized equation, if we consider only the small
solution. While both couplings are small, there is only a trivial
solution. And when the couplings become large and satisfy a certain
relation, the small non-trivial solution will be bifurcated from the
trivial solution. The relation is nothing but the critical line.

The general solution of the differential equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the constants, and @xmath . The boundary
conditions give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

By combining these conditions, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The non-trivial solution exists if the inside of the square bracket
vanishes. In the naive limit @xmath , the condition @xmath , namely
@xmath , should be satisfied for any @xmath and @xmath . But, we have
another solution for @xmath . The condition for non-trivial solution can
be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the limit @xmath gives the another condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have obtained the critical line which is displayed in fig.( 7.1 ).

The value of the critical gauge coupling @xmath depends on the value of
the effective four fermion coupling as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When the four fermion coupling is larger than @xmath , the critical
gauge coupling is reduced. The condensation scale of this channel is
defined by using the phase diagram. We replace the gauge coupling
constant by the running one given by the one-loop perturbative
calculation. We, however, ignore the running of the massive gauge
boson-fermion coupling, because the coupling does not become large. The
reason is that the negative contribution to the @xmath -function of the
coupling of the broken gauge interaction can be neglected, since the
gauge boson loop in the self-energy of the massive gauge bosons should
contain at least one massive gauge boson. The condensation scale can be
defined as the scale at which the gauge coupling takes critical value.
The larger effective four fermion coupling constant means the smaller
condensation scale and the larger anomalous dimension as @xmath for
@xmath [ 49 ] . We have a criterion for the attractive effective four
fermion interaction to be significant to the dynamics: the coupling must
be larger than @xmath .

Now we evaluate the massive gauge boson effect on the dynamics of the
channel with attractive gauge interaction and answer the question
whether the large anomalous dimension dynamics due to the strong four
fermion interaction can be realized in the channel. We can get a
relation of the effective couplings at the scale @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

from eqs. ( 7.11 ), ( 7.13 ) and ( 7.14 ), and now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

since the gauge interaction is considered to be attractive. Furthermore,
the effective coupling @xmath at the scale @xmath is less than the
critical coupling @xmath because of the MAC hypothesis. Therefore, the
four fermion coupling @xmath must be less than @xmath and we conclude
that the attractive force by the massive gauge boson exchange is too
small to significantly affect the dynamics in the channel with
attractive gauge interaction. This means that the realistic technicolor
dynamics with the large anomalous dimension due to the strong four
fermion interaction cannot be realized in the low energy effective
theory of tumbling gauge theories, provided that the mixing channels are
ignored. We can also conclude that the MAC is not change, even if we
consider the massive gauge boson effect.

This conclusion is also true when we consider a direct product gauge
group. We consider that the gauge group @xmath is broken to the gauge
group @xmath at the scale @xmath . For example, we consider a channel

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

denote a representation. The representations of the group @xmath can be
decomposed into the representations of the group @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the summations are taken over the appropriate sets of the
irreducible representations of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If
the channel mixing are ignored again, the decomposed representations of
the mass functions in the effective action have the one-to-one
correspondence to the channels in terms of the representations of @xmath
. We also obtain similar relations to determine the effective four
fermion couplings. For example, for the channel

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the effective couplings are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the four fermion coupling must be less than @xmath in the
channel with attractive gauge interaction and the conclusion does not
change. The attractive force of the massive gauge boson is too small to
significantly affect the dynamics of the channel with attractive gauge
interaction.

### 7.2 The massive fermion effect

Several fermions get their masses in the process of tumbling. In the
original tumbling scenario it is naively assumed that the massive
fermions do not cause significant effect on the lower energy dynamics.
In this section we will argue the decoupling of the fermions which get
Majorana masses in the process of tumbling ³ ³ 3 Some fermions get Dirac
masses (mixing Majorana masses) in the process of tumbling. These masses
are due to the mixing of the condensation. We do not discuss the mixing,
here. .

We examine the linearized ladder gap equation for the channel with the
massive fermions,

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (7.35)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

where @xmath is the scale of the previous tumbling, @xmath and @xmath
are the Majorana masses, @xmath is the gauge coupling and @xmath is the
index of the representation of condensate (fig.( 7.2 )).

Here we neglect the massive gauge boson effect, because we have found in
the previous section that such effect is small for @xmath . This
equation can be translated into a differential equation with boundary
conditions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and index @xmath is omitted. We assume that the mass
function is real.

First, we consider the case @xmath and @xmath . In this case the
differential equation can be reduced to the Bessel differential equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . We can see that the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

must be satisfied for the non-trivial solution to exist, where @xmath is
the zero-th order Bessel function. The critical value of the coupling is
defined by the lowest zero point of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and this is very large compared with the value of massless fermion case
@xmath .

Next, in the case @xmath , the equation can be reduced to the modified
Bessel differential equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can see that there is no non-trivial solution which satisfies the
boundary conditions.

Therefore, the channels containing the fermions with Majorana masses are
unlikely to be the MAC. The fermions which get Majorana masses in the
process of tumbling may decouple from the low energy dynamics. We have
non-perturbative shown it.

## Chapter 8 Conclusion

The idea of the technicolor theory and the extended tehcnicolor theory
is very beautiful. It can be expected that the theory solves some
problems of the standard model. The hierarchical gauge symmetry breaking
is expected in the extended technicolor theory to explain the hierarchy
of the mass of the quarks and leptons. Tumbling gauge theory is a
candidate of the dynamics of such hierarchical gauge symmetry breaking.

But some new problems peculiar to the technicolor theory is emerged. One
of the problem is the flavor-changing neutral current problem. Extended
technicolor theory results too large mixing of @xmath and @xmath to be
consistent with the experiment, for example. The problem is solved by
considering the special technicolor dynamics with the large anomalous
dimension. Therefore, it is expected that the large anomalous dimension
is realized in the tumbling gauge theory.

We formulated the tumbling gauge theory using the
Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis effective action in the one gauge boson
exchange approximation (ladder approximation). Non-perturbative effect
of the massive particles which get their masses in the process of
tumbling was estimated by using the formalism. We got the effective
action at the low energy region of the tumbling gauge theory and
obtained a formula to give the coupling constants of the effective four
fermion interactions which is mediated by the massive gauge bosons.
Upper bound on the coupling constants was obtained in the channels with
attractive unbroken gauge interactions. The effective four fermion
interactions are too weak to cause the significant effect on the
dynamics. The large anomalous dimension due to the strong four fermion
interaction with the attractive gauge interaction (gauged
Nambu-Jona-Lasinio type system) cannot be realized in the tumbling gauge
theories. This result is important for the model building of the
extended technicolor theory with tumbling dynamics. The possibility of
walking dynamics (gauge theory with very slowly running coupling) in the
tumbling gauge theory is not excluded.

We also estimated non-perturbative effect of the massive fermions
(Majorana type) in the same framework. It was shown in one gauge boson
exchange approximation that they decouple from the low energy dynamics ¹
¹ 1 It must be noted that all the mixing effects were ignored in our
argument. . The channels containing massive fermions are hard to be MAC
(most attractive channel). It can be expected that all the massive
particles non-perturbatively decouple from the low energy dynamics. In
the perturbative sense, the decoupling of the heavy particles from the
low energy physics is well known as the decoupling theorem.

The recent phenomenological issues of the technicolor theory were also
discussed. We discussed the relation between the technicolor theory and
the recent precision experiments. The radiative correction due to the
technicolor or extended technicolor dynamics is classified into two
parts: oblique correction and non-oblique correction. The experimental
constraint on the oblique correction ( @xmath parameter) directory
restricts the size of the technicolor sector. The number of the
technicolor degrees of freedom and the number of the techni-flavor are
restricted. The technicolor theory is disfavored by the experiments.
Extended technicolor theory generally generates the large non-oblique
correction. It was explained that the non-oblique correction on @xmath
vertex due to the sideways and “diagonal” bosons are large, when the
mass of the top quark is large. We showed that the correction on the
vertex is too large to be consistent with the experiments. The extended
technicolor theory is disfavored by the experiments.

All the results of this thesis are disadvantageous for the technicolor
theory. If the nature selects the dynamical electroweak symmetry
breaking and the dynamical generation of the ordinary fermion masses
without the elementary scalar fields, there will be some new mechanisms.
The present technique to analyze the non-perturbative dynamics of the
gauge theory is poor. Therefore, the breakthrough in the technique can
make possible to find the new mechanisms.

Acknowledgments

I am grateful to Professor Koichi Yamawaki for helpful encouragement and
many discussions. I would like to thank Professor A.Ichiro Sanda, Yoshio
Kikukawa, Masaharu Tanabashi, and Masayasu Harada for many discussions
and suggestions. I also thank Sho Tsujimaru for careful reading of this
thesis. I thank all the members of the elementary particle physics
laboratory.