This thesis reviews minimal @xmath chiral supergravities coupled to
matter in six dimensions with emphasis on anomaly cancellation. In
general, six-dimensional chiral supergravities suffer from
gravitational, gauge and mixed anomalies which, being associated with
the breakdown of local gauge symmetries, render the theories
inconsistent at the quantum level. Consistency of the theory is restored
if the anomalies of the theory cancel via the Green-Schwarz mechanism or
generalizations thereof, in a similar manner as in the case of
ten-dimensional @xmath supergravities. The anomaly cancellation
conditions translate into a certain set of constraints for the gauge
group of the theory as well as on its matter content. For the case of
ungauged theories these constraints admit numerous solutions but, in the
case of gauged theories, the allowed solutions are remarkably few. In
this thesis, we examine these anomaly cancellation conditions in detail
and we present all solutions to these conditions under certain
restrictions on the allowed gauge groups and representations, imposed
for practical reasons. The central result of this thesis is the
existence of two more anomaly-free gauged models in addition to the only
one that was known until recently. We also examine anomaly cancellation
in the context of Hořava-Witten–type compactifications of minimal
seven-dimensional supergravity on @xmath . Finally, we discuss some
basic aspects of the 4D phenomenology of the gauged models.
