##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 From the Standard Model and General Relativity to superstrings.
    -    2.1 General Relativity and the Standard Model.
    -    2.2 The need for unification
    -    2.3 Grand Unification Theories.
    -    2.4 Extra dimensions.
    -    2.5 Supersymmetry and supergravity.
    -    2.6 Bosonic strings.
    -    2.7 Superstrings and M-theory.
-    3 Branes in quantum theories.
    -    3.1 Fundamental @xmath -branes.
    -    3.2 Branes as sources of antisymmetric tensor fields.
    -    3.3 Branes in superstring and M-theory.
        -    3.3.1 D @xmath -branes in bosonic strings.
        -    3.3.2 D @xmath -branes in superstrings.
        -    3.3.3 BPS and non-BPS, stable and unstable D-brane
            configurations.
        -    3.3.4 NS-branes.
        -    3.3.5 M-branes.
-    4 Branes in supergravity.
    -    4.1 Single charge solution in the harmonic gauge.
        -    4.1.1 Geometry of the solution.
        -    4.1.2 Charges and tension.
        -    4.1.3 Supersymmetry.
        -    4.1.4 Multi center solution.
    -    4.2 Nonsupersymmetric single-charge solutions.
        -    4.2.1 Black branes.
    -    4.3 Solutions with many branes.
        -    4.3.1 Intersecting branes.
-    5 Branes without harmonic gauge.
    -    5.1 Commonly orthogonally intersecting non-composite
        delocalised branes.
        -    5.1.1 The model.
        -    5.1.2 Ansätze.
        -    5.1.3 Harmonic gauge.
        -    5.1.4 @xmath coordinate.
        -    5.1.5 The @xmath matrix and reduction to Toda-like system.
        -    5.1.6 Solution for @xmath .
        -    5.1.7 Charges and masses
    -    5.2 Toda and Toda-like systems.
    -    5.3 Diagonal @xmath solution.
    -    5.4 Single component solution.
        -    5.4.1 Solution without dilaton for @xmath – general
            remarks.
        -    5.4.2 Solution without dilaton for @xmath – variants
            review.
        -    5.4.3 Supersymmetry.
        -    5.4.4 Solution without dilaton for @xmath .
        -    5.4.5 Solution with dilaton for @xmath .
        -    5.4.6 @xmath duality.
    -    5.5 Composite branes.
        -    5.5.1 Intersecting composite branes of @xmath supergravity.
        -    5.5.2 Three magnetic brane solution in @xmath supergravity.
-    6 Conclusions

## 1 Introduction

Branes are one of the most interesting topics that appeared in the
theoretical physics of elementary particles in the last years. Treated
at the beginning as just some special solutions of supergravity models
they slowly gathered importance to the point that now they are treated
as hypothetically more fundamental than strings. In superstring theories
branes are identified with sources of Ramond-Ramond charges. These
branes, so called D-branes, are equivalently described as hypersurfaces
where ends of open strings are attached. Consequently, the standard type
I string theory with freely propagating open strings can be understood
as a theory on a ten dimensional brane worldvolume. But there is also
another sort of branes – NS-branes and a special representative of the
category is a fundamental string serving as an elementary object of the
whole string theory. This fact allows to make a conjecture that there
can be a theory – a generalization of string theory – where not strings
but branes are the fundamental objects. The hypothesis suggests that
this tentative M-theory could be realized as a quantum theory of
membranes but the explicit realization of this idea has not yet been
found.

But even restricted to string theory the role of branes is
extraordinarily important. Branes belong to the spectrum of the theory,
so the knowledge of their properties is necessary for the better
understanding of string theory. Discovery of branes significantly
enlarged the number of known states in the theory, and since they don’t
have a string interpretation their presence in the spectrum sheds new
light on the whole theory. Several classes of states can be
distinguished depending on their features. For example BPS states, which
saturate so called Bogomolny bound and preserve at least part of
supersymmetry. The remaining non–BPS states fall into two main
categories: stable and unstable where the last one contains tachyons.
Non–BPS stable states are especially interesting because the physics we
see (which is obviously nonsupersymmetric) is probably the low energy
limit of such a state with (softly) broken supersymmetry.

A fact worth to note at this moment is that branes are in general
objects of certain dimensionality living in a higher dimensional theory.
So it is tempting to interpret the four dimensional Universe we observe
as the brane immersed in ten dimensional spacetime of string theory.

Since branes can be treated as an extension of some already well know
(at least theoretically) objects as magnetic monopoles or fundamental
strings, they allow to look at some previously discovered facts from a
wider perspective and find connections among them. For example theorems
telling that classical superstrings are permitted only for @xmath and
the maximal dimension for supergravity is eleven are consequences of a
rule determining how many dimensional superbranes are possible to
introduce in a given spacetime. The idea of branes provides also a
method for studying Yang-Mills theories in diverse dimensions. This
comes from a fact that a theory induced on the brane worldvolume by the
surrounding string theory is in general gauge invariant. So one can
understand properties of a given Yang-Mills theory in connection with
properties of the branes. In particular BPS branes give a description of
super-Yang-Mills theories, while non-BPS branes – gauge theories with
broken supersymmetry.

Branes can also be regarded from the purely classical point of view as
solutions of field equations in supergravity or more generally in
systems with gravity coupled to antisymmetric tensors and other fields.
This method of description of branes is very important because it gives
some exact information which cannot be obtained with the use of
perturbative methods peculiar for string theory. The main subject of
this work is dedicated to this part of the theory of branes, especially
to such brane solutions of supergravity equations of motion which can
break supersymmetry. We aim in this work to find and analyze new brane
solutions that are in general nonsupersymmetric and which describe many
intersecting branes supported either by the same type of field or by
different fields.

Before we go over to the main part of the work we present a short
explanation what branes are and why they are interesting. In chapter 2 a
path is presented which leads from the Standard Model and General
Relativity – the theories extremely well describing physics from the
smallest to the biggest scales experimentally testable at this moment –
through Grand Unification Theories, models with extra dimensions,
supersymmetry and supergravity to bosonic strings, superstrings and
finally M-theory, currently thought to be the best candidate for the
unified theory of all interactions.

Various kinds of branes are introduced afterwards, in chapter 3 . First
of all a possibility of constructing quantum theories based on branes as
its fundamental objects (instead of point particles or strings) is
examined. A result of so called brane scan is presented, which tells for
what combinations of a spacetime and the brane worldvolume dimensions it
is possible to introduce a supersymmetric brane. The discussion however
ends with the conclusion that such a theory as we understand it now
cannot be consistently quantized. Therefore we gather information about
branes by treating them as sources of fields of antisymmetric forms and
we obtain generalization of the famous Dirac quantization rule for
magnetic monopoles. Next we discuss branes appearing in M- and string
theories in particular D-branes, NS-branes and M-branes and give
arguments that branes are the necessary part of the theories. We present
the classification of the brane states with respect to the saturation of
the Bogomolny bound and show some examples of non-BPS unstable and
stable states. We check also how the various kinds of branes behave
under string dualities or dimensional reductions. The observations allow
us to conjecture that all the branes can be various manifestations of
only one class of more fundamental objects.

Finally in chapter 4 supergravity description of branes is given
starting with detailed discussion of a simple but very instructive
example – single component brane solution in the harmonic gauge. Some
generalizations of the example including black branes and systems with
many intersecting branes are also presented.

The last chapter consists of a construction of a model of many
orthogonally commonly intersecting delocalized branes with neither
harmonic gauge nor any other extra conditions. Further a method of
solving equations of motion of the model is given. It is proved that the
model reduces to the so called Toda-like system (after adequate
redefinition of radial coordinate: @xmath , where @xmath is in general
not a harmonic function in flat space). The system is solvable at least
in several cases relevant for realistic brane configurations. The
solutions generally can break supersymmetry and the supersymmetric
solutions are generally distinguished by their very specific properties.
Examples of the solutions are given and some their properties are
considered in more detail. Especially the presence and interpretation of
singularities is discussed and the relation between energy and charge
density of the solution. A certain duality in the space of solutions is
described connecting two seemingly different elements of the space. It
is shown that the solution dual to the supersymmetric one breaks
supersymmetry, but it still possesses some features usually attributed
only to solutions preserving supersymmetry. In particular for the dual
solution equality between energy and charge density holds.

## 2 From the Standard Model and General Relativity to superstrings.

Nowadays physicists, especially those interested in theories of
elementary particles sometimes seem to be modern incarnations of the
legendary King Arthur’s knights. Similarly to the ancient warriors, they
spend a lot of time and devote most of their efforts to achieve one goal
for which there is even no known proof that it really exists. The goal
however is not the Holy Graal. The physicists are searching for
something even more miraculous – the Theory of Everything, how is often
called the hypothetical unified theory of all interactions. The road
expected to lead to the goal is very difficult, winding and with many
branches ending as blind alleys. Fortunately there are no dragons or
other beasts lurking for inadvertent travellers. But striding the way
one can find several other creatures lying at the shoulder of the road
as a milestones of scientific progress. Creatures, which in many cases
are still not fully domesticated and which at any time can make a
surprise for the explorer. The list of the creatures is long and
contains grand unification theories, supersymmetries and supergravities,
extra dimensions, strings and superstrings and one of the latest
discovery for which this work is dedicated – branes. Let us look at some
of their features more closely.

### 2.1 General Relativity and the Standard Model.

In modern physics we know four fundamental interactions described by two
completely distinct theories. One of them is Einstein’s General
Relativity [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] describing classically gravitational
forces. The other is the Standard Model [ 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ] , quantum
field theory of electromagnetic, weak and strong interactions.

The General Relativity Theory is based on Equivalence Principle i.e. a
postulate of an invariance under general coordinate transformations (in
the usual formulation) or the local @xmath or Poincaré symmetry in a
tangent space (in so called Einstein–Cartan formulation). The theory
describes particles of spin 2 (gravitons) and has a very elegant and
simple structure because its lagrangian is given just by @xmath . One of
the most significant achievements of the theory is a direct link between
physics and geometry because the kinetic term for gravitons @xmath is
simultaneously the Ricci curvature of space-time. Therefore it allows to
interpret the gravitational forces as effects of a non-flat space-time
geometry. But the theory has a very important defect: it is consistent
only classically.

On the contrary, the Standard Model is a bona fide quantum theory. It is
of Yang-Mills [ 9 ] type based on local non-abelian gauge symmetry group
@xmath where the group @xmath is responsible for strong interactions
while electroweak forces are related to @xmath . The particle spectrum
contains spin 1/2 fermions in different representations and spin 1 gauge
bosons constituting @xmath , @xmath and @xmath representations of the
gauge group. The gauge bosons which are directly responsible for a
mediation of the interactions are described as coefficients of a
connection of the gauge symmetry group. All the fermions are divided
into three generations characterized by different mass scale but filling
up the identical pattern of representations: @xmath for left-handed
quarks, @xmath for left-handed leptons, @xmath and @xmath for
right-handed quarks and @xmath for right-handed leptons (plus @xmath if
we include right-handed neutrinos). The theory is chiral i.e. a
transformation interchanging left-handed fermions with right-handed ones
is not a symmetry of the theory. The chirality forbids fermions to
attain a mass from the usual Dirac mass term: @xmath because such a term
would not be gauge invariant. A necessary part of the model is the Higgs
mechanism [ 10 , 11 ] of a spontaneous breaking of the @xmath symmetry
into the electromagnetic @xmath . This mechanism makes fermions and
three vector bosons carrying weak interactions massive but to make the
mechanism working there should necessarily exist additional, still
experimentally not observed fields – scalar Higgs bosons. With the
exception of this point requiring confirmation, the Standard Model is a
consistent quantum theory, renormalizable, anomaly free and last but not
least confirmed in all existing experiments with a fantastic precision.

### 2.2 The need for unification

The Standard Model and General Relativity are surprisingly successful in
prediction and description of all of the experimentally observed
physical phenomena at the fundamental level. They have however
significant theoretical disadvantages. A validity of both of the
theories is limited and both of them are constructed under assumptions
that seem arbitrary from a purely theoretical point of view. What is
more, some aspects of one of the theories are in contradiction with the
other, the most profound example being quantum character of the Standard
Model and classical one of General Relativity. Therefore one cannot
obtain a consistent physical theory just by joining them together. The
most popular hypothesis says that the theories are only extreme limits
of some yet unknown unified theory. This theory is expected to be
unified not only in a sense of its completeness in a phenomenological
description of the Universe, but it also should unify all the four
interactions reducing them to low energy limit symptoms of a single
fundamental force. The history of physics notes similar facts in the
case of electricity and magnetism in nineteenth century and in the case
of electromagnetism and weak interactions thirty years ago. We believe
that there are no reasons to forbid occurring it again. But before we
start to follow the way leading to the unified theory let us list the
main problems arising in the Standard Model or the General Relativity
Theory and questions which cannot be answered by these theories.

-   The main disadvantage of the Standard Model is its arbitrariness.
    The agreement with experiments even in the simplified version with
    no right–handed neutrinos requires determination of 18 seemingly
    arbitrary and uncorrelated parameters (3 coupling constants, 6
    masses of quarks, 3 masses of leptons, 3 quark mixing angles, one
    phase and two parameters of the Higgs potential).

-   Similarly arbitrary is a choice of the gauge group and a choice of
    the fields multiplets appearing in the Model (constrained only by
    vanishing of anomalies) .

-   A next mysterious thing is a number of the fermionic generations. We
    do not know why exactly three generations are observed, whether we
    should expect next generations at higher energy level and why fields
    in different generations have different masses.

-   We also do not know why all known generations are chiral and whether
    the chirality is a physical rule still true for the higher
    generations if they exist.

-   There is unexplained reason for which electric charge is quantized.
    For the anomaly cancellation it is enough if a certain combination
    of charges vanish, but the condition does not state that, for
    example, the up quark charge is exactly @xmath of the positron
    charge.

-   In classical General Relativity problems are of different nature. To
    find any solution one has to provide the sources for the space-time
    curvature i.e. the energy–momentum tensor. To describe the evolution
    of the Universe we have to assume that the energy-momentum tensor is
    extremely unnatural - besides the well understood matter and
    radiation content it has to contain the so called cosmological
    constant which in comparison with any theoretical estimates is too
    small by tens orders of magnitude.

-   The only intrinsic parameter of General Relativity is @xmath – the
    gravitational constant. It creates even bigger problems. Since it is
    dimensional it describes not only a relative strength (or rather
    weakness) of the gravity compared to other interactions but gives a
    specific length and energy scale called the Planck’s scale:

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (1)
      -- -------- -- -----

    The theory with such a scale cannot be quantized with usual methods,
    because when an energy of an interaction exceeds the the Planck’s
    mass the theory becomes strongly coupled and nonrenormalizable.
    However following the example how the Fermi theory of weak
    interactions was replaced by the Weinberg-Salam model one should
    expect an appearance of a new quantum physics at the Planck scale
    and a new theory of gravity being a generalization of General
    Relativity.

-   Possible existence of the new physics at the Planck scale
    automatically causes so called hierarchy problem. Calculating
    quantum corrections to masses of the low energy (electroweak scale)
    particles we find that the corrections should be very large. Barring
    a possibility that these masses are just fine-tuned with extreme
    precision there should exist a mechanism restricting the interaction
    between low energy and high energy particles and then preventing a
    mixing of the both scales.

-   At the classical level solutions of General Relativity equations of
    motion contain singularities (like the famous Big-Bang singularity).
    Therefore the theory predicts existence of objects that cannot be
    satisfactorily described by the theory itself and these objects may
    be different or even disappear in the larger theory

-   Although General Relativity directly connects energy and geometry of
    a space-time, it does not answer a question why the observed
    Universe is flat and has exactly three space and one time direction.
    And indeed it is possible to define the theory in a space-time with
    arbitrary dimensionality, signature and geometry.

One could idealistically think, that to define the Unified Theory of All
Interactions it should be enough to write an adequate set of assumptions
determining a consistent theory. On one hand the number of assumptions
should be as small as possible to answer a request for ”naturalness” of
the theory. But on the other the assumptions should be strong enough to
allow a derivation of only a single theory which obviously has to reduce
to the Standard Model and General Relativity in the low energy limit.
Unfortunately till today nobody has found any nontrivial and fully
consistent quantum theory let alone to write down such a set of axioms.
Some physicists even doubt the possibility of formulation of the Unified
Theory that way (if of course it could be formulated anyhow).

But there is another way perhaps more efficient. We should extract the
principles constituting the Standard Model and General Relativity and
slightly generalize or relax one or few of them. If after such a
redefining it is not possible to construct a theory more unified, less
arbitrary and still compatible in some limit with the starting ones,
then we should step back and try with some other set of principles. If
it is possible then we should suppose that it was a correct step towards
the Unified Theory.

Let us describe some of the steps that presumably lead towards the
Unified Theory [ 12 ] .

### 2.3 Grand Unification Theories.

Investigating by the renormalization group methods a behavior of the
three coupling constants of the Standard Model one finds that their
values almost converge at some large ( @xmath GeV) energy scale. The
natural hypothesis is that perhaps the three coupling constants are
replaced at this scale by a single constant and the group product @xmath
by a single simple Lie group of larger gauge symmetry. If it really
happens a real unification of strong and electroweak interactions is
attained in the similar way as the electromagnetic and weak interactions
are unified at @xmath 100 GeV. The idea of a Grand Unified Theory (GUT)
[ 13 , 14 ] has several attractive theoretical features for example it
can explain why the @xmath charges are quantized. Let us discuss the
most attractive GUT – @xmath theory [ 15 ] . A fundamental
representation of @xmath is @xmath and under symmetry breaking @xmath it
decomposes as [ 16 ] :

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the numbers in subscripts denote values of the @xmath electroweak
hypercharge. As we see the representations appearing in the above
formula precisely agree with the representations containing spinor
fields in the Standard Model (both quarks and leptons) including the
right-handed neutrino.

However GUTs still suffer most of the problems peculiar for the Standard
Model. All these theories are full of arbitrary parameters, do not
answer the questions of the number of generations or chirality and do
not propose any way to incorporate gravity. Since a new energy scale
(the grand unification scale) appears in the theories which is many
orders of magnitude higher than the electroweak scale, the hierarchy
problem is even more pronounced. Additionally there is a lot of Lie
groups containing the Standard Model symmetry group as their subgroup
and therefore being possible bases for construction of different GUTs
and we have no clear indication how the correct one should be chosen.

### 2.4 Extra dimensions.

A proposal to unify gravity with other interactions was first put
forward by Kaluza and Klein in 1920s [ 17 , 18 , 19 ] . It consist in
introducing additional dimensions of a space-time [ 20 ] and
interpreting the additional geometrical symmetries of higher–dimensional
gravity as the gauge symmetries of the four–dimensional world. This is
not a new idea. If we look how electricity and magnetism is unified in
the Maxwell theory of electromagnetism we can see that the key of the
unification is to replace a three dimensional space with separated time
by a four dimensional space-time. So a conjecture that a similar
mechanism can be used in case of gravity seems to be very plausible.

Let us start with a @xmath dimensional theory where @xmath dimensions
are infinite (or very large) and @xmath dimensions are small (i.e. the
inverse radius is larger than presently available energies and therefore
impossible for direct detection). In other words we assume that at a low
energy level a @xmath -dimensional space-time @xmath splits into a
product @xmath , where @xmath is relatively small. A natural assumption
is that a length scale of the small directions is of the order of the
Planck’s scale.

With such a splitting @xmath – the original symmetry group of the
general coordinate transformations defined on @xmath – breaks into a
product @xmath of symmetries defined on @xmath and @xmath respectively.
Any field in an arbitrary representation of @xmath decomposes into a sum
of products of representations of @xmath . But for a @xmath -dimensional
observer who cannot excite momentum along @xmath , group @xmath is seen
as a gauge symmetry group and with different choices of topology of
@xmath we can in principle obtain any gauge symmetry group.

From the @xmath -dimensional point of view each of the resulting fields
has an additional dependence on @xmath continuous parameters –
coordinates on @xmath . If @xmath is a compact manifold it leads to very
interesting conclusions. As an example let us consider a field @xmath
satisfying on @xmath an equation @xmath , where @xmath is an adequate
wave operator. For wave operators on products of manifolds it is
possible to write @xmath where @xmath commutes with @xmath . Therefore:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath runs over some countable set. The @xmath , @xmath are
eigenvectors of the operators @xmath and @xmath respectively and
constitute a complete, orthogonal systems. Then:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath are eigenvalues of @xmath . So, in @xmath dimensions we see
a tower of the so called Kaluza–Klein modes @xmath each characterized by
a mass (for fermions) or mass squared (for bosons) @xmath . It is
plausible to identify stages of the tower with the subsequent
generations of the fields.

It would be extremely appealing if one could justify the Standard Model
gauge group in such a purely geometrical way – it turns out however that
it is impossible with the main obstacle being the chirality of fermions
in the Standard Model.

### 2.5 Supersymmetry and supergravity.

Looking at the Standard Model one can notice a strange asymmetry between
bosons and fermions. Each kind of fields appears in the Model in
different representations of the gauge group and because of that they
play different roles. Spin 1 bosons are in the adjoint representation of
the gauge group and can be interpreted as carriers of interactions,
while spin @xmath fermions are in fundamental (or trivial)
representations and act only as pure matter and there is no the
slightest hint that bosons and fermions could be connected.

In the middle of 1970s however it was realized that in string theory the
seemingly fundamental difference between bosons and fermions is
alleviated and there exists there a symmetry connecting bosons and
fermions – it was called supersymmetry [ 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ] . An
immense theoretical effort over the last 20 years was devoted to the
application of this idea for different theories and most of the nearest
future experimental efforts in particle physics is aimed at one goal – a
discovery of the supersymmetric partners of the Standard Model
particles.

The starting point for a construction of supersymmetry group is to
assume that generators of the group are fermions, so a supersymmetry
transformation of a bosonic field is gives a fermion field and vice
versa. In a consequence, any supersymmetry representation contains equal
number of bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom and all fields
belonging to a single representation have to have the same mass. The
last statement stays in contradiction with experiments because
supersymmetric partners of known particles are not observed. Therefore,
if supersymmetry is realized in nature it cannot be exact but must be
(spontaneously) broken. But even broken supersymmetry has many
interesting features [ 26 , 27 ] .

The assumption of supersymmetry puts rigorous constraints on a theory
highly determining a number and a kind of terms which can appear in its
lagrangian. For example the cosmological term is forbidden so the
cosmological constant problem is less severe (by 60 orders of magnitude)
bringing down its scale to the supersymmetry breaking scale.

Thanks to the fermion-boson symmetry supersymmetric theories are usually
less divergent than their nonsupersymmetric counterparts and can help to
solve the hierarchy problem. The idea comes from an observation that in
the perturbation expansion corrections from bosonic excitations have to
be accompanied by fermionic ones and the latter contribute with an
opposite sign. As a result many of the corrections cancel each other
reducing the degree of divergence (for scalars from the quadratic to the
logarithmic).

Supersymmetry constitutes also a doorway by which gravity can be
introduced to join the other interactions. A first observation is that
the supersymmetry generators belong to an algebra that necessarily
contains the Poincaré algebra as its subalgebra. So we can conjecture
that there should exist a supersymmetric theory being an extension of
the general relativity. Indeed, if we want to construct a local
supersymmetry we need a spin @xmath vector-spinor field. They play a
role of a connection of the supersymmetry group analogously like the
gauge vectors are connections of the gauge symmetries groups. But the
vector-spinors have to be in one supermultiplet with spin 2 fields,
which naturally can be interpreted as fields carrying gravitational
interactions. This is the reason why the locally supersymmetric theories
are usually called supergravities [ 29 , 30 ] .

Supersymmetry has also another feature especially interesting in an
association with extra dimensional theories [ 28 , 31 ] . Denoting by
@xmath a number of irreducible spinorial supersymmetry generators one
can talk about @xmath supersymmetries. From the four–dimensional point
of view acting with a supersymmetry generator changes a spin projection
of the field by 1/2. It is natural not to introduce fields with spin
higher than 2, because there are not known consistent interacting
quantum theories describing them so the maximal number of four
dimensional supersymmetries is @xmath . This leads to the conclusion
that the highest number of dimensions with supersymmetry is generally
twelve and with one time direction it is eleven (since @xmath in @xmath
corresponds to @xmath in @xmath ).

In this way we come to the eleven dimensional supergravity [ 32 ] . The
theory is constructed only from one supermultiplet @xmath where the
@xmath is a Majorana spinor and its action is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -----

where @xmath is a strength of the potential @xmath , @xmath is a
covariant derivative, @xmath a spin connection and:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----

The supergravity transformations laws are given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is an elfbein and @xmath is a spinorial parameter of
supergravity. In the above we replaced the coefficient @xmath which
should accompany the curvature term @xmath with the number @xmath . The
operation is allowed if we assume to work with such units system where
@xmath .

It is instructive to check the number of physical degrees of freedom of
the fields. In arbitrary dimension they are given by (the number for a
Dirac spinor should be multiplied by 2 and for a Majorana-Weyl spinor
divided by 2) :

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath .

So, if @xmath , a simple calculation gives @xmath degrees for the metric
tensor and @xmath for the antisymmetric rank @xmath potential. Their sum
is @xmath and is precisely equal to the number of on-shell degrees of
freedom of the gravitino.

The eleven dimensional supergravity was thought in the past as an
excellent candidate for the Unified Theory. Firstly, it is simple and
elegant. Secondly, quite natural, because it is naturally distinguished
in a set of all supersymmetry theories as its maximal element. Moreover
a compactification from eleven to four dimensions on @xmath could even
produce the gauge group of the Standard Model, but the mechanism cannot
give a chiral four dimensional theory because of lack of gauge symmetry
in the @xmath supergravity.

Let us describe also some lower dimensional supergravities. In ten
dimensions there are three possible theories described as: @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath count numbers of left-handed and right-handed
generators respectively.

The @xmath theory [ 33 , 34 , 35 ] can be derived by a dimensional
reduction form the eleven dimensional one, since the @xmath Majorana
spinor splits into two Majorana-Weyl spinors of opposite chirality in
@xmath . An action of the theory truncated to only bosonic part reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a scalar field and:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The terms @xmath and @xmath describe respectively so called
Neveu-Schwarz-Neveu-Schwarz and Ramond-Ramond sectors of the theory (the
meaning of this terminology will be explained later) and @xmath is
Chern-Simons term.

The @xmath supergravity [ 36 , 37 ] is at first sight quite odd. It
cannot be derived from dimensional reduction of eleven dimensional
supergravity. Moreover it is impossible to write down a lagrangian
because the theory contains an antisymmetric field of rank 5, which is
selfdual i.e.:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

However, the equations of motion derived from an action with bosonic
part given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

with ( 18 ) as an extra condition are just the equations of motion of
the @xmath supergravity.

Setting equal to zero one of the generators of the @xmath or @xmath
theories one reduces them to the @xmath theory [ 38 , 39 ] . The bosonic
part of its action is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

There one more supergravity known in ten dimensions being an extension
of @xmath theory, called massive supergravity or Romans [ 40 ] theory.
An action of the theory can be obtained from the action @xmath given in
( 11 ) by adding a scalar field @xmath and a @xmath -form @xmath in the
following way:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the same as ( 11 ) after the substitution:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Field @xmath is as an auxiliary one and can be integrated over in the
action giving quite complicated combination of other fields.

As we see in 11 dimensions a supersymmetric theory is necessarily a
supergravity but in 10 dimensions a supersymmetry generator can be a
Majorana–Weyl spinor leading to a gauge supermultiplet (with fields of
spin not higher than 1). There exists a rule that chiral Yang-Mills and
simultaneously supersymmetric theories are allowed only if @xmath . In
such a case nothing prevents the @xmath supergravity for coupling to
matter which is supersymmetric, gauge symmetric but chirally asymmetric
[ 39 ] . Such theories can be compactified to a chiral, gauge symmetric
lower dimensional theory, if the supersymmetry preserved in the target
space is not higher then @xmath . In the case of the @xmath supergravity
the required compactification scheme is obtained if @xmath is Calabi-Yau
manifold (i.e. a complex manifold of complex dimension @xmath and with
@xmath holonomy group [ 41 ] ). The reasoning is as follows: we have to
compactify 6 dimensions; the holonomy group in 6 dimensions is @xmath
which is locally isomorphic to @xmath . If the holonomy of the manifold
is @xmath (i.e. it is a Calabi-Yau manifold) then the holonomy breaks
three out of four supersymmetries which can emerge after
compactification from @xmath to @xmath dimensions. Simultaneously we can
identify a subgroup of the gauge group with the holonomy group so it
gives a mechanism of gauge symmetry breaking. For example starting with
@xmath gauge symmetry, which is a natural candidate because of reasons
described later, one obtains:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

and afterwards:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

But @xmath is one of the most suitable GUT theory thanks to the behavior
of its multiplets under reduction to @xmath , (see 2 ).

In spite of their attractive features supergravities have a major
drawback – they are nonrenormalizable. They are consistent only at a
classical level but not at the quantum one. But even if they are not the
final goal one is tempted to think that they indicate the correct way
toward the Unified Theory.

### 2.6 Bosonic strings.

The result of search for the unification of all interactions summarized
in the previous section can seem quite disappointing. Even if we
recovered an interesting idea that could lead to unification of gravity
with other fundamental forces it turned out that a theory incorporating
the idea was still nonrenormalizable. But for now we were considering
only theories where the fundamental objects were defined as point
particles. What if the point-like structure is only a simplification,
the particles can be extended objects and at some scale (for example the
Planck’s scale) it is necessary to take into account this fact? So, let
us describe a theory with points replaced by strings [ 42 , 43 , 44 ] .
Then the Feynman diagrams, which in the case of point particles were
networks of crossing worldlines now become homomorphic to two
dimensional manifolds. But at any order of the perturbation expansion a
number of topologically inequivalent two-folds is significantly smaller
than a number of topologically inequivalent line-like diagrams, so the
theories of strings at first sight seem to be more convergent than the
point particles’ ones. And really they are. They are only known examples
of consistent interacting quantum theories which include both gauge
interactions and gravity, they are expected to be finite at every level
of perturbation expansion and they are not anomalous. But this is not
the only advantage of the string theories. The other include:

-   They contain only two dimensionful parameters – speed of light
    @xmath and the string scale @xmath .

-   They can be constructed only in a specific dimension of a spacetime.

-   Fields of various spins and masses are quantum excitations of a
    single string.

-   At the low energy limit string theories reduce to supergravities
    possibly coupled to super Yang Mills.

-   There is only a small number of inequivalent string theories and
    connections among them (dualities) suggest that they are all only
    special cases of one theory (M–theory).

Let us describe in more detail a construction of the string theories. It
is natural to start with an analog of a relativistic point particle
action @xmath (so called Nambu-Goto action [ 45 , 46 ] ):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath are space-time coordinates giving a localization of the
string worldsheet with respect to two parameters: timelike @xmath and
spacelike @xmath , indices @xmath run over values @xmath and @xmath .
The @xmath is a string coupling constant and it is related to a string
tension by @xmath . Because equations of motion derived from the action
( 33 ) could be equivalently obtained from another action which is free
of roots of @xmath , it is more convenient to construct string theories
on a base of so called Polyakov action [ 47 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the above we introduced a worldsheet metric @xmath . The action is
invariant under general transformations of coordinates @xmath and global
Poincaré transformations in space-time. Additionally it exhibits local
Weyl symmetry given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (35)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

This is an important fact, because three parameters of the local
symmetries exactly agree with a number of @xmath degrees of freedom.
Therefore the field describing internal structure of a string can be
completely gauged out from the physical theory and even in the quantum
theory we have well defined distances on the world-sheet. Thanks to ( 35
- 36 ) a worldsheet of a propagating string can be described not only as
a general two dimensional real manifold but also as a Riemann surface,
it means as a complex one-fold. This is a starting point for developing
so called conformal field theory (CFT) which gives an apparatus allowing
to evaluate an amplitude for any scattering process in the string
theory. In such a description there are deep subtleties in the Wick
rotation from the physical Minkowski to the Euclidean signature on the
world sheet - it is a beautiful mathematical result that such a rotation
can be done and that the amplitudes coincide. This result justifies the
common approach to string theory by the powerful formalism of conformal
field theory.

One distinguishes several categories of strings characterized as open or
closed and oriented or unoriented. The open ones are homeomorphic to an
open interval and have to satisfy the following boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath describe free ends of the string. Analogously
the closed ones are homeomorphic to a circle, so the points @xmath and
@xmath should be identified in this case and the boundary conditions
are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The open string conditions are more restrictive. While on the closed
strings there can live two infinite series of quantum excitations
related to left and right moving waves

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are independent, on the open strings they are
combined into one series of stable waves.

The oriented and the unoriented strings are defined as strings with
worldsheets of respectively oriented or unoriented manifolds. The
orientability is a global feature of manifolds and in the interacting
theory all the string worldsheets are joined and form a single connected
manifold. So, it leads to a conclusion that the oriented and the
unoriented strings can interact only within their classes. By use of a
purely topological arguments it can be checked that an interaction among
open strings always can produce a closed one, while for the closed
strings it is possible to impose consistent restrictions forbidding them
to interact with the open ones. Therefore there are four possible kinds
of interacting string theories:

-   theories with only closed oriented strings,

-   theories with only closed unoriented strings,

-   theories with open and closed strings, all oriented,

-   theories with open and closed strings, all unoriented.

Quantizing the theory derived from ( 34 ) with an assumption that it
should preserve Lorentz invariance one obtains a spectrum of quantum
states with masses given by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a dimension of space-time, @xmath enumerates levels of
excitations, and @xmath is a number equal to @xmath in the case of open
strings and @xmath in the case of closed strings. Counting number of
states at each level and checking their behavior under Lorentz
transformations one finds that only @xmath can form massless
representations in @xmath dimensional space-time. Simultaneously, from
the condition @xmath for @xmath one obtains @xmath as a critical
dimension i.e. the number of dimensions where strings can live. For the
oriented open strings the massless representation is a vector and for
the oriented closed strings it is a multiplication of two vectors which
decomposes into irreducible rank @xmath tensors: a traceless symmetric
tensor, an antisymmetric tensor and a scalar. The condition of
unorientability reduces a number of possible massless fields disallowing
vectors and antisymmetric tensors.

Consider an interaction among several external open strings. Because
ends of the external strings are distinguished points on a worldsheet,
each possible interaction can be characterized by a specific order of
the points and this order is invariant under the worldsheet
reparametrization. This means that the open strings in a distinction to
the closed ones have additional degrees of freedom attached to their
endpoints. They are known as Chan-Patton degrees of freedom and can be
described in terms of gauge symmetry [ 48 ] . More detailed analysis
shows that possible gauge groups are @xmath in the case of oriented
string and @xmath or @xmath in the case of unoriented strings.

Until now we have discussed strings in flat space-time but it is
possible to consider strings propagating in other backgrounds. A first
step of such an extension is to replace the constant flat metric @xmath
from ( 34 ) by a general coordinate dependent metric @xmath and add
couplings to other massless states of the oriented closed string: the
antisymmetric tensor @xmath and scalar @xmath . Then one obtains a
nonlinear sigma model action which takes the form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

The above theory is a renormalizable theory of fields @xmath . It is
consistent only if Weyl invariance is preserved on a quantum level, it
means when the following conditions leading to a cancellation of Weyl
anomaly are satisfied:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . These conditions look like equations of motion of some
theory and indeed it is possible to find an action from which they can
be derived:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

In this way one arrives at an effective theory describing massless modes
of the closed oriented string. The above action is written in a
formalism known as a string frame, in which the curvature term is given
by @xmath . By a redefinition of fields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

it can be transformed to so called Einstein frame where the curvature
term is @xmath and the whole action:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

However the theory ( 49 ) is obviously not a good candidate for an
effective string theory being simultaneously a generalization of the
Standard Model and General Relativity, because it does not contain
fermions. Another important disadvantage is that the fields at the
lowest level in the spectrum given by ( 41 ) are not massless but
tachyonic with a negative mass square described by @xmath . So, the
interacting theory cannot be stable since any excited state including
the massless ones should decay into tachyons. It was conjectured that
the presence of the tachyons is a consequence of a wrong vacuum choice
and there should be a mechanism shifting the theory to the correct
vacuum similarly as the Higgs mechanism makes it with the Standard
Model. But this idea did not give a satisfactory result.

### 2.7 Superstrings and M-theory.

Fortunately there is another method avoiding the shortcomings of the
bosonic string theory described above but saving its virtues. The key
idea is to apply supersymmetry to strings and therefore introduce so
called superstrings. There are two variants of the theory, each more
convenient in different but complementary aspects. Fortunately both lead
to at least partially equivalent results.

The first one is known as spacetime supersymmetry or Green-Schwarz
theory [ 49 , 50 , 51 ] . In this case derivatives @xmath in ( 34 ) are
replaced by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the resulting action is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a spinor in @xmath dimensions, @xmath with @xmath giving
a number of global supersymmetries. The expression ( 50 ) is invariant
under transformations of the supersymmetries:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

However it can be checked, that the @xmath fields have twice too many
components than can be determined by solving the equations of motion of
the theory. So, the additional symmetry is needed to gauge away the
undesired degrees of freedom and possibly redefining ( 51 ) to
incorporate new terms allowing a closure of the action under the new
symmetry.

To write the appropriate action it is convenient to introduce a
superspace formalism with supercoordinates: @xmath and a supervielbein
@xmath where the indices @xmath label tangent space coordinates. Define
@xmath and then the action reads:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

The action is invariant under local fermionic transformations called
@xmath symmetry:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

It is important that the action ( 53 ) has to incorporate the
Wess-Zumino term with antisymmetric tensor to achieve @xmath invariance.
But on the other hand the action is not supersymmetric for arbitrary
@xmath and @xmath as ( 51 ) is. It can be checked that such a situation
occurs only for @xmath and @xmath .

A quantization program for the Green-Schwarz theory encounters serious
difficulties and it was carried out only in the light-cone gauge. But
there is another supersymmetrisation method for strings, more convenient
for the quantization but with the manifest space-time supersymmetry
lost. The method is known as world-sheet supersymmetry or
Ramond-Neveu-Schwarz theory [ 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 ] . The idea in this
case is to add to ( 34 ) fields @xmath being Majorana spinors on the
worldsheet but vectors in the spacetime:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

Then, for any given @xmath the pairs @xmath are scalar supermultiplets
of @xmath supersymmetry. Quantizing the theory one obtains a critical
dimension @xmath . It is also possible to consider extended @xmath
supersymmetries. But it occurs that for @xmath the critical dimension is
@xmath what is unreasonable for a theory with eventual applications but
can be interesting as a playground for theoretical experiments. For
@xmath the critical dimension is negative what is obviously
unacceptable.

The spinors living on a string worldsheet have to obey one of two
possible boundary conditions, known as Ramond (R) and Neveu-Schwarz (NS)
ones:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

what gives two kinds of quantum states. Additionally all quantum states
can be divided with respect to the worldsheet fermion number operator
@xmath being an extension of the chirality operator with two eigenvalues
@xmath and @xmath . The projection from the space of all states onto
states of given fermion number is called the GSO (Gliozzi-Scherk-Olive)
projection.

Identically as for the bosonic strings, on the open superstrings only
stable waves can exist, so the whole quantum spectrum can be classified
by four sectors labelled as R+, R-, NS+ and NS-. The lowest state in NS-
is a tachyon, but in NS+, R-, R+ it is a massless vector and two
massless Majorana-Weyl spinors with opposite chirality respectively. On
the closed superstrings left and right moving waves are independent of
each other, so the spectrum in this case is given by sectors described
as pairs of the open superstrings sectors. Total number of the closed
superstring sectors is @xmath and not @xmath because combinations of
NS(-) with the other possibilities are forbidden by the quantum level
matching rule. The rule says that tachyons are only in (NS-,NS-) sector
and the lowest states in the remaining sectors are massless. Massless
fermionic states are contained in the sectors labelled by NS+
accompanied by R+ or R-, while the sectors with massless bosonic states
are described by (NS+,NS+) and all possible parings among R+’s and R-’s.
In short all massless bosons can be classified as NS-NS or R-R.

Each choice of several sectors can lead to a different superstring
theory. A number of such choices is possibly very huge. For example in a
case of closed superstrings it is equal to @xmath . Fortunately only a
few choices give a consistent interacting theory with tachyon free and
supersymmetric spectrum.

Type IIA and IIB superstrings.

Those are closed oriented superstrings theories with two
supersymmetries. They are constructed of the following sectors:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the above @xmath can be replaced by @xmath , what changes chirality
of all fermions, but leads to equivalent physical theories. What is
important, in the type IIA theory left and right moving massless fermion
states have opposite chirality but in the type IIB theory all fermions
have the same chirality. In the language of the GSO projection for the
IIB theory the same GSO projection is chosen for both left and right
moving states, while for the IIA the opposite ones.

By the low energy limiting procedure analogous to that described for
bosonic string one can derive effective theories for massless states of
type IIA and IIB superstrings and find that they coincides respectively
with the @xmath and @xmath supergravities in ten dimensions. Because
massless bosonic states in the superstring theory belong to two disjoint
sectors R-R or NS-NS the corresponding fields in the supergravity theory
can be described in the same way. This is an explanation of the
classification given in ( 11 ) and ( 19 ).

Type I @xmath superstrings.

This is a theory of unoriented closed and open strings and possesses
only one supersymmetry. It can be obtained form the IIB theory by the
requirement of unorientability and removing states not satisfying this
condition. Particularly from the two sectors containing massless
fermions only one linear combination survives: (NS,R)+(R,NS). But the
theory is inconsistent unless open string states NS+ and R+ are also
included. The additional states have Chan-Patton degrees of freedom, so
the theory is gauge symmetric with the gauge group @xmath or @xmath .
The requirement of vanishing anomaly further constrains the gauge group
to only @xmath . In the low energy limit the theory converges into the
@xmath supersymmetry coupled with @xmath super-Yang-Mills.

Heterotic @xmath and @xmath superstrings.

Another possibility to construct a superstring theory is to combine the
superstring constraints on a half of the closed strings states (say: on
the right-moving) and the bosonic string constraints on the second half
(left-moving) in a way which leads to removing tachyons from the
physical spectrum. Because superstring lives in ten dimensions and the
bosonic string in 26, the additional 16 dimensions of bosonic string
should be compactified. This process leads to a gauge symmetry. Only two
choices of the gauge group are acceptable to achieve a consistent theory
with tachyon free and supersymmetric spectrum: @xmath and @xmath . In
the low energy limit these theories become the @xmath supersymmetry
coupled with @xmath or @xmath super-Yang-Mills respectively. The
massless spectrum of type I and heterotic @xmath theories coincide,
however they are different if the massive states are taken into account.

In this way one finally obtains exactly five consistent string theories
which satisfy conditions requiring supersymmetric and tachyon free
spectrum. If the conditions are relaxed, other string theories can be
introduced as type @xmath theory or a few heterotic theories with gauge
groups other than the described before. In most cases they are
simultaneously not supersymmetric and tachyonic, but there is one
exception: the heterotic @xmath superstring which is not supersymmetric
but still tachyon-free.

An extensive research on string theories has recently shown, that these
five consistent string theories are all connected by a net of dualities.
There are two kinds of such dualities. One is T-duality [ 56 ] , which
is perturbative, what means that it works precisely at every level of
perturbative expansion. T-duality connects theories compactified on
n-torus and is described in general by @xmath group. In the simplest
case it connects a theory compactified on a circle of radius @xmath with
another theory compactified on a circle of radius @xmath . The second
kind of duality: S-duality [ 57 , 58 ] is nonperturbative and it is
described by @xmath group. In particular it establishes relations
between weakly and strongly coupled limits of two theories. Let us list
examples of the dualities:

-   Heterotic @xmath theory is T-dual to heterotic @xmath theory.

-   Type IIA and type IIB theory compactified on odd dimensional tori
    are T-dual.

-   Type IIA and type IIB theories compactified on even dimensional
    torus are T-selfdual.

-   Type I @xmath theory compactified on odd dimensional torus is T-dual
    to type II A theory.

-   Type I @xmath theory compactified on even dimensional torus is
    T-dual to type II B theory.

-   Type IIB theory is S-selfdual,

-   Type I @xmath and heterotic @xmath theories are S-dual.

In the above no S-dual partners for type IIA and heterotic @xmath
superstrings are shown since these cases need a special treatment.
Applying S-duality to these theories one finds that their duals do not
coincide with any known superstring theory. Moreover the dual theories
seem to live in 11 rather than 10 dimensions. Thanks to duality between
type IIA and heterotic @xmath superstrings one deduces that their
S-duals have to be the same theory for which the name was coined:
M–theory. However, besides a name the theory is generally unknown. We
can describe only several features of it based on the S-duality relation
with superstrings and conjecture that its low energy limit should be the
only allowed 11 dimensional supergravity ( 5 ). So we can add to the
previous list:

-   Type IIA theory is S-dual to M-theory compactified on a circle
    @xmath .

-   Heterotic @xmath theory is S-dual to M-theory compactified on an
    orbifold @xmath .

Existence of the net of dualities among all known superstring theories
leads naturally to the conclusion that all these theories are only
specific sectors of some really unified, probably unique theory. The
theory obviously should be at least 11 dimensional and is usually called
M-theory [ 59 , 60 , 62 , 61 ] identically as the previously introduced
dual partner for type IIA and heterotic @xmath superstrings. In this
picture S and T dualities should be understood as symmetries of M-theory
transforming one of its sectors into another. There is a conjecture that
S and T dualities are only subgroups of more general symmetry group of
the whole theory called U-duality.

## 3 Branes in quantum theories.

If it is possible to construct string theories one could wonder why do
not introduce a theory of higher dimensional objects like membranes?
Such an idea is not a new one. In 1962 Dirac proposed a model where the
elementary particles were described in terms of modes of a vibrating
membrane [ 63 ] . The membrane Dirac theory was based on a action which
was a straight analog of the Nambu-Goto string action ( 33 ). Curiously,
that Nambu and Goto have written their actions a few years after Dirac.
But during the next year, when the string theory was rapidly developing,
attempts to develop the competitive idea of membranes ended without
success. The situation has changed in 1986 when a supersymmetric
membrane was discovered by Hughes, Lu and Polchinski [ 64 ] . But the
real breakthrough was paradoxically made on a ground of the string
theory, when Polchinski [ 65 ] has shown that superstrings necessarily
have branes in the spectrum as sources of Ramond-Ramond charges in the
theory.

### 3.1 Fundamental @xmath-branes.

Constructing the brane theory it is natural to follow the derivation of
string theory. One should then start with the Nambu–Goto-like action:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

or the Polyakov-like action [ 47 , 66 ] of a @xmath -dimensional object
sweeping out in space-time a @xmath dimensional worldvolume:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

The extended objects that after supersymmetrization and quantization
would be described by such a theory are known as @xmath -branes. The
theory of superstrings should appear in this picture as a theory of
@xmath -branes and be only a specific case of the theory. However it
turns out that the superstring @xmath case is specific and very
difficult to generalize to arbitrary @xmath . A first evidence of the
difficulties is the worldvolume cosmological term @xmath in ( 61 ) which
vanishes for strings but survives and breaks Weyl symmetry ( 35 - 36 )
in other cases.

As for string theory there are two ways of introducing supersymmetry –
by imposing worldvolume supersymmetry and further requirement of
spacetime supersymmetry (a spinning brane) or by imposing spacetime
supersymmetry from the very beginning (Green-Schwarz construction).

In the case of a spinning brane [ 66 , 67 ] the presence of the
worldvolume cosmological term precludes starting from ( 61 ) (so called
no-go theorem for spinning membranes). The modified action can be
introduced [ 68 ] which exhibits Weyl invariance and is classically
still equivalent to ( 60 ) and ( 61 ):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

But even this Weyl invariant action does not lead to a fully successful
theory of a spinning membrane.

The second possibility of supersymmetrisation is the Green-Schwarz
spacetime supersymmetry [ 64 , 69 ] . This construction is an extension
of ( 53 ), so similarily as in that case there should be introduced the
supercoordinates @xmath , the supervielbein @xmath with @xmath labeling
tangent space coordinates and @xmath . Then the action is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

and it is invariant under @xmath symmetry:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

The action preserves worldvolume supersymmetry only for certain triplets
of @xmath and @xmath .

When the super- @xmath -brane is moving in a spacetime it sweeps out a
@xmath -dimensional worldvolume. It is convenient to set spacetime
coordinates as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

The super- @xmath -brane has therefore exactly @xmath bosonic degrees of
freedom. To count fermionic degrees of freedom we introduce @xmath as
the number of worldvolume supersymmetries and @xmath as the number of
real components of an irreducible spinor in a given worldvolume
dimension. Then the number of fermionic degrees freedom on–shell is
@xmath . But calculating the same for spacetime fermions one should take
@xmath (where @xmath is a number of spacetime supersymmetries and @xmath
a number of real components of an irreducible spinor in a given
spacetime dimension) because the @xmath symmetry halves a number of
physical degrees of freedom. The condition of equality of the number of
bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom for the Green-Schwarz super-
@xmath -branes is therefore:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using the known numbers of dimensions of irreducible spinor
representations with Lorentzian signature we find that the condition is
satisfied by four fundamental solutions [ 70 ] :

-   ”octonionic” branes with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath

-   ”quaternionic” branes with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath

-   ”complex” branes with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath

-   ”real” branes with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath

The fundamental solutions are maximal ones in four series and can be
denoted as @xmath . Other members of the series can be obtained by a
double reduction of @xmath dimensions @xmath for @xmath . Note that for
@xmath all found super- @xmath -branes have @xmath .

The case @xmath is special and requires more detailed analysis. The
reduction of the fundamental solutions gives superstrings in four
possible spacetime dimensions: @xmath . All of them have @xmath , so
they are type II superstrings. But for @xmath the ( 67 ) is not the only
possibility. In this case it is allowed to treat left and right moving
modes independently and apply supersymmetry only to one of them. Then
instead of ( 67 ) another condition should be satisfied:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

leading to @xmath solutions with @xmath corresponding to heterotic
superstrings.

It is worth to note, that the maximal spacetime dimension obtained in
this procedure is @xmath being in excellent agreement with the analogous
result derived before for supergravity theories. Moreover in the super-
@xmath -branes the condition @xmath is derived without the restriction
that spin is not bigger than @xmath .

The conditions ( 67 ) and ( 68 ) are valid only in the case when it is
assumed that the worldvolume fields form scalar multiplets. One can
relax this assumption and introduce on the worldvolume other
supersymmetry representations (i.e. vector or tensor supermultiplets)
with additional fields. Then one can define more super- @xmath -branes
of various kinds and the table 1 shows the result of such a search [ 71
] . However it should be noted, that matching fermionic and bosonic
degrees of freedom is only a necessary but not a sufficient condition
that a supersymmetric theory exists in a general case. To prove that the
presumable super- @xmath -brane really exists, an analog of ( 63 )
should be written and examined in each case.

Several cases in the table seem to be especially interesting. Let us
take @xmath super- @xmath -brane in @xmath . The action ( 63 ) of the
super- @xmath -brane has to contain an antisymmetric tensor potential of
rank @xmath with @xmath -form field strength. The case is very
interesting because there is a dual formulation of @xmath supergravity
where the @xmath -form field strength is replaced by a @xmath -form [ 72
] . Both these supergravity theories are equivalent and anomaly free
when coupled to @xmath or @xmath super-Yang-Mills. For the @xmath -form
formulation the theory is a low energy limit of the heterotic
superstrings with @xmath supersymmetry. The other formulation suggests
that there should be a ”heterotic” super- @xmath -brane theory dual to
the theory of heterotic superstrings [ 73 ] .

Even more exciting possibility is pointed out by super- @xmath -brane in
@xmath . It can be checked, that @xmath symmetry requires that fields
@xmath and @xmath appearing in ( 63 ) satisfy constraints equivalent
with the equations of motion of the eleven dimensional supergravity [ 59
, 69 ] . Moreover double dimensional reduction procedure applied to the
super- @xmath -brane gives the type IIA superstring which is S-dual to
M-theory. This fact suggests to put forward a hypothesis that M-theory
could be a quantum theory of super- @xmath -branes in a similar way as
superstring theory is a quantum theory of super- @xmath -branes.

A quantization [ 74 , 71 ] , of super- @xmath -branes for @xmath is
significantly more difficult than in the case of superstrings ( @xmath
). The main problem is that for @xmath there are not enough symmetries
to gauge away all internal degrees of freedom so in contradistinction to
string worldsheet there is no classical meaning of a distance on the
worldvolume. Therefore there is no evidence that a brane theory is
finite or even renormalizable (but on the other hand neither there is
evidence to the contrary). Some attempts to quantize the most promising
@xmath brane in @xmath have shown that the resulting theory should be in
some aspects similar to super-Yang-Mills theory defined in @xmath
dimensions with an exotic gauge group @xmath . The result was extended
to other super- @xmath -branes and it was also suggested that cases with
@xmath correspond to analogs of gauge theory where gauge vectors are
replaced by higher rank antisymmetric tensors [ 75 ] . Next it was
checked that the super- @xmath -brane is anomaly free only in @xmath [
77 , 76 ] . However all these studies are rather tests of various
possibilities, so M-theory understood as a membrane theory is still more
a conjecture than a fact.

### 3.2 Branes as sources of antisymmetric tensor fields.

In the previous section it was observed that a @xmath -brane is
accompanied by a field of @xmath -forms. This observation is a part of a
more fundamental rule: a theory with a @xmath -form potential is
connected with the existence of a @xmath -dimensional charged objects:
branes. Let us examine it more carefully.

Consider a model with an antisymmetric tensor field @xmath of rank
@xmath . A general action of the model is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (70)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is a dilatonic scalar field, @xmath – a constant. @xmath
depends at most linearly on @xmath , but has an arbitrary dependence on
any other fields, in particular it has to contain kinetic terms for the
dilaton @xmath and graviton @xmath . The remaining @xmath is
Chern–Simons term trilinear in @xmath . For simplicity of the discussion
let us put in this section @xmath . The @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

With this relation the field @xmath has to satisfy the Bianchi identity:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

The theory exhibits gauge invariance under:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the equations of motion derived form ( 70 ) are:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the @xmath is the conserved Noether current of the theory and its
shape is specified by the @xmath .

This picture is quite similar to that one of electrodynamics but now the
current @xmath is in general @xmath -form (and not a vector) and (if it
possesses a nonzero timelike component) it defines not a worldline of
electrically charged point particle, but @xmath -dimensional worldvolume
of @xmath dimensional object propagating in time. The object carries an
elementary charge of the field @xmath , in other words the Noether
charge associated with the conserved Noether current @xmath , which by
analogy to electrodynamics is very often called an electric charge. The
object is known as an electric (elementary) @xmath -brane. If @xmath has
a form of ( 63 ) then the @xmath -brane can be identified with the
super- @xmath -brane introduced in the section 3.1 .

We can calculate the electric charge of the brane in the usual way as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the @xmath is a subspace transversal to the electric brane and the
@xmath is a sphere surrounding a point-like image of the brane under a
projection of the @xmath on the @xmath .

It is possible to construct also a magnetic (solitonic) brane. Then ( 71
) is replaced by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is an arbitrary not exact @xmath -form, so the Bianchi
identity is then:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

instead of ( 72 ), where @xmath . In this way via the modified Bianchi
identity a @xmath dimensional object can be introduced to the theory – a
magnetic (solitonic) @xmath -brane. The brane carries a magnetic (called
also solitonic or topological) charge defined as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a subspace transversal to the magnetic brane and the
@xmath is a sphere surrounding an image of the brane under a projection
of @xmath on @xmath .

When @xmath both the electric and the magnetic branes have the same
dimension and can even coincide. If additionally the field @xmath is
selfdual or anti-selfdual, i.e. it obeys:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

the branes necessarily coincide so we then have a single brane carrying
simultaneously electric and magnetic charges. This category of branes is
called dyonic branes.

Some features of the electric and magnetic branes are strongly
correlated. For example:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are dimensions of electric and magnetic brane’s
worldvolumes:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

Because of that it is convenient to define a mapping described by the
symbol of tilde @xmath and acting on integer numbers as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the case of the brane worldvolume dimensions it gives:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

Another interesting fact is that if the discussed theory is quantum then
the charges ( 75 ) and ( 78 ) have to satisfy the Dirac’s quantization
condition:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is an integer. The above quantization rule was originally
derived by Dirac in the case of electromagnetic theory in @xmath . To
prove ( 84 ) in this case consider a hypothetic magnetic monopole (i.e.
a magnetically charged particle) with a charge @xmath located at the
origin of the coordinate system. Let the coordinates be spherical @xmath
where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The magnetic monopole is a source of
an electromagnetic field whose strength @xmath has to satisfy @xmath ,
so:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

Solving @xmath one finds the corresponding vector potential. But the
potential cannot be expressed by a single formula globally. It is
necessary to introduce at least two maps covering together the whole
space with different @xmath ’s and different choice of gauge on each.
For example:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

It gives @xmath . If an electrically charged particle with charge @xmath
moves in the field of the magnetic monopole its wave function should
also be given by two sections: @xmath and @xmath . Both the wave
functions differ by a phase:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

But because shifting the @xmath coordinate by @xmath gives the same
point, the phase has to be unchanged by such an operation and this
requirement leads to @xmath .

Considering general branes, the Dirac monopole has to be replaced by a
magnetic @xmath -brane and the electric point particle by an electric
@xmath -brane, where the branes are orthogonal one to the other and not
intersecting. Making a projection in the @xmath -dimensional space-time
parallel to all space-like directions that are parallel to any of the
branes one gets a @xmath dimensional picture identical to the one
described before. So, the condition ( 84 ) has to be true not only for
point particles but also for branes.

It is crucial to observe that if we reformulate the theory defining as a
fundamental field @xmath , then the equation of motion ( 74 ) is
replaced by the Bianchi ( 77 ) identity and vice versa, but the kinetic
term in ( 70 ) does not change:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the identity @xmath valid when applied to @xmath -forms was used.
This is called electric/magnetic duality. But of course in a general
case nothing guarantee that the duality is an exact symmetry of the
theory not only an interesting coincidence.

However in 1970s it was noted that in some supersymmetric gauge theories
electric and magnetic charges and masses of all particles described by
the theory have to obey a universal relation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a constant. Therefore if roles of the electric and
magnetic charges are exchanged the mass is still preserved. This
inspired Montonen and Olive to conjecture [ 78 ] that the
electric/magnetic duality could be a real symmetry of the whole quantum
theory. Let us discuss this conjecture in more detail. Consider a
quantum state which carries electric and magnetic charges and the
electric charge is quantized such that @xmath , where @xmath is an
integral quantum number and @xmath is a fundamental quanta of the
electric charge. Then the magnetic charge has to be quantized as well,
but by the Dirac quantization rule ( 84 ) it should be given by @xmath .
So the electric/magnetic duality cannot by described just by a replacing
of the quantum numbers @xmath with @xmath and vice versa. Simultaneously
also the coupling @xmath has to be inversed, what means that the duality
connects weak and strong coupled sectors of the theory. This idea has an
interesting continuation on the ground of string theory where S-duality
was discovered [ 57 , 58 ] .

Up to now we have not specified for what range of @xmath it is
reasonable to define a brane. The simple model described in this section
works properly if @xmath what corresponds to @xmath . For each case
there is a well defined antisymmetric tensor potential @xmath , its
strength @xmath and a dual strength @xmath . In particular, @xmath
reduces to a point particle and @xmath – to a string. But it is possible
to extend the definition of branes beyond that range.

@xmath makes no formal problems. It is a dual to @xmath -brane and is
given by a scalar potential and vector strength field. However, some
features of the @xmath -brane can seem quite odd. Because its
worldvolume is zero-dimensional it cannot propagate and exists only in
one moment in time. This class of objects was previously discovered in
electrodynamics and are called instantons.

Of course it is possible to extend definition of the instantons, to
objects which are not necessary points in spacetime. If we relax the
condition, that the currents @xmath or @xmath must have nonvanishing
timelike component, we allow a situation where they span purely spatial
hypersurfaces of nonzero dimension. Such hypersurfaces are called
S-branes [ 79 , 80 , 81 ] . We will not discuss them in this work and
concentrate on the branes evolving with time. It is however worth noting
that S-branes can be especially interesting in the context of
cosmological models where they can play a role of an initial
singularity.

A @xmath -brane is usually called a domain wall and it is described by a
rank @xmath potential @xmath and a rank @xmath strength @xmath . Such a
field appears for example in massive @xmath supergravity ( 28 ). Without
external sources it can be deduced from equation ( 74 ) that @xmath and
therefore @xmath have to be constants and have no propagating states.
Thus, the kinetic term @xmath contributes to a lagrangian effectively as
a cosmological term.

A brane with @xmath is very special. Because its antisymmetric potential
has to be proportional to the volume element it should be interpreted
just as the whole spacetime. A strength field related to the @xmath
-brane obviously vanishes since it is a form of rank @xmath .

Branes with @xmath or @xmath cannot exist because there is no
possibility to introduce an antisymmetric potential in these cases.

### 3.3 Branes in superstring and M-theory.

Knowing that branes are closely related to antisymmetric forms one may
note that the massless sector of every superstring theory contains
several fields of this kind. So it is natural to expect that the
theories could admit existence of brane-like objects. However there is a
question what are these objects in this context and whether they are
necessary or only theoretically possible elements of string theories.
The answer is more surprising than one could expect. The branes are not
only an intrinsic part of any string theory but they also give an
excellent tool for forecasting and examining features of the M-theory.

#### 3.3.1 D@xmath-branes in bosonic strings.

Consider bosonic oriented closed string theory with one, say the twenty
sixth, dimension compactified on a circle of radius @xmath . A quantum
states’ spectrum of such theory is different than the spectrum of free
theory ( 41 ). However, besides Kaluza-Klein modes which are naturally
expected by analogy with the compactification procedure of point
particle theories, states of other kind can also appear. They are
labelled by so called winding numbers @xmath counting how many times a
closed string is wound around the compact dimension. Because closed
strings with different @xmath are topologically inequivalent they have
to form different states. The full spectrum is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath numbers Kaluza-Klein excitation levels. A crucial
observation is, that the spectrum and the whole theory is invariant
under:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

In other words the theory compactified on a small circle @xmath is
equivalent to a theory compactified on a big circle @xmath if roles of
the winding and the Kaluza-Klein states are simultaneously interchanged.
In the limit @xmath a theory dimensionally reduced by one is dual to a
theory on a noncompact space @xmath . It can be checked that the duality
also effectively reverses sign of the right-moving modes, so in terms of
coordinates it is given by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (93)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

This is an example of T-duality and can be extended to more general
cases of toroidal compactifications.

One can wonder what is happening in a similar situation with open
strings which cannot have preserved winding numbers. The spectrum of
such compactified theory is just:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

what evidently is not invariant under @xmath . This seems to lead to a
contradiction if one remembers that theories with interacting open
strings have to contain also closed strings. The contradiction is
however only apparent. A difference between open and closed strings lays
in the endpoints of open strings not in their interior. So, a naive
consideration gives a prediction, that a dual to open string theory
compactified on a circle with radius @xmath should be a theory with open
strings having endpoints confined on a @xmath -dimensional hypersurface.
Actually, applying ( 93 ) to the Neumann boundary conditions of open
string ( 37 ) one really obtains Dirichlet boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

defining a hypersurface called Dirichlet brane, D-brane or D @xmath
-brane, where @xmath is a number of spatial dimensions of the
hypersurface [ 65 , 82 ] .

Of course T-duality can be applied not only to the ”original” theory
where all open strings satisfy only Neumann boundary condition but also
to a theory with D @xmath -brane of arbitrary @xmath . If one T-dualize
@xmath dimensions, @xmath tangent and @xmath orthogonal to the D @xmath
-brane, then one obtains a theory with D @xmath -brane. In this picture
the ”original” string theory is a theory with D @xmath -branes filling
the whole space.

Additional properties are revealed when one takes into account
Chan-Patton states. It can be shown that @xmath oriented open string
theory after T-dualization gives a theory with exactly @xmath parallel D
@xmath -branes. A state dual to @xmath where @xmath are indices of the
gauge symmetry group is then realized by a string having one end glued
to the @xmath -th brane and the second to the @xmath -th brane. If all
branes are separated, a gauge symmetry group of the dual theory is
@xmath . If some of the branes coincide, for example if there are @xmath
distinct locations for the branes with @xmath branes at each ( @xmath )
then the gauge group is @xmath . Maximally the original @xmath group can
be restored.

A little different situation occurs for unoriented strings. The starting
symmetry is then @xmath or @xmath and the T-dual space is not
compactified on a circle or a torus but rather on an orientifold @xmath
. If @xmath is even then all the branes are grouped into @xmath pairs
with partners living at points related by @xmath symmetry, so
effectively one sees maximally @xmath branes on the orientifold. If
@xmath is odd, then there is an additional brane with no partner which
has to be localized at @xmath fixed plane. A gauge group related to a
pair of branes is @xmath and @xmath in a case of @xmath coincident
pairs. But if the branes coincide at one of the fixed planes then the
symmetry is @xmath or @xmath instead of @xmath . So in the extreme case
when all the branes are at the fixed plane the original symmetry @xmath
or @xmath is restored again. Note, that the above results are consistent
with the previous observations that a theory with open strings in a flat
empty space can be equivalently interpreted as a theory in a space
filled out by @xmath D @xmath -branes.

Consider a low energy effective physics on a worldvolume of a single D
@xmath -brane. It has to be given by a vector field @xmath involved with
the gauge group of the Chan-Patton states and fields induced on the
brane by the background of string massless states:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (96)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (97)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

As an appropriate action describing a dynamics on the brane one usually
postulates Born-Infeld action [ 83 , 84 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath describes a tension of the brane when an expectation value
of the dilaton @xmath vanishes. More precisely a physical tension of the
brane in an arbitrary background is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is interesting that for D @xmath branes of various @xmath the
following identity holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

The action ( 99 ) describes a kind of @xmath -dimensional gauge theory,
where the gauge group and other features of the theory depend directly
on the brane configuration and on the type of the string theory. So, we
can study gauge theories not only as completely separate models but also
in connection with string theory or (in a limit) with supergravity
theories.

#### 3.3.2 D@xmath-branes in superstrings.

Up to now we were considering D-branes in bosonic string theories, but
it should be remembered that five consistent, interacting string
theories are necessarily supersymmetric. Fortunately, the bosonic sector
discussed so far can be simply adjusted – for example one should replace
26 dimensions by 10, set for the tension:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

add fermionic terms to ( 99 ), and then everything what was written for
bosonic D-branes is still valid for D-branes in superstring theories.
Moreover, new important features can be detected.

Let us focus on the type I @xmath superstring theory. The theory
describes unoriented open and closed strings. After T-dualisation on
@xmath toroidally compactified dimensions one obtains a theory with open
superstrings having endpoints at @xmath D @xmath -branes and closed
superstrings propagating in a bulk. There is some evidence that
T-duality is an exact symmetry of superstrings, so the dual theory with
branes is well defined. Since in a limit when the distance grows to
infinity it gives either type IIA or type IIB theory and since changing
the distance between two adjacent D-branes is a continuous operation,
there are strong conjectures that all the theories at finite distances
should also be consistent. In this model the type I, IIA, IIB theories
and the theories with the 16 branes are only special limits of more
general superstring theory (and further M-theory) and one should rather
treat them as different states of the same theory than as separate
theories.

It is important to note that similar arguments lead to a prediction that
a general superstring state does not need to be given by a set of
exactly @xmath parallel D-branes of the same dimension. For example one
can move to infinity and neglect only some branes but not all of them
and get a state with @xmath branes. It is also possible to rotate a
brane and then encounter branes intersecting at some angles (even
orthogonally in the extreme case). Consider then two orthogonal D @xmath
-branes. Applying T-duality to the configuration in a direction tangent
to only one of them one obtains a state with D @xmath -brane
perpendicular to D @xmath -brane. In a similar way many other states
allowing various number of D-branes of various dimensions intersecting
at various angles can be constructed.

There is no evidence that all possible states of the string theory have
to be built upon a flat space or a space with branes only. Probably
other backgrounds also can exists. Unfortunately methods of construction
of quantum interacting string theories in a nontrivial background are
not yet developed. So, the only possible opportunity to attain a
knowledge of the ”not flat” states is to study the branes.

In the section 3.2 it was shown that a theory with antisymmetric tensor
fields admits an existence of branes – extended charged objects. It was
proved that D-branes carry in string theory Ramond-Ramond charges [ 65 ]
, so they are spun by fields from the Ramond-Ramond sector. In the R-R
sector of type IIA theory there are antisymmetric tensors @xmath ,
@xmath and their duals @xmath and @xmath . Then the potentials of the
fields have ranks @xmath and spun D @xmath -branes of @xmath
respectively. In the same way @xmath branes can be related to
antisymmetric fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of
type IIB theory. But there are also D @xmath and D @xmath -branes which
cannot be directly connected with any massless field of the type IIA or
the type IIB theory.

The D @xmath -brane has to be related to the antisymmetric field
strength of rank @xmath . Such a field has no propagating degrees of
freedom in ten dimensions, so including such a field is not obvious from
the field theory point of view. But besides the usual @xmath
supergravity identified as a low energy limit of the type IIA theory
there is also its extension - the massive supergravity ( 28 ), which
contains the field @xmath . On the ground of type IIA superstrings, the
existence of D @xmath brane can be interpreted as a cosmological
constant of arbitrary value [ 65 ] .

By analogy to other branes one could expect the D @xmath -brane in type
IIB superstrings. The appropriate coupling of the brane to the
background fields is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a number of branes. But the variation of ( 103 ) in the
action with respect to @xmath leads to @xmath . Fortunately in type I
superstring with @xmath gauge symmetry group there are additional terms
which modify ( 103 ) replacing @xmath by @xmath [ 85 ] . So we can
interpret the type I theory with its open strings having free ends as a
theory defined on 16 coincident pairs of D @xmath -branes. All the other
D-branes can be then derived from the model by T-duality.

#### 3.3.3 BPS and non-BPS, stable and unstable D-brane configurations.

Remembering that five consistent superstring states defined in flat
space are supersymmetric and hence stable, it is very interesting to
study analogous properties of states with branes.

The type IIA D @xmath -branes and the type IIB D @xmath -branes always
break precisely half of supersymmetries. To see this take a state with
@xmath parallel branes which is T-dual to type I superstrings. The
duality requires that the state must have @xmath supersymmetry. But if a
distance between the adjacent branes is growing the state in the bulk
tends to type II state which obviously is @xmath supersymmetric. So,
half of possible supersymmetries are broken by the branes. Writing more
formally, if @xmath and @xmath are supercharges corresponding to left
and right moving modes of the theory, then on the D @xmath -brane:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

is conserved, where @xmath denotes @xmath spatial directions
perpendicular to the brane and:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the chiral operator in ten dimensions.

The states which preserve part of supersymmetry are usually called
BPS-states because they saturate so called Bogomolnyi-Prasad-Sommerfield
(BPS) inequality:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy (mass) density and @xmath – the charge
density. For a single p-brane it can be equivalently written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

The formula ( 104 ) shows that the number of broken supersymmetries in a
given state depends on geometrical properties of configuration of the
branes. In particular, an arbitrary number of parallel D @xmath -branes
with the same @xmath breaks the same number of supersymmetries as a
single D @xmath -brane. But if the branes are not parallel, they usually
break together more supersymmetries and for some configurations of
D-branes no supersymmetry can be preserved at all. However even if two
branes are situated at nonzero relative angle it is possible to find
such specific value of the angle for which the same amount of
supersymmetries is preserved as by the parallel configuration [ 86 ] .

The non-BPS states also have to be present in string theory. A proof for
it is simple. The world we know is nonsupersymmetric, so it has to be a
low energy limit of some non-BPS state. An important task consists in
finding such a nonsupersymmetric state and test its properties (first of
all to check if it is stable).

Probably the simplest example of a non-BPS-state is a system of two
parallel D-branes with opposite R-R charges or in other words a system
of a D-brane and an anti-D-brane. A key ingredient of the construction
is that by ( 104 ) each of the objects breaks the complementary half of
supersymmetry. In terms of ( 106 ) one can see that for the
brane-anti-brane system the total mass is twice the mass of a single
brane, but the effective charge vanishes. However such a
brane-anti-brane configuration is unstable due to tachyons living on the
brane worldvolumes [ 87 ] .

Another non-BPS-state can be produced from a system of coincident D
@xmath -brane and anti-D @xmath -brane in type IIA theory with the
projection operator @xmath acting on it [ 88 ] . The @xmath changes sign
of the left moving fermions, so it brings the type IIA superstrings in
the bulk to the type IIB. It also removes half of states on the
brane-anti-brane system, specifically this half which is related to
degrees of freedom describing possibility of disjoining the branes. So,
the object is effectively a single D @xmath -brane in the type IIB
theory. An analogous construction leads to type IIA D @xmath -branes.
Both the classes of branes are unstable and their masses are by @xmath
bigger than masses of corresponding type IIA or IIB BPS-branes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

Applying the @xmath to the non-BPS type IIB D @xmath -brane or type IIA
D @xmath -brane once again changes the bulk theory and projects out next
part of states living on the brane. The result of the operation is the
already known BPS IIA D @xmath -brane or IIB D @xmath -brane
respectively.

But we are still looking for the stable non-BPS states. They are
interesting for several reasons:

-   They belong to the string theory spectrum, so they are necessary to
    fully describe the theory.

-   By ( 106 ) they are objects whose masses are not bounded by demand
    of supersymmetry, but still possible to calculate for various values
    of the string perturbative coupling constant. Therefore they provide
    an opportunity to study string theory at finite coupling.

-   The worldvolume theory on the stable non-BPS brane should belong to
    nonsupersymmetric gauge theories which are much less understood than
    the supersymmetric ones.

The usual procedure leading to construction of a stable non-BPS brane is
to apply to one of IIA or IIB unstable non-BPS states an orbifolding or
orientifolding projection which removes the tachyonic states [ 88 ] . In
this way, acting with the worldsheet parity operator @xmath on the IIB D
@xmath -brane the type I stable D @xmath -brane can be found. This
example is very interesting because it can serve as an illustration to
the S-duality between type I and heterotic @xmath theories. At the first
massive level the heterotic theory possesses non-BPS states which are in
the spinor representation of the @xmath gauge group. But because these
states are the lightest in such representation they could not decay
without violating the quantum numbers conservation law. Hence, they are
stable. Now one can identify the states as the dual partners of the
stable type I D @xmath -branes.

The stable non-BPS brane states can be also studied in type IIA theory
compactified on orbifold @xmath , where @xmath is the spacetime parity
which changes signs of the four compactified coordinates. The model
contains for example D @xmath -branes. By T-dualisation it gives type
IIB theory on @xmath which is furthermore dual to the IIB on @xmath .
For more examples see also [ 88 , 89 , 90 ] .

#### 3.3.4 NS-branes.

There is one more antisymmetric field, common for massless limits of all
five basic superstring theories and not correlated to any of the D
@xmath -brane. This is the rank three tensor @xmath belonging to the
NS-NS sector as it was shown in ( 11 ), ( 19 ) and ( 27 ). The
antisymmetric potential of the field couples to the fundamental
superstring, so we can interpret the superstring as an electric NS
@xmath -brane.

Furthermore an existence of a magnetic NS @xmath -brane, can be
predicted. Such an object is a solitonic solution of classical equations
of motion. It will be shown later that there is also an additional
argument based on S-duality that the magnetic NS-branes should be an
intrinsic part of the general superstring theory.

First consider a fundamental string and a D @xmath -brane in type IIB
theory. The objects are similar but not identical. Both are @xmath
-branes and both have the same massless quantum excitations, but their
tensions are different and obey the relation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

The above relation shows that in the weakly coupled limit where @xmath
the fundamental string is much lighter than the D @xmath -brane but this
is no longer true when the coupling is getting stronger. For a strongly
coupled case with @xmath the situation is opposite. The symmetry of
inversing the coupling constant with simultaneous exchange of F-string
and D @xmath -brane is called weak-strong duality and is a simplest
example of S-duality. So, both states should be thought of in general as
different manifestations of the same object. Similarly it can be checked
that type IIB D @xmath -brane is S-selfdual.

Now let us take D @xmath -brane in type IIB theory. It is
electric/magnetic dual to the D @xmath brane, which is S-dual to the
fundamental string, which is in turn electric/magnetic dual to the NS
@xmath -brane. Therefore to preserve consistency, D @xmath -brane and NS
@xmath -brane should be related by S-duality:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that a fundamental open string has its ends attached to D @xmath
-branes. But if one object is joined with another, their duals have to
be tied up by the same relation. Therefore if we have F-string with its
endpoints on a D @xmath -brane, we should expect also a D @xmath -brane
glued to NS @xmath -brane. Analogously from a composition of a F-string
and a D @xmath -brane, a system where a D @xmath -brane ends on a D
@xmath -brane can be deduced. Applying to the system various T-dualities
one obtains a D @xmath -brane joined to D @xmath -brane where @xmath and
@xmath are arbitrary.

#### 3.3.5 M-branes.

Even more spectacular results follow when S-duality acts on objects in
the type IIA theory, especially on D @xmath -branes. Because the D
@xmath -brane sweeps out a @xmath dimensional worldvolume and its
tension is given by ( 102 ), the mass scale related to the D @xmath
-brane is of order:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore at strong coupling the lightest states are built of the D
@xmath -branes and total mass of a system consisting @xmath objects of
this type is equal to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the coupling @xmath tends to infinity, a split between states with
@xmath and @xmath branes tends to zero and in the limit the spectrum
becomes continuous. This picture looks identically as a model with the
eleventh dimension compactified on a circle of radius:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

when the radius grows up. This is the essence of the argument that the
M-theory S-dual to type IIA should be eleven dimensional.

The M-theory is largely unknown, but because we assume that its low
energy limit is described by @xmath supergravity, we can predict some
properties of it. In particular, because in the action ( 5 ) a third
rank antisymmetric potential is present, we expect an existence of so
called M @xmath and M @xmath -branes carrying respectively electric and
magnetic charges of @xmath . Furthermore we can describe the branes of
type IIA superstrings in terms of M-theory with compactified eleventh
dimension:

-   F-string is the M @xmath -brane wrapped on the eleventh dimension,

-   NS @xmath -brane is the M @xmath -brane transverse to the
    compactified dimension,

-   D @xmath -brane is a state carrying Kaluza-Klein electric charge,

-   D @xmath -brane is the M @xmath -brane transverse to the
    compactified dimension,

-   D @xmath -brane is the M @xmath -brane wrapped on the eleventh
    dimension,

-   D @xmath -brane is a Kaluza-Klein magnetic monopole,

Summarizing these considerations one can conjecture that in the unified
theory there should be essentially only one type of electric brane and
one type of magnetic brane.

## 4 Branes in supergravity.

Most of supergravity theories have in its field content one or more
antisymmetric tensors. Therefore as observed in the previous section 3.2
, one should expect that among possible classical solutions there exist
also brane solutions. Such solutions can be found by at least two
equivalent methods. The first one consists in solving the system of
equations with an inhomogeneity given by a delta function (source term
in ( 63 )) coinciding with the location of a brane. The second method
consists in solving the homogenous equations of motion and imposing
boundary conditions appropriate to given brane configuration.
Integration constants (or their combinations) describing the solution
should be identified with physical quantities like tension or charge.

The problem of finding and classifying all (or at least as many as
possible) classical solutions for a given model is of fundamental
importance not only because these solutions characterize the basic
features of the model but also because they serve as the building blocks
for constructing Hilbert space in quantum theory. The importance of the
issue in the case of higher dimensional supergravities is strongly
amplified since they are identified as the low energy limit of the
respective superstring states (which are largely unknown except in the
simplest cases). One can therefore expects that supergravity description
of the branes should be instructive also from the superstring theory
point of view. First because it gives information about the underlying
classical geometry and second because supergravity solutions should give
us insight into the superstring spectrum. Furthermore to solve the
supergravity equations of motion exact methods can be used while in
superstring theory only perturbative methods are known. Therefore the
results obtained in these two ways can be in some aspects complementary.

There are however several problems which have to be stressed.
Supergravity is only an effective low energy limit of the superstring
theory, so there is no guarantee that the exact solution derived with
constraints describing a given brane configuration is still a good
classical approximation of any exact solution in the quantum theory. It
has to be checked case by case whether the constraints imposed agree
with conditions leading to the low energy limit [ 91 , 92 ] . More
precisely, the supergravity action is the limit of the string theory
where @xmath . Because a tension of a p-brane ( 102 ) is of order @xmath
, the relation between a given string state and its low energy
(supergravity) description should be well defined when the total mass of
the respective brane configuration goes to infinity. In the case of BPS
branes, due to vanishing force theorem, one can prove that a solution
describing @xmath branes is a direct superposition of @xmath single
brane solutions with the total mass:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

which tends to infinity for @xmath . But this simple picture usually
does not work for non-BPS states and despite some partial results [ 93 ,
94 ] , the question of classical description of non-BPS states is still
open.

Another problem has a technical character. While there are mathematical
theorems stating that functions satisfying the equations of motion with
given boundary conditions always exist, they do not provide us these
solutions in explicit form. In other words, we are able to find only a
limited number of solutions, usually only if some additional assumptions
leading to simplification of the starting equations are made. Therefore
each essentially new solution is a significant achievement.

### 4.1 Single charge solution in the harmonic gauge.

Let us consider at the beginning one of the simplest models (in detail
discussed in [ 95 ] ): @xmath -dimensional theory describing graviton
@xmath , dilaton @xmath and a single antisymmetric potential @xmath with
its field strength @xmath . We examine only a consistent bosonic
truncation of the theory, i.e. with no terms with fermionic fields taken
into account. Equivalent formulation of the condition is an assumption
that vacuum values of the fermionic fields are identically equal to
zero. Additionally the contribution from the Chern-Simons term is
neglected.

The action is then:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the equations of motion:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (116)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (117)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

We search for a single charge solution, what means that the @xmath has
only one independent non-zero component which carries electric or
magnetic charge but not both (the case of dyonic brane is excluded). The
brane enforces a split of the whole space-time @xmath into a
multiplication of two mutually orthogonal subspaces ¹ ¹ 1 For simplicity
we identify a submanifold with its tangent bundle. @xmath , where @xmath
is a worldvolume of the brane and @xmath . We assume that the solution
is maximally space-time symmetric what is equivalent to breaking by the
brane of the Poincaré symmetry @xmath to subgroup @xmath where @xmath is
the dimension of the brane worldvolume.

Under these assumptions we can write the following ansätze for the
metric tensor and the dilaton:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (120)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath with @xmath are coordinates in directions parallel to the
brane, @xmath with @xmath – in transversal and:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the antisymmetric tensor we need to distinguish two separate cases.
The electric brane corresponds to @xmath with the only nonvanishing
component:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , but the solitonic brane:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a real constant.

Substituting ( 120 – 124 ) into ( 116 – 118 ) we can rewrite the
equations of motion as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (125)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (127)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (128)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the prime denotes a derivation with respect to @xmath and:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (130)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

A crucial observation is that the equations are drastically simplified
when additional assumptions about the solution are made:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (132)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

The ( 132 ) is sometimes called the harmonic gauge because it always
leads to solutions where the metric tensor is expressed via harmonic
functions [ 96 , 97 ] . In this case, the solution reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (135)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (136)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (137)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (138)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (139)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a positive integration constant – in the magnetic case:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

To arrive at a more symmetric relation between electric and magnetic
cases, it is convenient to use this identity as a definition of @xmath
for the electric brane. Note, that the constant @xmath can be
equivalently written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

so it is just harmonic average of @xmath and @xmath enlarged by @xmath .
Setting @xmath and @xmath in the above solution we obtain a solution for
a model without the dilaton. If we include a dilaton but still keep
@xmath it is necessary to replace ( 136 ) by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

In some special cases, the solution ( 135 - 143 ) describes:

-   M @xmath -brane [ 98 ] if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

-   M @xmath -brane [ 99 ] if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

-   NS @xmath -brane [ 100 ] if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

-   NS @xmath -brane [ 101 ] if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

#### 4.1.1 Geometry of the solution.

The positivity of @xmath of the previous subsection is a consequence of
an extra requirement that we want to avoid a singularity for @xmath .
Other restrictions imposed on integration constants to derive the above
solutions are: @xmath when @xmath , what means that at the infinity the
solution asymptotically goes to Minkowski spacetime. Near @xmath the
geometry is curved and corresponds to @xmath .

Consider the solution without the dilaton. More careful analysis shows
that the point @xmath is rather a horizon than a singularity and the
solution can be extended beyond it [ 102 , 103 , 104 ] . It is
convenient to introduce the so called interpolating coordinates where
@xmath is replaced by @xmath satisfying:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

So, the ”flat infinity” @xmath corresponds to @xmath and the horizon
@xmath to @xmath . The horizon is sometimes called a degenerate one,
because its properties are not the same as for the horizon in the
classical Schwarzschild solution. Particularly for the brane solution
the @xmath component of the metric tensor does not change its sign at
the horizon as it happens at the Schwarzschild horizon. In other words
light-cones cannot flip over inside the horizon.

The interpolating coordinates are well defined also for @xmath . If
@xmath is odd it can be checked that at @xmath the solution describes a
geometry near a naked singularity and the singularity can be therefore
identified with a localization of a fundamental brane. If @xmath is
even, the formula ( 144 ) is invariant under @xmath , so the area
described by negative @xmath is a mirror of the area where @xmath is
positive and there is no singularity at all. Of course the construction
is only one of many possible analytical continuations. However its
virtue is that in @xmath supergravity it allows to identify the electric
@xmath -brane with the singular solution as it should be for the
elementary object of the theory, while the magnetic non-singular @xmath
-brane solution can be interpreted as a soliton.

If we consider the solution with the dilaton the situation is a little
different. The field @xmath is scalar, so it is invariant under any
coordinate change and the points where it tends to infinity are
necessary singularities of the whole solution. By ( 136 ) it means that
the horizon @xmath coincides with the singularity.

The solution ( 135 - 143 ) can be extended to cases @xmath or @xmath
when the factor @xmath is replaced by @xmath or @xmath respectively. But
for such solutions it is not true that at @xmath they describe Minkowski
spacetime or (if @xmath ) that there is no singularity of the metric for
positive @xmath .

#### 4.1.2 Charges and tension.

Let us calculate a number of degrees of freedom of the solution ( 135 –
140 ). The ansätze were expressed in terms of four scalar function
@xmath which appear in the equations of motion ( 125 – 129 ) with their
second derivatives. Integrating the equations, one should expect 8
integration constants. But, since there are four function and five
equations, one of them can by used as a constraint reducing the number
of free parameters by one. The linearity conditions ( 132 – 133 ) cancel
next two and the requirement of @xmath at @xmath additional three. One
of the remaining two illustrates the fact that @xmath is determined up
to an additive constant. The last one is the parameter @xmath and being
the only essential parameter it has to determine both the energy and
charge of a solution.

We can calculate the electric and magnetic charges associated with the
solution from the identities ( 75 ) and ( 78 ). If we use the relation (
141 ) then we get:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a surface of unit @xmath -sphere.

Next, thanks to the ADM mass formula which reads [ 105 , 106 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

or equivalently [ 95 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the indices @xmath run over all @xmath spatial directions, we find
the tension (or the energy density) of the solution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

Another way leading to the same result is to find the stress-energy
density pseudotensor:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are contribution to the total stress-energy
density coming from the antisymmetric potential and the dilaton
respectively. From ( 116 ) we see, that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (151)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

And the energy density corresponding to the @xmath component of @xmath ,
is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -- -------

The energy of the intersecting branes system is then:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

and it is precisely equal to ( 149 ) multiplied by the brane
worldvolume.

In @xmath supergravity the electric brane solution is characterized by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and the magnetic one by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . So, for both @xmath . At @xmath NS-branes have @xmath , @xmath
or @xmath , @xmath and @xmath what gives @xmath again. Also, the
analogous solutions related to D-branes have the same value of @xmath .
Therefore all of them saturate the BPS bound ( 106 ) and are
supersymmetric. Also in lower dimensions most antisymmetric fields and
then the branes corresponding to them are described by @xmath so the
solutions in harmonic gauge preserve half of the original
supersymmetries. This general rule is a consequence of a fact that a
value of the @xmath is preserved under Kaluza-Klein dimensional
reduction [ 107 ] and all supergravity theories in lower dimensions can
be derived with this procedure from @xmath supergravity or type @xmath ,
@xmath supergravity. However other values of @xmath are also possible.
It can happen when the antisymmetric tensor in the considered
supergravity theory is a linear combination of several fields of the
same rank obtained by the dimensional reduction procedure [ 108 ] . Such
solution observed from the higher dimensional point of view describes
rather several coinciding branes.

#### 4.1.3 Supersymmetry.

The supersymmetry preserving condition is in general given by the
requirement that for all fermionic fields @xmath in the theory the
vacuum value of its supersymmetric transformation @xmath is vanishing.
We take as an example an electric 2-brane in @xmath supergravity.
Because the theory possesses only one fermionic field @xmath , the
supersymmetry preserving condition is just:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given by ( 8 ). The elementary brane splits the @xmath
-dimensional spacetime into @xmath , hence @xmath -dimensional Dirac
matrices @xmath have to decompose as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (156)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (157)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are Dirac matrices in @xmath dimensions, @xmath — Dirac
matrices in @xmath dimensions and @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional
chiral operator. It is convenient to introduce:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -- -------

so the following identities hold:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (160)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (161)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Substituting ( 120 ) and ( 123 ) into ( 155 ) we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (162)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is a constant parameter. So, we see, that the condition ( 155
) is satisfied only if simultaneously:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (165)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (166)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (167)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The first of these conditions is equivalent to ( 132 ) and the second is
a consequence of ( 132 ) and ( 133 ). This shows explicitly that
harmonic gauge is a necessary condition for preserving supersymmetry.
The third condition states that the preserved supersymmetry is rigid and
the fourth that the spinorial parameters corresponding to the preserved
part of the supersymmetry are chiral in the @xmath dimensions
transversal to the brane. We see also that ( 168 ) is invariant under a
transformation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (169)
  -- -------- -- -------

describing a reversal of the electric charge and a reversal of the
parameter @xmath chirality, at once. In other words, the brane and
anti-brane preserve opposite chirality parts of supersymmetry.

For a magnetic @xmath -brane in the @xmath supergravity an equivalent
derivation to the previously described can be conducted giving analogous
conclusions. However, in this case instead of ( 162 – 163 ) one has:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (170)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -- -------

The decomposition of the Dirac matrices gives now:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (173)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (174)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (175)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath ( @xmath ) are the Dirac matrices defined on the
worldvolume of the brane with @xmath the six dimensional chiral operator
constructed of them and @xmath ( @xmath are the Dirac matrices on the
remaining five dimensions. So, for the operator @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 4.1.4 Multi center solution.

The crucial trick applied to find the solution ( 135 – 140 ) was to make
additional assumptions simplifying the equations of motion ( 116 – 118 )
which allowed to reduce it to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -- -------

But because the operator @xmath is linear it means that if any two
@xmath and @xmath obey ( 177 ) their sum @xmath is also a good solution
of the equation. Therefore in general one can replace ( 139 ) by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (178)
  -- -------- -- -------

A natural interpretation of this so-called multi-center solution is to
assume that it describes a set of @xmath parallel identically oriented
(i.e. characterized by the same sign of the R-R charge) branes, each
localized at @xmath . Physically, a possibility of such a solution
follows from a fact that in such configuration of branes attractive
forces carried by the graviton @xmath and the dilaton @xmath are
precisely cancelled by repulsive forces of identically oriented
antisymmetric fields. The whole brane configuration breaks the same
amount of supersymmetry as each of its components and the total charge
denisty and energy density is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 4.2 Nonsupersymmetric single-charge solutions.

The solution given in the previous section can be generalized if some of
the constraints imposed on the model are relaxed. One possibility is to
drop the harmonic gauge condition ( 132 ). A class of solutions obtained
in this way was initially discussed in [ 109 , 110 ] and a complete
solution was presented in [ 111 ] . We will discuss those cases in more
detail in chapter 5 . Let us only mention here that since harmonic gauge
is not imposed, the equations of motion cannot be reduced to ( 177 ) and
the solutions are not still governed by harmonic functions and are
nonsupersymmetric in general. In a connection with string theory they
can be used as the classical description of the brane-anti-brane system
[ 112 ] .

#### 4.2.1 Black branes.

Another possibility is to relax the demand of the @xmath symmetry on the
brane worldvolume. Branes of this type are called black branes [ 99 , 91
, 101 , 114 ] because of their similarity to the Schwarzschild black
hole ² ² 2 More precisely a black hole can be interpreted as a black
@xmath -brane. . The simplest case occurs when instead of the @xmath we
have @xmath symmetry. The appropriate ansatz for the metric tensor is
then:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (180)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the indices @xmath run through the @xmath spatial directions
parallel to the brane. In such a case the harmonic gauge condition ( 132
) has to be rewritten in the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (181)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is convenient to write the black brane solution in Schwarzschild
coordinates, where the Schwarzschild radial coordinate @xmath is related
to the original isotropic @xmath by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (182)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (183)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The spacetime interval takes then a form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (184)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and the scalar field:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -- -------

The solution depends on two nonnegative parameters @xmath and @xmath .
The first describes a localization of an event horizon and the second of
an inner horizon. Both the horizons are nongenerate, it means that
similarly as for the horizon in the Schwarzschild black hole solution
signs of the @xmath and @xmath components of the metric tensors are
reversed when one goes with the solution through the horizon. If @xmath
both the sing reversions cancel one with the other and one obtains the
degenerate horizon known for the supersymmetric brane solution discussed
in the paragraph 4.1.1 . The horizon at @xmath is nonsingular, but the
horizon at @xmath usually coincides with a singularity what is a
consequence of a fact that the dilaton depends on @xmath .

The two parameters @xmath and @xmath describe also the energy density
and the charge density of the black brane:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (186)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

So, we see that in general the solution does not saturate the BPS bound
and is not supersymmetric in spite of the fact that it is expressed in
terms of harmonic functions @xmath and @xmath . This explicitly
illustrates that the harmonic gauge leads to harmonic functions in the
solution but it is not sufficient to preserve supersymmetry. However in
a special situation when @xmath the solution becomes supersymmetric and
reproduces the isomorphic solution ( 135 – 140 ).

Finally it is also possible to find a brane solution without imposing
the harmonic gauge and Poincaré worldvolume symmetry. This kind of
generalized black branes was given in [ 115 ] and discussed in [ 112 ] .

### 4.3 Solutions with many branes.

The procedure of relaxing some constraints imposed on the equations of
motion gives a very rich collection of various solutions if we allow for
configurations describing many branes instead of the single brane. Such
configurations can be introduced to the model in two fundamental ways
(with possible combinations of the two).

The first is to consider a theory with several, say @xmath ,
antisymmetric tensors @xmath and assume that each of the fields still
supports only one brane. Because the ranks @xmath can take various
values, the branes have dimensions potentially completely uncorrelated
with one another. An action relevant for such model can be built
starting from the single brane action ( 115 ) by replacing the single
kinetic terms of antisymmetric fields by a sum:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the equations of motion instead of @xmath we obtain a sum @xmath
where each component describes the contribution from different @xmath
and thus different branes. The system of equations is also enlarged
because ( 117 ) now appears in @xmath copies, one for each @xmath .

In the second method we still have only one antisymmetric tensor but
allow it to be the source of several branes. In this case the branes are
of only two possible kinds: one electric and one magnetic. The action of
the model is the same as ( 115 ), all differences are encoded in the
form of the assumed solution. Of course a natural generalization is to
combine these two ways and study brane configurations related to systems
with many antisymmetric fields each describing many independent branes.
The situation where many branes are given by one antisymmetric field is
known in literature as composite branes.

The composite branes of a single antisymmetric tensor can be in some
cases equivalently described in terms of several single charged
antisymmetric fields. This possibility arises if the first component of
the @xmath ( 119 ) tensor has diagonal form or equivalently when the
stress–energy tensor @xmath ( 151 ) is diagonal. Then:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -- -------

This means that there are no direct interactions among independent
elements of the @xmath [ 116 ] .

In supergravity theories there can also exist different scalar fields so
the multi-scalar brane models should be also considered. But in
supergravities there are two kinds of scalar fields each having
different features. One type consists of dilaton fields which in
lagrangians appear as exponential factors multiplying the kinetic terms
of the antisymmetric fields. The other type consists of rank zero
antisymmetric potentials which can be responsible for the existence of
instantonic branes.

For a single brane it is always possible to choose Cartesian coordinate
system with @xmath directions parallel to the brane and @xmath
perpendicular to it and describe localization of the brane by
constraints @xmath where @xmath runs from @xmath to @xmath . This
possibility is very convenient because it allows to identify the brane
worldvolume with a single independent element of @xmath antisymmetric
potential. But for two or more branes the feature has in general no
simple extension. If we orient the Cartesian coordinate system to be in
an agreement with one brane nothing can a priory guarantee that the
other is either parallel or perpendicular to the directions of the
coordinate system. In other words the branes can be oriented at any
angle one to the other.

But it this work we restrict ourselves only to configurations of
orthogonally or paralelly oriented branes. Consider then two branes of
this kind: a @xmath -brane and a @xmath -brane. Such a configuration
induces a split of the spacetime directions into four segments: @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The @xmath contains directions parallel to
both of the branes. It is necessarily not trivial because the time
always belongs to it. The @xmath segment is characterized as tangent to
the first and perpendicular to the second brane. Analogously the @xmath
segment – parallel to the second but transverse to the first. Finally
the @xmath segment contains directions normal to both the branes. The
directions in the @xmath segment are usually called common tangent, in
the @xmath and @xmath – relative transverse and in the @xmath – overall
transverse. Further we can decompose the set of the coordinates @xmath
into four subsets:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------

A spacetime localization of the branes is completely determined when the
following constraints are imposed:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are constants. The splitting procedure can be extended to
arbitrary @xmath and always gives one common tangent segment, no more
then one overall transverse and maximally @xmath relative transverse
segments.

#### 4.3.1 Intersecting branes.

The two branes as described before intersect orthogonally ³ ³ 3 Of
course in general branes can intersect not only orthogonally but also at
arbitrary angles. See for example [ 86 , 117 , 118 ] when @xmath and the
intersection is a subspace given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -- -------

A description of branes intersections becomes more complicated when the
number of branes is bigger than two because intersections of any two
different pairs of branes may have no common point. However, in a
special situation there exists nonempty subspace common for all the
@xmath branes. It is naturally to name the case as commonly intersecting
branes however it is usually called just ”intersecting branes” [ 119 ]
what is shorter but less precise. The (commonly) intersecting brane
configurations are very special and have many features distinguishing
them from the others, what is a consequence of a fact that they have
relatively more spacetime symmetries. Let us discuss it in some detail.

Each @xmath -brane breaks the original @xmath symmetry of flat empty
spacetime to @xmath . But when we have two or more branes the symmetry
is usually only a local approximation, because in globally each brane
can break a different part of @xmath . Therefore a group of the commonly
preserved symmetry is much smaller and in the extreme case can be
reduced to a translation in time exclusively. But the situation is
different if the branes are commonly orthogonally intersecting because
then the preserved symmetry has always a form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a dimension of the intersection common for the all
@xmath branes and @xmath are dimensions of the other segments of the
spacetime distinguished by the branes.

For a solution corresponding to a brane configuration which is
characterized by ( 193 ) it is natural to assume that it depends on
variables @xmath , where @xmath is the radial coordinate in the @xmath
-th segment and where the origin of the coordinate system lies on the
common intersection. But when such ansätze are imposed the equations of
motion form a quite complicated system of partial differential equations
with second order derivatives with respect to the @xmath ’s. It is not
easy to solve that system in full generality. Additional restrictions
simplifying the equations are needed.

Usually it is assumed that the solution has to depend only on @xmath –
radial coordinate in the overall transverse space. This kind of
solutions are called delocalized, averaged or smeared branes, because
they do not determine at what points the branes are situated in the
relative transverse directions. One can wonder if the solution derived
under such assumption can have any physical meaning. It turns out that
there is one important application – if the relative transverse
dimensions are small in comparison to the common tangent and overall
transverse ones since then we can use the intersecting branes
configurations as a background for compactification models (with the
relative transverse dimensions compactified). We have to note that the
notion of intersection of delocalized branes has a rather imprecise
meaning – if they are not localized we cannot be sure that they really
intersect. But because such terminology is common, we will use it here
too.

Since a set of orthogonally intersecting branes enforces a split of the
spacetime into several orthogonal segments it is natural to assume that
an ansatz for the metric tensor should admit independent factors to
encode possibly different length scales for each of the segments. Call
@xmath the factors for the common tangent, the relative transverse and
the overall transverse directions respectively. This dramatically
increases the number of degrees of freedom of the solution and
complicates its derivation. Therefore one usually imposes some set of
linearity conditions as in the case of the single brane. One of them is
the generalized harmonic gauge:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

Applying it as an additional requirement on the solution has analogous
effects as for the single brane – it enforces the solution to be
constructed of harmonic functions only and is necessary but not
sufficient for preserving the supersymmetry. It is also possible to
impose more restrictive conditions:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (196)
  -- -------- -- -------

what means that all relative transverse dimensions are governed by the
same factor, or even:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -- -------

The multibrane systems are classified as BPS or non-BPS states where the
criterion is respectively saturation or non-saturation of the multibrane
version of the BPS inequality ( 106 ). But while the total energy is
just a sum of component energies:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (198)
  -- -------- -- -------

the charge is in general rather ”vector-like”:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (199)
  -- -------- -- -------

The BPS states fall into two categories: marginal and non-marginal [ 120
] . For the marginal (called also threshold) states the BPS bound is
degenerated and can be written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (200)
  -- -------- -- -------

Examples of intersecting branes solutions which satisfy ( 194 ) are
solutions constructed as orthogonal superposition of some number of the
single charge supersymmetric brane solutions ( 135 – 140 ) with the use
of so called harmonic function rule [ 119 , 121 , 122 ] . The rule for a
nondilatonic solution tells, that if:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (201)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath , and @xmath is a dimension of the @xmath -th brane
worldvolume, then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (202)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (203)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (204)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath (respectively @xmath ) is a set of such indices @xmath
which correspond to the branes for which the @xmath -th segment of the
metric contains directions tangent (transversal) to the brane
worldvolume.

Wider class of solutions can be obtained when the multibrane equations
of motion are solved directly. It is interesting that it is possible to
reduce the equations of the intersecting branes to a Toda-like system
which is an extension of the Liouville equation. A possibility of the
reduction was observed in [ 109 ] under assumption of ( 196 ), in
generalized harmonic gauge [ 123 , 124 ] and further it was proved in a
general case without any linearity condition assumed [ 125 ] . We will
analyze the last case with details in the next chapter. But of course
all the examples given already and later do not run short a set of
possible but still solvable generalizations of the brane problem. For
some others see [ 119 , 95 , 126 , 97 , 127 ] .

## 5 Branes without harmonic gauge.

In the chapter 4 a short introduction to the subject of branes in
supergravity was given. It was noted that in the case of single brane as
well as in the case of many intersecting branes a rich class of
nonsupersymmetric solution could be derived when the condition of the
harmonic gauge was dropped. Now we turn our attention to this kind of
solutions and to a method leading to them.

### 5.1 Commonly orthogonally intersecting non-composite delocalised
branes.

Consider a @xmath dimensional theory having after consistent bosonic
truncation a following action:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath         (205)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- -------

where @xmath are antisymmetric @xmath -forms, @xmath – scalar fields,
@xmath – constants, @xmath – a manifold of dimension @xmath and @xmath
coordinates on it. A bosonic sector of most of supergravity theories
like ( 5 ), ( 11 ), ( 27 ) is well described by the above action if
additional assumptions leading to cancellation of Chern-Simons term are
made.

The equations of motions derived from ( 205 ) are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (206)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (207)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (208)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (209)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are sums over all possible values of @xmath and
@xmath .

#### 5.1.1 The model.

We search for a solution which allows @xmath commonly orthogonally
intersecting electric or magnetic non-composite branes. Let @xmath be a
worldvolume of the @xmath -th brane. Then each @xmath is supported by a
potential of a different @xmath or @xmath . We define indices @xmath
running through the set of all non-empty subsets of @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath as a subspace spun by vectors simultaneously parallel to all
@xmath and transversal to all @xmath . Next, let @xmath be a cartesian
product of common tangent and all relative transverse directions, @xmath
– the overall transverse space and @xmath – a subspace of @xmath
transverse to @xmath . Volumes of the subspaces @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
will be denoted respectively by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If all
@xmath intersect at the point @xmath (the center of the coordinate
system) we can write:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (210)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (211)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (212)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (213)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Introduce numbers describing dimensions of the subspaces:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (214)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (215)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (216)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For particular brane configurations some of @xmath can be
zero-dimensional. For example, if @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath .
We will use also the mapping @xmath defined by ( 82 ).

All the branes are assumed to propagate in time, so the instantonic
solution is a priori disallowed. Note that because the branes are
delocalized in the relative transverse directions, the solution would be
trivial giving all fields constant when @xmath . So we not consider the
case. Therefore, the dimensions ( 214 – 217 ) have to obey:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (218)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (219)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (220)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

#### 5.1.2 Ansätze.

Let us now set ansätze consistent with all assumed conditions. We call
by @xmath the coordinates on @xmath , by @xmath – the coordinates on
@xmath , by @xmath – on @xmath , by @xmath – on @xmath and we use sum
convention for all indices enumerating coordinates but not for indices
like @xmath or @xmath . Because we search for a delocalized solution all
the fields should depend nontrivially only on @xmath – a radial
coordinate in the overall transverse space. Derivatives with respect to
the @xmath are denoted by primes @xmath .

The simplest is an ansatz for the scalar fields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (221)
  -- -------- -- -------

More complicated is a case of the metric tensor. It has to be divided
into @xmath segments related to @xmath and those @xmath which are at
least one-dimensional ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (222)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the space interval of the @xmath dimensional unit sphere
and @xmath if @xmath . It has to be explained that in the formula ( 222
) and any formulae below by @xmath we denote a sum over those @xmath for
which @xmath are at least one-dimensional and which satisfy the
restriction @xmath .

For the antisymmetric tensor fields @xmath , two cases should be
distinguished. If the @xmath -th brane is electric, the only nonzero
components of @xmath have the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (223)
  -- -------- -- -------

when for the @xmath -th brane being magnetic only:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (224)
  -- -------- -- -------

do not vanish. In the above @xmath is an arbitrary nonzero real constant
and @xmath takes discrete values @xmath or @xmath . In the both cases
the relative opposite signs illustrate possibility of an exchanging in
the model the given brane with its anti-brane.

Now it is possible to derive explicit forms of the Ricci tensor and
other objects appearing in the equations of motion. But first we need to
find a vielbein, which is defined as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (225)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (226)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the bared indices enumerate the local Lorentz coordinates which
are lifted by @xmath . So in our case from ( 222 ) we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (227)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (228)
  -- -------- -- -------

With the vielbein we can calculate a spin connection @xmath from:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (229)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (230)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We find that the only nonzero components of the field @xmath are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (231)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (232)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

so the spin connection is described as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (233)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (234)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and has all other elements vanishing.

The Riemann tensor can be derived from the spin connection because it
obeys:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (235)
  -- -------- -- -------

so in our case its nonzero components are given as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (236)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (237)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (238)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The Ricci tensor can be calculated from:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (240)
  -- -------- -- -------

and all its elements are zero except:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (241)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

And finally the Ricci scalar:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (243)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Let us rewrite the equations of motion ( 206 – 208 ) in terms of the
functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and (only for the elementary branes)
@xmath introduced by ( 221 – 224 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (244)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (245)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (246)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (247)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (248)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (249)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (250)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

#### 5.1.3 Harmonic gauge.

Assuming that @xmath define a function:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (251)
  -- -------- -- -------

Condition @xmath is equivalent to the generalized harmonic gauge ( 194
). Imposing it enormously simplifies the equations ( 244 – 248 ) and
leads to a solution expressed in terms of harmonic functions on @xmath [
97 , 96 ] . In case of supergravity theories the condition is necessary
but not sufficient for preserving supersymmetry. Here we do not make any
a priori assumption on @xmath , so the results presented below remain
valid in more general classes of nonsupersymmetric solutions and
solutions not governed by harmonic functions.

Summing ( 244 – 245 ) one can see that @xmath has to satisfy the
following equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (252)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be solved and gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (253)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants taking real as well as infinite
values and @xmath is a function of @xmath . Of course it is only one of
many possible variants how the @xmath can be parameterized. But with
this one we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (254)
  -- -------- -- -------

So points @xmath and @xmath can be identified in the parameter space and
then the space is compact in @xmath direction. Harmonic gauge is
restored when @xmath and @xmath .

See, that because of arbitrariness of @xmath the parameterization used
in ( 253 ) is not unique but rather constitutes a class of
parameterizations labelled by @xmath . Each choice of @xmath gives
different parameterization, but each is singular at @xmath . In the
discussion below we choose @xmath , but we should remember that it can
be generalized to arbitrary @xmath .

It is very convenient to introduce instead of @xmath new parameters:
@xmath and @xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (255)
  -- -------- -- -------

so if @xmath or @xmath both possible signs of @xmath describe the same
point in the parameter space. Rewriting @xmath with these parameters one
obtains:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (256)
  -- -------- -- -------

For @xmath (harmonic gauge) it simplifies to @xmath and for @xmath to
@xmath .

#### 5.1.4 @xmath coordinate.

Looking at the equations of motion ( 244 – 248 ) one can see that the
equations with second derivative of @xmath or @xmath have a form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (257)
  -- -------- -- -------

The left hand side is just @xmath , so ( 257 ) is curved space harmonic
equation where a contribution from the curvature is given by @xmath .
Under a redefinition of variable as @xmath ( 257 ) transforms to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (258)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the ”dots” describe derivatives with respect to @xmath . And this
convinces that it would be very convenient to work with such variable
@xmath for which:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (259)
  -- -------- -- -------

A function which satisfies the above equation is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (260)
  -- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (261)
  -- -------- -- -------

Of course this is not the most general solution of ( 259 ) which can be
generated from the function @xmath given in( 260 ) as @xmath where the
integration constants @xmath and @xmath can be independently set in two
areas separated by points where @xmath is singular. One of the areas is
@xmath , @xmath and the second is the remaining part of the spacetime.

The function @xmath obeys following conditions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (262)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (263)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

So in harmonic gauge ( @xmath ) and only then @xmath is a flat space
harmonic function of @xmath . And the parameter @xmath (or @xmath
equivalently) can be then treated as a measure how distant is a given
case from the harmonic one.

The function @xmath can be understood as a space coordinate instead of
@xmath and the coordinate change is singular only at @xmath , @xmath .
Further, in the section 5.3 we will see, that the replacing of @xmath
with @xmath is not only a simple coordinate change, because the solution
formulated with use of @xmath is well defined also for such values of
@xmath which cannot be related to any @xmath by ( 260 ). In other words,
@xmath covers wider area of spacetime than @xmath .

The space-time interval expressed in terms of @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (264)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (265)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (266)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the coordinate change factor @xmath because of ( 260 ) has to be
equal to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (267)
  -- -------- -- -------

The identity ( 266 ) allows us to write @xmath explicitly in terms of
the variable @xmath or @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (268)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (269)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

From the definition of function @xmath ( 251 ) we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (270)
  -- -------- -- -------

and:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (271)
  -- -------- -- -------

Interesting, that if one substitutes ( 265 ) into ( 245 ) one then
obtains:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (272)
  -- -------- -- -------

The left hand side of the equation is similar to ( 257 ) but in addition
the @xmath component appears. The component is the origin for the @xmath
factor in ( 271 ).

Thanks to ( 270 , 251 ) and the already known function @xmath we are
able to reduce a number of unknown functions in the equations of motion
i.e. to replace @xmath (or @xmath ) by certain combination of @xmath ’s
and to drop the equation ( 245 ) which does not contain any independent
piece of information. The remaining equations ( 244 – 248 ) can be
translated to a system depending on the @xmath variable:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (273)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (274)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (275)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (276)
  -- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (277)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (278)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The system ( 273 – 278 ) together with ( 269 ) and ( 271 ) carries
complete information originally contained in ( 244 – 248 , 250 ). Since
the @xmath -variable system( 244 – 248 , 250 ) drastically simplifies
when harmonic gauge is imposed, it is interesting what happens to ( 273
– 278 , 271 , 269 ) in an analogous situation. If one treats the @xmath
as a fundamental coordinate then all dependence of the solution on the
parameter @xmath (so also all differences between the harmonic and a
general cases) enters only in two places: in the @xmath function ( 269 )
which influences a form of the @xmath function ( 271 ) and in the @xmath
constant ( 278 ) appearing in ( 276 ). However ( 276 ) is not a dynamic
equation but rather a constraint decreasing by one a number of
integration constants.

#### 5.1.5 The @xmath matrix and reduction to Toda-like system.

Define:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (279)
  -- -------- -- -------

With these functions one can find that ( 275 ) leads to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (280)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are nonzero real integration constants. Simultaneously (
277 ) for magnetic branes gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (281)
  -- -------- -- -------

so, after the identification:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (282)
  -- -------- -- -------

the relation ( 280 ) is valid for electric as well as for magnetic
branes.

It can be checked from ( 273 – 274 ) that @xmath have to satisfy the
following system of equations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (283)
  -- -------- -- -------

what is equivalent to a Toda-like system. A proof of the equivalence,
together with a short introduction to a theory of Toda systems and
methods of solving such kind of differential equations will be given in
the section 5.2 .

Elements of @xmath matrix are:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (284)
  -- -------- -- -------

where indices @xmath run through all values allowed for @xmath and
additionally @xmath , and by @xmath is understood @xmath (but not @xmath
). By the definition ( 284 ) the matrix @xmath is symmetric. Its
diagonal elements obey:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (285)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the non-diagonal ones are bounded by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (286)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath then it is possible to express all functions @xmath , @xmath (
264 ), @xmath ( 221 ), @xmath ( 223 ) in terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               (287)
     @xmath   @xmath               (288)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (289)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (290)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have to satisfy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (291)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (292)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (293)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It can be checked that if all @xmath vanish, the numbers @xmath and
@xmath are in an excellent agreement with the harmonic function rule
presented in ( 202 – 204 ). Values of real constants @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and positive constants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are restricted
by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (294)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (295)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (296)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (297)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

So the problem of finding brane solution in gravity coupled to an
arbitrary number of antisymmetric tensors and scalar fields without
assumption of harmonic gauge can be reduced to solving the Toda-like
system ( 283 ) with a constraint derived from ( 276 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (298)
  -- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (299)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note, that if the model describes a single brane without dilaton the
solution is constructed only of @xmath and one @xmath , the constraints
( 294 ) and ( 296 ) enforce the constants @xmath and @xmath to vanish.
Consequently the identity @xmath holds.

#### 5.1.6 Solution for @xmath.

Defining the function @xmath ( 251 ) we imposed to the discussed model
additional constraint that @xmath what means that the overall transverse
space cannot be two dimensional. Now let us turn our attention to the
opposite case, i.e. we assume now that @xmath . In such situation the
equations of motion expressed in terms of the scalar functions @xmath (
244 – 248 ) simplify to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (300)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (301)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (302)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (303)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (304)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (305)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (306)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Furthermore the definition of the @xmath function ( 251 ) gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (307)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the function has to satisfy:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (308)
  -- -------- -- -------

Solving the above equation one immediately obtains:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (309)
  -- -------- -- -------

We see that the factor @xmath appearing in ( 253 ) is replaced here by
@xmath . The parameter @xmath takes not only real but also infinite
values and the limits of @xmath for @xmath are equal:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (310)
  -- -------- -- -------

so we can identify these points in the space of parameters analogously
as it was done for the @xmath case. We can also introduce the parameter
@xmath , which in this situation instead of ( 255 ) has to obey:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (311)
  -- -------- -- -------

what after setting @xmath allows us to rewrite ( 309 ) as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (312)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that in distinction to ( 255 ) it is not necessary to introduce
discrete parameter @xmath because for positive @xmath the logarithm
@xmath takes positive as well as negative values.

The equation for @xmath is now:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (313)
  -- -------- -- -------

so it is satisfied in general by @xmath for arbitrary real constants
@xmath and @xmath which again can be independently chosen for areas
where @xmath and @xmath respectively. Take then:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (314)
  -- -------- -- -------

what preserves a possibility of the identification @xmath ( @xmath )
with @xmath ( @xmath ) because gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (315)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath it is possible to make a coordinate change which replaces
@xmath with @xmath . But in distinction to the situation of @xmath , in
this case @xmath usually covers wider area of spacetime then @xmath .
More precisely for @xmath , when @xmath ranges from @xmath to @xmath ,
the coordinate @xmath runs over all real values and makes it one again
when @xmath . So the change of the coordinates is well defined only if
we restrict the discussion to one of the areas. But if @xmath or @xmath
then from ( 315 ) we have @xmath what works properly for all positive
@xmath .

The spacetime interval in the coordinates @xmath is the same as ( 264 )
and @xmath and @xmath are still defined by ( 266 ) and ( 265 )
respectively, so:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (316)
  -- -------- -- -------

But for @xmath we are not able to write an analog of ( 271 ) because
this function does not contribute to @xmath if @xmath . The equations of
motion in terms of @xmath are then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (317)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (318)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (319)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (320)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (321)
  -- -------- -- -------

The system can be solved analogously as in the case of @xmath by
introducing the functions @xmath ( 279 ). But because for @xmath the
Toda-like system ( 283 ) does not carry information necessary to
determine a form of the @xmath we have to solve additionally ( 319 ). So
as a result of solving the Toda-like system, if @xmath we obtain for the
functions @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               (322)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (323)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath have to satisfy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (324)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (325)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and values of real constants @xmath , @xmath and positive constants
@xmath , @xmath are restricted by:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (326)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (327)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (328)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (329)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

But for the remaining functions @xmath and @xmath we have to solve the
following equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (330)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (331)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and to remove one integration constant by use of the constraint ( 321 ).

Note also that combining the system ( 283 ) with the equation ( 319 ) we
again obtain a Toda-like system:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (332)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the indices @xmath run through @xmath as @xmath but additionally
can take value @xmath and:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (333)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (334)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (335)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (336)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (337)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (338)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

#### 5.1.7 Charges and masses

Each of the branes in the system under consideration carry some
Ramond-Ramond charge. For the magnetic branes the charge is defined by (
78 ) what immediately gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (339)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the elementary branes we have to count the electric charge from ( 75
) and obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (340)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the quantity @xmath is defined by a formula which seems to be very
complicated:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (341)
  -- -------- -- -------

but after more detailed analysis proves to be a constant number:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (342)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can also calculate energy of the intersecting branes system. Let us
first see that for the gravitational tensors like Ricci tensor, Ricci
scalar and Einstein tensor:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (343)
  -- -------- -- -------

thanks to the equations of motion ( 244 – 248 ) is it possible to write
them in terms of the functions @xmath ( 250 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (344)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (345)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (346)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (347)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (348)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

So, the component with double timelike indices of the stress-energy
tensor is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (349)
  -- -------- -- -------

and an integral of it:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (350)
              @xmath   @xmath      (351)
              @xmath   @xmath      (352)
              @xmath   @xmath      (353)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The above integration should be taken over the whole space to cover the
whole energy density which can contribute to the total energy. However
it will be shown later (see the paragraph 5.4.2 ) that ”the whole space”
seen by a given observer is not necessary the same as the area described
by @xmath or @xmath and to determine the area properly some additional
analysis is needed.

### 5.2 Toda and Toda-like systems.

The Toda system is a system of second order differential equations which
can be written in a form [ 128 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (354)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Cartan matrix i.e. a matrix satisfying:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (355)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (356)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (357)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

After the substitution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (358)
  -- -------- -- -------

the Toda system is reformulated as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (359)
  -- -------- -- -------

The above equations can be derived from a following lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (360)
  -- -------- -- -------

This type of systems was studied in the context of gauge theories on
lattices [ 129 , 130 ] , where the matrix @xmath was understood as a
Cartan matrix of a simple Lie algebra corresponding to a given compact
Lie group describing the considered gauge symmetry. There are four
infinite series of Lie algebras @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and
five exceptional examples @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Let us review them and their Cartan matrices.

-   @xmath or @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (361)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath or @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (362)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath or @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (363)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath or @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (364)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (365)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (366)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (367)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (368)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath :

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (369)
      -- -------- -- -------

Turning back to the problem of intersecting branes we see that after the
substitution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (370)
  -- -------- -- -------

into ( 283 ) the equations take the form of ( 354 ) where:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (371)
  -- -------- -- -------

But for arbitrary @xmath the matrix @xmath does not to have to obey the
Cartan matrix conditions ( 355 ) – ( 357 ). Such generalizations of the
Toda systems are called Toda-like systems.

The fact that the models of the intersecting branes in full generality
reduce to Toda-like but not exactly Toda systems causes a problem since
methods of integration are developed mainly for the latter ones.
Fortunately quite large set of reasonable brane configurations can be
described in terms of the standard Toda systems.

It is important to note that while any given matrix @xmath is
necessarily symmetric the corresponding matrix @xmath defined by the
identity ( 371 ) may be not symmetric. So those of the above algebras
which have not symmetric Cartan matrices can also be relevant for some
configurations of the intersecting branes. Another very useful fact
which significantly enlarges set of known solvable cases is that if any
matrix @xmath can be written in a block diagonal form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (372)
  -- -------- -- -------

then the problem of solving the corresponding Toda system decomposes
into two separate problems related with @xmath and @xmath respectively.
On a ground of Lie algebras it means that from solutions of the simple
Lie algebras one can immediately construct solutions with semisimple
algebras being a sum of the simple ones. In particular the case of
diagonal matrix @xmath is related to semi-simple @xmath algebra and can
be treated as @xmath independent equations. Each of the equations is the
Liouville equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (373)
  -- -------- -- -------

which can be solved:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (374)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a real constant.

A very elegant method leading to a solution of the Toda system related
to @xmath algebra was given in [ 131 ] and furthermore extended to
@xmath and @xmath and applied to the problem of intersecting branes
under assumption of the harmonic gauge [ 124 ] . But of course the
method works also in a general situation without the harmonic gauge.

The solution for @xmath is then:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (375)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Vandermonde determinant defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (376)
  -- -------- -- -------

the complex constants @xmath , @xmath satisfy:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (377)
  -- -------- -- -------

and additionally the constraint ( 298 ).

### 5.3 Diagonal @xmath solution.

Consider the case when matrix @xmath is diagonal and nonsingular. Then
with use of ( 374 ) the equation ( 283 ) gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (378)
  -- -------- -- -------

where real phases @xmath are independent but ( 298 ) gives a restriction
on @xmath which for @xmath reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (379)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting ( 378 ) into ( 287 – 289 ) and solving ( 290 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (380)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are integration constants. Therefore in this case we have
an explicit form of the solution.

It is not necessary to apply the absolute value to the @xmath in ( 378
). However if any @xmath is a solution of ( 283 ) then @xmath and more
general any @xmath such that @xmath is also a good solution of the
system of equations everywhere except points where @xmath is
discontinuous. But because the equation ( 283 ) itself is not well
defined for @xmath , what means @xmath there is no obstacle to assume
that @xmath can change sign there. It gives a possibility to write the
functions @xmath as everywhere nonnegative which is in an agreement with
the definition ( 279 ).

### 5.4 Single component solution.

Let us restrict our attention to the simplest case – the single
component solution which was already discussed in the section 4.1 with
the harmonic gauge condition imposed. Let us now consider the case when
the condition is dropped.

#### 5.4.1 Solution without dilaton for @xmath – general remarks.

If @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the above solution can be written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (381)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (382)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath given by ( 380 ), @xmath by ( 378 ) and @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (383)
  -- -------- -- -------

The parameter @xmath has no physical meaning because it describes only
freedom of shift of the antisymmetric potential: @xmath and values of
@xmath and @xmath can be fixed if we assume that at a given point @xmath
the functions @xmath and @xmath (or B) take certain values.

For example if with @xmath the spacetime tends to flat one, it is
natural to set @xmath what equivalently means:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (384)
  -- -------- -- -------

In such a situation calculating the energy density of the brane from a
formula derived form ( 353 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (385)
  -- -------- -- -------

we should take a boundary of the integration exactly at @xmath what
gives [ 112 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (386)
  -- -------- -- -------

When the solution is supersymmetric ( @xmath and consequently @xmath )
it reproduces properly the BPS equality between mass and charge
densities ( 154 ). And if @xmath and @xmath it gives @xmath as it should
for nonsupersymmetric solutions. There is an exception for the solution
with @xmath (which evidently is not supersymmetric because when applied
to the electric @xmath -brane solution in @xmath it does not satisfy (
165 )) – we have then @xmath . This leads to a contradiction with the
rule that the BPS states are supersymmetric. Moreover, for @xmath we get
even @xmath .

This is only an apparent paradox, because we should remember that the
formula ( 386 ) is well defined only when certain conditions are
satisfied. The conditions which assure that performing the integration
of ( 385 ) we keep all energy inside the integrated area but do not
encounter any naked singularity. Additionally it may happen that it is
impossible to impose the boundary conditions ( 384 ). So the validity of
the formula ( 386 ) can be limited to only some subspace of the whole
parameter space. To describe the subspace we need to examine more
precisely some aspects of a geometry of various variants of the solution
and find where there are singularities, horizons and boundary points at
infinity.

Invariants of the metric.

Let us calculate invariants constructed by coefficients of the metric
tensor:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (387)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (388)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (389)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and check where the quantities take infinite or zero values. Their poles
indicate the points which can be ”suspected” to be singularities and the
zeros indicate the points where the geometry tends to be flat. Except
the situation when @xmath and the Ricci scalar identically vanishes all
the quantities are proportional to a positive power of the function
@xmath , so they all have zeros and poles at the same points. For @xmath
we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (390)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore to determine poles and zeros it is enough to study properties
of the functions @xmath and @xmath . It is interesting that if @xmath
then all the invariants are constant – this case should be considered
separately and we assume that @xmath from now on. We know that the zeros
of @xmath are given by @xmath , so the points are ”suspected” to
describe localization of the singularities. But to verify real nature of
the points it is very helpful to examine behavior of test particles
freely falling onto them.

The proper and the coordinate time.

Because of the spherical symmetry of the model it is enough to look at a
test particle moving only in the radial direction i.e. consider only
time @xmath and radial coordinate @xmath . The equation for geodesic in
coordinates @xmath reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (391)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath describes an affine parameter and the Christoffel symbols
are:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (392)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore equations for the trajectory of the test particle read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (393)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (394)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The first equation leads to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (395)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath has interpretation of test particle energy and then the
second equation can be rewritten as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (396)
  -- -------- -- -------

Solving this equation one finally obtains:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (397)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is another integration constant. For radially propagating
test particle one has:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (398)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since any massive particle must have @xmath it is convenient to set in
that case @xmath , what defines units of the proper time. For photons
and other massless particles we must set @xmath .

We should calculate the coordinate time @xmath and proper time (or
affine parameter if the particle is massless) @xmath that passes when
the test particle falls from an arbitrary point @xmath to the examined
one @xmath . For our needs it is enough to check if the values are
finite or infinite for @xmath arbitrarily close to @xmath . These times,
for the massive test particle, are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (399)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (400)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and for the massless test particle:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (401)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (402)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For the discussed model the last integrals can be rewritten as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (403)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (404)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

so everything depends on the functions @xmath and @xmath .

#### 5.4.2 Solution without dilaton for @xmath – variants review.

We decompose the general solution into several variants with respect to
values taken by parameters @xmath and @xmath .

We distinguish:

-   Variant I where @xmath , what immediately gives @xmath ,

-   Variant II where @xmath and @xmath , so @xmath ,

-   Variant III where @xmath , so @xmath ,

-   Variant IV where @xmath and @xmath , so @xmath

and

-   Variant A when @xmath does not belong to an area described by
    positive @xmath ,

-   Variant B when @xmath is on an edge of the area with positive @xmath
    ,

-   Variant C when @xmath belongs to the area of positive @xmath .

Variant IA where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (405)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (406)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This gives exactly the supersymmetric single brane solution with a naked
singularity hidden behind a horizon which was discussed in the section
4.1 . The point @xmath (or equivalently @xmath ) describes boundary of
the spacetime at infinity where the geometry tends to the flat one.
Because @xmath and @xmath are finite there it is possible to normalize
them to one with the conditions ( 384 ) and get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (407)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (408)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The area where @xmath is related to positive values of the isotropic
radial coordinate @xmath and at @xmath (or @xmath ) where metric tensor
coefficients @xmath and @xmath become singular but the invariants ( 387
– 389 ) are finite the horizon is located. The solution can be extended
beyond the horizon by an identification of @xmath with @xmath and
continued to @xmath where the naked singularity is settled. The
singularity means a point which is reachable with finite @xmath and
where the invariants of the metric grows to infinity. An observer
located at positive @xmath can see only a region of the spacetime
described by @xmath (or equivalently @xmath ), because any piece of
information sent to the observer from other points needs to travel
infinite amount of coordinate time. So counting the total energy of the
brane we have to integrate ( 385 ) over the area and get:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (409)
  -- -------- -- -------

Variant IB where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , so:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (410)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (411)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Then @xmath is everywhere constant, non zero and finite what means that
there is no singularity nor flat places at all. The point @xmath is
characterized by @xmath , so we can interpret it as the boundary at
infinity. But a geometry at the infinity is not flat and the metric
tensor coefficients are singular so one should expect an external energy
source attached at the point sustaining the nonzero curvature – the
brane. Note also that a travel to the brane takes a finite amount of
coordinate time @xmath , so an observer located at positive @xmath can
”feel” a presence of the object. Integrating ( 385 ) from @xmath where a
horizon is localised to @xmath and calculating in this way the total
energy of the brane one gets an infinite value. It suggests that to
evaluate the energy properly one should take into account also an
external contribution originating from the point @xmath . The solution
can be continued beyond the horizon at @xmath when it is identified with
@xmath . At @xmath reached now from the left side one again encounters
the external energy source. This situation (and all other type B
variants) are quite similar to a solution describing spacetime enclosed
between two domain walls. But in this case we have not one but three or
more direction transversal to the branes.

Variant IC where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It is very similar to the
variant IA but now the singularity appears in the area corresponding to
positive @xmath .

Variant IIC/A where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (412)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (413)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the variant both coordinates @xmath and @xmath cover the same area of
the spacetime. When @xmath (or equivalently @xmath ) a geometry of the
spacetime tends to Minkowski spacetime and we can normalize @xmath and
@xmath with ( 384 ). Going in the opposite direction at @xmath ( @xmath
) one encounters a horizon. So we can give now a physical interpretation
to the parameter @xmath as a length where in the isotropic coordinate
system the horizon is situated. When @xmath the localization goes to
@xmath and in this limit we recover the supersymmetric solution
described by the variant IA. But let us turn back to the variant IIC/A.
Near the horizon the quantity @xmath behaves as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (414)
  -- -------- -- -------

so it vanishes at @xmath . Behind the horizon we can continue the
solution with negative @xmath ( @xmath ) and at @xmath we find a naked
singularity. Since the singularity is placed in the area covered by
@xmath we should classify the variant as type C. But if we restrict our
consideration to only @xmath we get a situation of type A, and this is
an explanation why the variant is called IIC/A.

An observer living in the part of the spacetime where there is no
singularity, it means at @xmath sees only the area between the flat
infinity at @xmath and the horizon @xmath . So counting the energy
density from ( 385 ) one should take exactly such limits of the
integration. And this gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (415)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we used the definition ( 278 ) of @xmath with @xmath . So the
energy is always bigger than the charge of the brane as it should be
expected for a nonsupersymmetric solution.

Variant IIB where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , so:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (416)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (417)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The variant is quite similar to the IB, but now the isotropic
coordinates cover the whole spacetime. Again we find the spacetime to be
free of singularities and stretched between two points reachable in
finite coordinate time where the curvature is finite but non zero, so we
should expect the points to be localizations of the branes. Both the
points are described in the @xmath coordinate system as @xmath (but as
@xmath and @xmath ) and they are separated by a horizon situated at
@xmath .

Variant IIA/C where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It can be
obtained form the variant IIC/A by shifting the point @xmath with the
naked singularity to the area where @xmath . So, the region ”behind the
horizon” described by @xmath is nonsingular now. We can count the energy
density and find again ( 415 ). But to achieve it we should not
determine @xmath by the boundary conditions for @xmath @xmath , what is
a point separated from the discussed area by the horizon and the
singularity. We should rather make a coordinate change to introduce
@xmath and normalize finite value of @xmath to one at @xmath what means
@xmath . However, both the methods gives the same result @xmath .

Variant IIIA where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then the functions
@xmath and @xmath satisfy:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (418)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (419)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

While the variant IA can be understood as a some kind of a limit of the
variant IIIC/A when @xmath converges to @xmath , the variant IIIA is a
similar limit of IIIA/C when @xmath . We have now a singularity at
@xmath hidden behind a horizon located at @xmath (or @xmath ). But for
@xmath which corresponds to positive @xmath the solution is regular.
Finally at @xmath ( @xmath ) a boundary at infinity is placed where the
spacetime tends to the flat one. The last statement can be easily seen
when the coordinate @xmath is replaced by @xmath . Then both functions
@xmath and @xmath tend asymptotically to finite values with @xmath .
Taking the values as equal to @xmath we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (420)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (421)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

what furthermore gives:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (422)
  -- -------- -- -------

To achieve the positive sign in the above formula the integration
leading to it has to be conducted from @xmath ( @xmath ) to @xmath (
@xmath ) instead of from @xmath to @xmath . But the obtained result is
strange at a first sight because it says that this variant saturates BPS
bound while being nonsupersymmetric (since the function @xmath does not
vanish in this case). An explanation of the fact is given below in the
paragraph 5.4.3 .

Variant IIIB where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath analogously as the variant
IB describes a spacetime stretched between two boundaries where the
branes sustain nonzero curvature.

Variant IIIC where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is similar to the variant
IIIA but now the naked singularity emerges in the area covered by
isotropic coordinates.

Variant IVC where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where it is
defined @xmath , then:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (423)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (424)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In this variant the functions @xmath and @xmath are periodic and a
interval of @xmath closed between two adjacent zeros of @xmath
corresponds to @xmath . At the both ends given by @xmath ( @xmath ) and
@xmath ( @xmath ) the spacetime tends to flat Minkowski spacetime. But
because the period of @xmath is shorter than the period of @xmath there
is always at least one naked singularity between the infinities.
Localization of the singularities is given by @xmath .

Variant IVC/B where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

This variant is a variation of the previous one and describes a
situation when @xmath coincides with @xmath . Then at the point @xmath
curvature of the spacetime is finite an nonzero due to presence of the
brane attached at this point. But there is necessarily another brane at
@xmath which produces a naked singularity.

Summarizing, we see that the parameter @xmath gives a position of a
horizon expressed with the radial isotropic coordinate @xmath .
Similarly a point described in @xmath coordinate as @xmath can be
interpreted as a localization of the brane. In the variants of type A
and type C the points @xmath are singular.

#### 5.4.3 Supersymmetry.

When @xmath and @xmath the variants reviewed in the previous paragraph
can be naturally interpreted as describing the electric @xmath -brane in
the eleven dimensional supergravity. This gives us a possibility to test
supersymmetric properties of the variants directly i.e. by examining the
formulae ( 162 ) and ( 163 ). From those we have the following rules:

-   @xmath only if:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (425)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath only if:

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (426)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (427)
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where we decomposed the parameter @xmath with respect to eigenstates of
the operator @xmath ( 159 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (428)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (429)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath are constant spinors and @xmath are functions dependent on
the radial coordinate.

We can always choose such @xmath and @xmath which satisfy ( 426 )
identically for arbitrary @xmath and @xmath . In the group of
supersymmetry parameters @xmath these @xmath and @xmath define a
subgroup which is possibly preserved by the solution. So the preserved
supersymmetry is necessary rigid with respect to the coordinate @xmath .
Examining the other conditions we verify if the supersymmetry is really
preserved.

For the variant I we find that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (430)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (431)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

so this part of supersymmetry which is described by @xmath is always
preserved. Similarly for the variant III we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (432)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (433)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The first condition is the same as for the variant I, but the second is
changed replacing @xmath with @xmath . Consequently no supersymmetry can
be preserved.

It is a very important fact that the supersymmetry transformations of
the gravitino components with the vector index corresponding to the
directions tangent to the brane ( 432 ) break other part of
supersymmetry than the components which have the index related to the
transversal directions ( 433 ). So, considering a model dimensionally
reduced only to the subspace parallel to the brane or only to the
subspace orthogonal to the brane we can see only a term breaking half of
supersymmetry. This explains why for the nonsupersymmetric variant III
we have the same relation between the charge and the energy density as
for the supersymmetric variant I. Calculating the densities we conduct
only an integration over the transversal directions, so we in fact work
only with the subspace orthogonal to the brane. But in the subspace the
@xmath part of supersymmetry is still preserved and the BPS inequality
has to be saturated.

For variants II and IV analogs of the both conditions ( 430 – 431 )
possess terms proportional to @xmath and @xmath , so supersymmetry is
broken in both tangent and transversal subspaces separately.

#### 5.4.4 Solution without dilaton for @xmath.

It was already noted that the case of @xmath is specific because then
all the invariants ( 387 – 389 ) of the metric tensor are constant
finite and nonzero numbers. However, we shoul note that the conditions
defining the considered case are rather unphysical, because there is no
known supergravity theory without any dilaton but with an antisymmetric
field supporting a @xmath -brane. So we can treat the case considered
here only as a toy model helping to understand properties of some more
realistic brane configurations with @xmath . See for example the one
studied in the paragraph 5.5.2 .

As was already mentioned because of the assumptions made we should not
expect any naked singularity in the solution. See also that ( 381 ) and
( 382 ) take forms:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (434)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (435)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

so the solution expressed in terms of @xmath does not have any
dependence on the function @xmath . Consequently ( 403 – 404 ) can be
rewritten as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (436)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (437)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Moreover if @xmath then not only the constant @xmath vanishes (as it is
for @xmath ) but we have also @xmath and the identity holds for all
values of @xmath . It suggests that for the solution we have @xmath .
But further analysis shows that it is not true, because to calculate
properly the energy density we should add an external contribution
originating from the brane in each variant.

It can be proved that for the variants I, II and III there is a
coordinate system singularity and an event horizon at @xmath where the
functions @xmath and @xmath vanish. It is possible to identify the
points @xmath and @xmath , so the areas of large positive and negative
values of @xmath are related to spacetime at opposite sides of the
horizon. A point where @xmath can be reached from the left and the right
side by a massless particle in infinite affine parameter but a finite
amount of the coordinate time, so it describes boundaries of the
spacetime where domain walls – the branes – are localized. The variant
IV is different, because then we have no horizon and a series of
”infinite” points @xmath . So any interval @xmath describes a
geodesically complete universe between two domain walls.

#### 5.4.5 Solution with dilaton for @xmath.

Imposing in the diagonal @xmath solution constraints @xmath and @xmath
we recover the single brane solution found in [ 111 ] and discussed in [
112 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (438)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (439)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (440)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (441)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (442)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (443)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It seems that the solution depends on seven parameters: @xmath and
@xmath . But @xmath has no physical meaning and describes gauge freedom
of the antisymmetric potential. Other three can be determined if we
assume that at a given point @xmath the functions @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath have a certain value. It is convenient to choose @xmath at a
point which is reachable only in infinite affine parameter and where the
spacetime is flat and demand:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (444)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (445)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (446)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are normalized to one at this point. The
constraints ( 444 – 446 ) allow then to express @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath by the remaining parameters. The remaining three degrees of
freedom should then be related to physical quantities: charge, mass and
the tachyon condensate [ 112 ] .

Calculating energy density of the brane, we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (447)
  -- -------- -- -------

But analogously as it was discussed in the paragraphs 5.4.1 and 5.4.2 it
is valid only when certain conditions are fulfilled assuring that the
integration has a well defined physical meaning. Comparing to ( 386 ) we
see that an additional term @xmath appeared. The term contributes with a
nonpositive value (if @xmath ) and depends only on the parameter @xmath
. This is the reason why we can identify @xmath with the tachyon
condensate.

Note that nonzero @xmath and thus @xmath is not a direct consequence of
a presence of the dilaton in the considered model. See that a total
number of constants @xmath and @xmath is equal to @xmath and there are
@xmath constraints imposed on them ( 294 ) and ( 296 ). So we should
expect similar effect in any situation when a total number of functions
@xmath and @xmath in the model exceeds the number of branes @xmath .

#### 5.4.6 @xmath duality.

Analyzing the formula ( 260 ) giving the definition of the coordinate
@xmath we can see that it exhibits the duality:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (448)
  -- -------- -- -------

what establishes a relation between @xmath defined for different values
of the parameter @xmath . The same transformation applied to the
function @xmath ( 269 ) leads to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (449)
  -- -------- -- -------

Further, having a particular solution, for example ( 378 ) one can
extend the duality to all parameters appearing in the solution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (450)
  -- -------- -- -------

and check that the transformation is a symmetry of the fields @xmath and
@xmath ( 287 – 289 , 380 ). The function @xmath is not invariant under (
450 ), but @xmath is.

One can be afraid that the duality is only a mathematical trick and both
the solutions tied by the duality are physically equivalent up to
reversing sing of the brane charge. However, it can be checked that it
is not true. To see that it is enough to look at the function @xmath .
Under ( 450 ) one has:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (451)
  -- -------- -- -------

This gives in particular that the supersymmetric solution given by
@xmath (variant I) has a non-supersymmetric partner which can be
described by @xmath (variant III).

From ( 450 ) it follows that while the metric tensor and the dilaton are
unchanged under the duality, the antisymmetric tensor changes its sign.
However our knowledge about the antisymmetric tensor is limited to only
those components of the field which spun the brane. Even less we know
about fermions. Because the considered model is restricted only to the
bosonic truncation of some supergravity theory it is difficult to guess
how the spinor fields appearing in the original theory behave under the
transformation. But we can collect some information by comparing
properties of the supersymmetry transformations ( 430 ) and ( 431 ) with
( 432 ) and ( 433 ). This suggests that the duality ( 450 ) has a
different effect when acting on the components @xmath and @xmath .

### 5.5 Composite branes.

Let us assume now that all except one condition imposed to construction
of the model discussed in the paragraph 5.1.1 are still valid. Therefore
we allow branes to be composite now. We should recall that validity of
the intersecting branes solution derived in the previous model (where
all branes are supported by different fields) can be extended to the
case of composite branes if the nondiagonal elements of the
stress-energy tensor @xmath ( 151 ) for each antisymmetric field vanish
i.e. identity ( 189 ) is satisfied. With results developed in [ 116 ] we
see that the tensor @xmath can (but does not have to) be nondiagonal
only if at least one of the following situations occur:

1.  There are two electric branes with worldvolumes @xmath and @xmath
    such that:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (452)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Of course @xmath .

2.  There are two magnetic branes with worldvolumes @xmath and @xmath
    such that:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (453)
      -- -------- -- -------

    In this case also @xmath .

3.  There is an electric brane with worldvolume @xmath and a magnetic
    with @xmath such that:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (454)
      -- -------- -- -------

4.  There is an electric brane with worldvolume @xmath and a magnetic
    with @xmath such that:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (455)
      -- -------- -- -------

5.  There is an electric brane with worldvolume @xmath and a magnetic
    with @xmath such that:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (456)
      -- -------- -- -------

6.  There is an electric brane with worldvolume @xmath and a magnetic
    with @xmath such that:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (457)
      -- -------- -- -------

#### 5.5.1 Intersecting composite branes of @xmath supergravity.

Let us focus on the eleven dimensional supergravity theory now. The
theory contains only one antisymmetric field, so if one wants to
consider commonly orthogonally intersecting branes in the theory they
have to be composite. The previously developed model can be employed to
give a description of the configuration only if the branes do not fall
into classes characterized by ( 452 – 457 ) and satisfy all other
conditions presented in paragraph 5.1.1 . But even that it is not
sufficient yet.

The @xmath supergravity possesses the Chern-Simons term @xmath ( 5 )
which was neglected in our model, so to be precise instead of @xmath
version of the equation ( 207 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (458)
  -- -------- -- -------

we should discuss in the theory:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (459)
  -- -------- -- -------

Fortunately it can be checked that if the branes are commonly
orthogonally intersecting, delocalized (i.e. with the solution depending
only on a radial coordinate in the overall transverse space) and with
timelike worldvolumes, a set of configurations with nonzero contribution
from the Chern-Simons term is very limited. We can describe the
configurations as containing at least one electric brane and at least
two magnetic branes such that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (460)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the electric brane worldvolume and @xmath , @xmath
worldvolumes of the magnetic branes.

Let us make a brief scan of possible two-brane and three-brane
intersections in the eleven dimensional supergravity. There are nine
inequivalent two-brane configurations which fall into three categories:

-   two electric branes, there are two configurations of this kind, one
    with the tensor @xmath diagonal,

-   electric and magnetic brane – three cases, two with diagonal @xmath
    .

-   two magnetic branes – four configurations including three described
    by diagonal @xmath .

All of them are shown in the table 10 . The letter ”y” in the last
column of the table tells that the tensor @xmath is diagonal. And the
numbers in the column indicate which of the reason given in at the
beginning of the section makes the tensor possibly nondiagonal. The same
convention is used in the tables 11 , 12 , 13 and 14 .

The table 11 gives twenty inequivalent configurations which can be
constructed of three magnetic @xmath -branes. Ten of the configurations
are described by diagonal @xmath , so the method developed in the
previous sections can by applied.

Similarly in the table 12 we have listed all 22 examples of brane
configurations containing two magnetic and one electric brane. Again for
ten of them the tensor @xmath is diagonal, but in the case number 3. we
encounter nonvanishing Chern-Simons term so it has to excluded from the
set of configurations relevant for the model discussed before.

The table 13 shows 12 configurations with two electric and one magnetic
brane, five of them are characterized by diagonal stress-energy tensor.
And in the table 14 there are contained five three-brane configurations
made of electric branes exclusively, but only one has diagonal @xmath .

Note, that for the @xmath supergravity the formula ( 284 ) for the
components of the matrix @xmath can be written in a simplified form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (461)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (462)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 5.5.2 Three magnetic brane solution in @xmath supergravity.

One of the brane intersections in the eleven dimensional supergravity
for which we can formulate and next solve the Toda-like equation is the
fifth case in the table 11 . The configuration consists of three
magnetic branes having the four dimensional common intersection and the
one dimensional overall transverse space. The case is very interesting
because it can serve as a simplified model of the most promising
compactification scheme where the @xmath spacetime decomposes like:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (463)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Calabi-Yau manifold and @xmath is a real interval.

In our model we have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath what means that @xmath ,
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath . This gives a diagonal form for the matrix
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (464)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally the appropriate solution can be written as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (465)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (466)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (467)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (468)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (469)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where for simplicity @xmath is written instead of @xmath and where
@xmath ’s are given by ( 378 ). Since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (470)
  -- -------- -- -------

therefore for the constants @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (471)
  -- -------- -- -------

The relation between the energy density and the charges densities is (in
those cases when it is well defined):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (472)
  -- -------- -- -------

This relation suggests that a necessary condition for preserving
supersymmetry is @xmath and @xmath . To verify this it is instructive to
consider again when @xmath . To discuss the condition we need first to
check how the Dirac matrices decompose under ( 463 ). We have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (473)
  -- -------- -- -------

and:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (474)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matrices @xmath are Dirac matrices and @xmath the chiral operator in
the four dimensional subspacetime @xmath . Similarly @xmath and @xmath
for @xmath are respectively Dirac matrices and chiral operator on the
two dimensional spaces @xmath . So we can define:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (475)
  -- -------- -- -------

which have to satisfy:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (476)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally from the supersymmetry preserving condition @xmath it follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (477)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (478)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (479)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where we defined projection operators:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (480)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (481)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (482)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and for the parameter @xmath we introduced @xmath with @xmath – a
constant spinor.

From the equation ( 479 ) we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (483)
  -- -------- -- -------

an analog of ( 167 ). Next the equations ( 477 – 478 ) lead to:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (484)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . However, instead of the harmonic gauge condition @xmath we
get only:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (485)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (486)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath preserves its general form. This feature is peculiar for
all models where the overall transverse space is one dimensional. In
such situation all operators @xmath have to vanish so we do not have any
analog of the term @xmath appearing in ( 163 ). Consequently it is not
possible from the requirement of supersymmetry to derive any equation
involving @xmath and restore the harmonic gauge condition.

## 6 Conclusions

The main purpose of this paper was to provide an overview of the way
that leads to the notion of branes, to discuss the known supersymmetric
brane solutions and to describe new nonsupersymmetric brane solutions.
It is generally accepted that the route from the Standard Model through
supersymmetric extensions, Grand Unified theories, supergravities to
superstrings and M theory is the most promising (albeit extremely
difficult in practice) attempt to unify Quantum Field Theory and the
General Relativity i.e. two main pillars of contemporary physics. It is
a relatively recent result that the theory of strings has much richer
spectrum than just perturbative string excitations. The new objects were
known for many years in supergravity under the name of branes and (in
analogy to instantons in nonperturbative quantum field theory) were
solutions of the classical equations of motion. Although we do not have
yet a quantum theory of branes we suspect that the elusive
11-dimensional M theory is just a quantum theory of 2-branes (as string
theory is perturbatively a quantum theory of 1-branes i.e. strings).
Therefore it is important to find and classify as wide class of brane
solutions as possible. A special role is played by the presence (or the
absence) of supersymmetry. All known string theories are supersymmetric
but it does not exclude a possibility that some solutions break
(spontaneously) supersymmetry in a similar way as gauge symmetry can be
spontaneously broken by the Higgs mechanism. Since supersymmetry is
certainly broken at low energy scales it is interesting too search for
brane solutions that are nonsupersymmetric to gain some insight into
possible ways of supersymmetry breaking in supergravity (and indirectly
in string theory).

The branes are multidimensional objects possible to define in many
various environments (in the most general situation – on a ground of an
arbitrary theory with antisymmetric tensor fields) and provide a very
useful method which allows to understand some theories as theories
living on brane worldvolumes (or intersection of the worldvolumes)
immersed in some other theory. In this scheme we can for example
interpret superstring theories as defined on domain walls of the
M-theory. Similarly various super-Yang-Mills or nonsupersymmetric
Yang-Mills theories can be regarded as superstring theories on
respectively BPS or non-BPS configurations made of D- and NS-branes.
Finally the Standard Model should appear as a low energy limit of a
theory of this kind related to a four dimensional intersection of the
brane worldvolumes which break supersymmetry. A verification if it is
really possible to derive the Standard Model directly from brane
solutions of string theory would give us new insight alternative to the
usual route string theory - supergravity - rigid supersymmetry -
Standard Model.

The branes appearing in superstrings and M-theory can be described also
from supergravity point of view as a special class of solution of
equations of motion. Because supergravities are low energy limits of
superstring and M-theory and are consistent only at the classical level,
in such approach some information especially involved with quantum
properties of the branes is lost. But on the other hand branes in
supergravities can be studied with the use of exact methods while
superstrings provide only perturbative techniques. Therefore results
obtained in both the ways are in many cases complementary.

The main part of this work was dedicated to give an exact descriptions
of possibly wide class of configurations of the branes in the framework
of supergravity. It was shown that for such configuration which can be
described as commonly orthogonally intersecting delocalized branes the
respective equations of motions reduce to the known Toda-like system
i.e. a generalization of the Liouville equation. The reduction to the
Toda-like system works both for supersymmetric and nonsupersymmetric
cases since it does not depend on imposing on the model a harmonic gauge
@xmath (a necessary condition for preserving supersymmetry). The key of
the reduction is a coordinate change where isotropic radial coordinate
@xmath is replaced by a coordinate called @xmath . And the relation
@xmath is a curved space harmonic function with the curvature
contribution to the harmonic equation given by @xmath .

The resulting Toda-like system is integrable and there are several known
classes of the solutions which can be written explicitly with the use of
elementary functions. Fortunately even the restricted class of
analytically known solutions can be relevant for realistic brane
configurations and it is possible to test properties of the quite wide
class of brane configurations by studying the exact solutions. In this
paper several examples of such solutions are discussed in much detail to
properly interpret supersymmetric properties of the solutions. We
examine the single brane solutions with and without a dilaton. The first
when @xmath can be treated as the supergravitational description of
branes in M-theory and the second (for @xmath ) as the analogous
description of branes in superstring theories. The solutions are in fact
families of solutions parametrized by @xmath giving a charge of the
brane and @xmath describing a localization of a horizon expressed in
terms of the isotropic coordinate @xmath . The dilatonic solution
additionally depends on a parameter @xmath giving the classical
description of a tachyon condensate. Also the three magnetic brane
configuration in @xmath supergravity possessing a three dimensional
(spatial) intersection and one overall transverse direction is studied.

A transformation @xmath together with @xmath and @xmath gives a duality
in the family of the solutions. The parameter @xmath (together with
@xmath ) corresponds to supersymmetric solution when the BPS inequality
@xmath is saturated, where @xmath and @xmath are respectively energy and
charge density of the brane. For @xmath supersymmetry is broken. But the
solution dual to the supersymmetric one i.e. given by @xmath although
nonsupersymmetric again saturates the BPS bound. The apparent
contradiction can be explained by checking that in this case
complementary parts of supersymmetry are broken by gravitino components
with vector index respectively tangent and transversal to the brane
worldvolume. So considering the model as dimensionally reduced only to
the directions orthogonal to the brane (or only to the directions
parallel) it seems like one part of supersymmetry is preserved. It
proves that it is possible to construct a nonsupersymmetric model
characterized by properties usually reserved only for supersymmetric
ones.

A character of the duality @xmath is rather unclear in full generality.
While it preserves a metric tensor and the dilaton field and reverses
sign of antisymmetric tensor one can see (from the form of supersymmetry
transformations) that its action on fermions is more complicated (at
least flips their chirality). Since we considered only bosonic truncated
model we cannot verify this fact - the model should be extended to
incorporate fermions with possibly nonzero vacuum values. Such an
extension is rather natural with nonsupersymmetric solutions because
preserving supersymmetry condition immediately leads to @xmath while
there is no analogous condition in the nonsupersymmetric case.

Other generalizations of the model given in this paper can be obtained
when one discusses intersections at angles instead of the orthogonal
ones or localized branes instead of the delocalized ones. It would be
very interesting to find exact solutions in this cases and check if any
of them can serve as backgrounds for realistic compactification models.

The possibility of finding the exact nonsupersymmetric solutions is very
intersecting. The solutions can be used to verify various mechanisms
postulated to break supersymmetry in a way leading to the Standard
Model. With the general solution at hand one is able to check if
conditions under which the mechanisms work can be consistently derived
from the equations of motion of the underlying theory. In any realistic
case however, it is necessary to go beyond the bosonic solutions of the
equations of motion discussed in this paper and include fermions if one
wants to take into account fermionic condensates, calculate masses,
chiralities, coupling constants etc. and compare it to the Standard
Model or its extensions with broken supersymmetry.