##### Contents

-    Abstract
-    1 Influence of the Ordering Prescription in the Case @xmath
    -    1.1 Ordering and Star Products
        -    1.1.1 About Ordering
        -    1.1.2 Star Products
    -    1.2 Gauge Field Theory in the Case of a constant Poisson Tensor
        @xmath
        -    1.2.1 Noncommutative Gauge Field Theory
        -    1.2.2 Noncommutative Gauge Field Theory for an arbitrary
            star product
        -    1.2.3 Noncommutative Gauge Theory and Involution
        -    1.2.4 Seiberg-Witten Map for Arbitrary Star Products
        -    1.2.5 Physics and the Choice of the Star Product
-    2 Gauge Field Theory on the @xmath -Symmetric Plane
    -    2.1 @xmath and the @xmath Symmetric Plane
    -    2.2 Generalization of the Case @xmath
        -    2.2.1 The Poisson Structure for @xmath
        -    2.2.2 A Star Product for @xmath
        -    2.2.3 Noncommutative Abelian Gauge Field Theory
        -    2.2.4 The Field Strength
        -    2.2.5 The Integral with Trace Property
        -    2.2.6 The Action and the Integral
        -    2.2.7 Freedom of the Theory
    -    2.3 @xmath - Covariant Abelian Gauge Field Theory
        -    2.3.1 An Invariant Integral on the @xmath - Symmetric Plane
        -    2.3.2 Covariant Differential Calculus on the @xmath -
            Symmetric Plane
        -    2.3.3 Gauge Fields and Action
        -    2.3.4 The Algebra Homomorphism @xmath
        -    2.3.5 Gauge Transformations and Gauge Invariance
        -    2.3.6 Summary and Last Remarks
-    3 Conclusion
-    A Change of basis @xmath
-    B The Right-Action of @xmath on @xmath

## Introduction

The idea to study noncommutative space-time is very old. It goes back to
Snyder, who first suggested a noncommutative structure at small length
scales to obtain this way an effective ultraviolet cutoff [ 1 ] . This
in turn should help to deal with the divergences that already appeared
in the early days of quantum field theory. The problem still persists
and during the last two decades noncommutative spaces have been
intensively studied in the hope to find a natural regularization of
deformed quantum field theories.

There are different ways to introduce a noncommutativity of space-time.
One is inspired by quantum mechanics, where position and momentum
operators obey the Heisenberg commutation relations. Similarly, the
quantized space-time coordinates @xmath are demanded to satisfy the so
called canonical commutation relations

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath are real constants. This approach became especially
interesting when in the eighties the study of open strings in a magnetic
background field led to a canonical noncommutativity in string theory [
2 ] . However, by deforming the space alone the space will in general
loose its classical background symmetry.

To maintain a background symmetry in the deformed setting, it is
therefore in general necessary to deform both the symmetry group as well
as the space. This leads to so called @xmath deformed spaces that admit
a quantum group symmetry. Correctly spoken the algebra of functions on a
manifold and the algebra of functions on a Lie group are @xmath deformed
[ 3 ] . Such a noncommutative theory is a generalization of the
commutative theory since the deformed space as well as the deformed
symmetry group become in the semi-classical limit @xmath the commutative
space together with its undeformed background symmetry. The rich
mathematical structure of quantum groups gives rise to the hope to get a
better understanding of physics at short distances and to solve the
above-mentioned problems.

Gauge field theories have been very successful for the understanding of
the fundamental forces of nature. The standard model made a unification
of electromagnetism, the weak and the strong force possible. Therefore a
generalization of the gauge invariance principle to noncommutative
spaces is of particular interest and subject matter of this thesis. The
hope is that a deep understanding of gauge field theories on
noncommutative spaces may make it possible to finally incorporate the
last fundamental force, gravitation, in a unified theory.

This thesis is divided into two chapters. The first chapter deals with a
canonically deformed space. Gauge field theory on this noncommutative
space has been examined intensively in [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 ] . A crucial
ingredient for the construction of gauge field theory on a canonically
deformed space is the use of a star product that renders the originally
commutative algebra of functions on the space isomorphic as algebra to
the noncommutative algebra of functions. By means of Seiberg-Witten maps
it then is possible to relate ordinary gauge theory and noncommutative
gauge theory and to express noncommutative fields in terms of their
commutative analogs. This allows us to read off explicitly the
corrections to the commutative theory predicted by the noncommutative
one in orders of the deformation parameter @xmath . In the whole
formalism a special star product was used: the Moyal-Weyl star product
that corresponds to the symmetric ordering prescription. However, there
exist infinitely many star products, all corresponding to a different
ordering prescription, that cannot be distinguished from the algebraic
point of view. Thus, the question arises how far a change of the star
product changes the physical theory, i.e. the action. We will examine in
all detail how a change of the ordering prescription explicitly affects
the action. We will see that in general different star products indeed
lead to different actions, but that nonetheless a large class of star
products generates identical actions. The star products corresponding to
normal ordering and symmetric ordering belong to this class.

The second chapter treats the case of a two-dimensional quantum space
with an @xmath symmetry. By @xmath we denote the @xmath deformed algebra
of functions on the two-dimensional Euclidean group. We start
introducing the quantum group @xmath and the corresponding @xmath
covariant plane. The underlying commutation relation of the space
coordinates is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

in the basis @xmath , @xmath . We then proceed to study two different
approaches to abelian gauge field theory on this noncommutative space.

The first is a generalization of the formalism developed in the case of
a constant Poisson tensor. If we substitute @xmath by @xmath , we can
write down the commutation relations of the coordinates of the @xmath
covariant plane in the form of ( 1 ), where @xmath now depends on the
coordinates and is not constant. A star product for this space is
introduced, as well as a noncommutative gauge field @xmath by the
concept of covariant coordinates. Moreover, we can again express the
noncommutative quantities in terms of the commutative physical fields
via a solution for the Seiberg-Witten maps. To get a gauge field which
approaches in the semi-classical limit @xmath the commutative gauge
field, we must introduce vector fields with lower indices. Since @xmath
is not constant, we cannot use @xmath to lower indices as this would
spoil gauge covariance of the gauge field @xmath . We have to do it
covariantly using the “covariantizer” @xmath [ 9 ] . At the end of the
section we calculate explicitly the field strength, the Lagrangian and
the action expanded in @xmath up to first order. As we will see, new
interactions appear. Unfortunately, we will learn that the theory
possesses some freedom in defining the field strength and the action.
Furthermore, we will see that it is not @xmath covariant: We are forced
to introduce an integral with trace property in order to obtain a gauge
invariant action. This action is not @xmath invariant.

In the third section we try to establish an @xmath covariant gauge field
theory. Considering @xmath covariance as a fundamental concept
underlying all considerations, we introduce an @xmath invariant (or
equivalently a @xmath ) integral. We will see that this integral is not
cyclic but possesses a “deformed” cyclic property. This is a crucial
result, telling us that we cannot introduce gauge transformations of
gauge fields as conjugation with a unitary element as it was done in the
previous section. In a second step, we establish an @xmath covariant
differential calculus. Furthermore, we find a frame, a basis of
one-forms that commutes with all functions, and a generator @xmath of
the exterior differential @xmath . This simplifies calculations in the
@xmath deformed space. A noncommutative gauge field @xmath and a
noncommutative field strength @xmath that approaches the commutative
field strength in the semi-classical limit @xmath are introduced.
Finally, “deformed” gauge transformations are defined. This allows us to
obtain an action that is both gauge invariant and @xmath and thereby we
get an @xmath covariant gauge field theory. In the end, we examine the
semi-classical limit for the deformed gauge transformations.

## Chapter 1 Influence of the Ordering Prescription in the Case @xmath

Noncommutative spaces, especially in the case of a canonical
noncommutativity, have been intensively studied in recent years. In [ 5
] and [ 4 ] , for instance, a gauge theory has been developed on such a
noncommutative space. The star product formalism plays a crucial role in
this theory because it gives us, together with the Seiberg-Witten map, a
possibility to express the noncommutative fields entering the theory in
terms of the well known commutative fields. This makes it possible to
read off explicitly the corrections to the commutative theory predicted
by the noncommutative one. The whole formalism was developed for a
special star product, the Moyal-Weyl star product, and it is necessary
to ask the question whether a different star product leads to a
different physical theory. Since a star product corresponds to an
ordering prescription, we are led directly to the question of how far a
change of the ordering prescription affects the physical theory.

In fact, we will see that for a large class of ordering prescriptions
the theories are physically equivalent in the sense that all those
theories lead to the same action. In particular this is the case for the
usually used star products, the Moyal-Weyl product corresponding to the
symmetric ordering prescription and the normal ordered star product.
Nonetheless, arbitrary star products will in general lead to different
actions and thereby to different physical theories.

We do not want to repeat in all detail the formalism constructed in [ 5
, 4 ] , presuming that the general ideas are known. Hence, we will only
present the essential ideas. Nonetheless, we want to explain in detail
the concepts that will be important within the framework of this thesis
starting with the notions of ordering and star product.

### 1.1 Ordering and Star Products

In this section we want to explain what we mean by an ordering
prescription, what a star product is and how a certain ordering
prescription corresponds to a star product. It will be a mixture of well
known definitions and facts (see for example [ 10 ] or [ 11 ] ) with
some new results in the application on the case of a constant Poisson
tensor.

#### 1.1.1 About Ordering

Underlying all our considerations is the following noncommutative
algebra of space time generated by the elements @xmath , to which we
want to refer as coordinates, satisfying the relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. the algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where Greek indices are to be understood in the whole chapter as
elements of the set @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Considerations made in this chapter are
true for higher dimensions as well. , if nothing else is indicated. We
additionally want to assume that @xmath is non-degenerated .
Furthermore, we have the well known four dimensional space of
commutative coordinates @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

generating the algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We want to call a map @xmath from @xmath to @xmath an ordering
prescription ² ² 2 We do not want to understand an ordering prescription
as simple “ordering” the coordinates in a special way but admit more
general isomorphisms as well. One could have said quantization instead
of ordering prescription, too. if

-   @xmath is a vector space isomorphism,

-   @xmath and

-   @xmath approaches the identity for @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

Obviously, we have a big freedom in constructing ordering prescriptions.
Let us illustrate that by giving two examples: the normal ordering and
the symmetric ordering.

##### (a) The normal ordering

We define a vector space isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the basis of monomials by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This ordering prescription we want to call normal ordering.

##### (b) The symmetric ordering

We can define another vector space isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by assigning any monomial of the variables @xmath to its totally
symmetric counterpart, i.e. for example

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This ordering prescription we want to call symmetric ordering.

Of course it is possible to construct arbitrarily many other ordering
prescriptions. But in the following we will often come back to these
important examples to illustrate our ideas and results.

While the noncommutative algebra @xmath and the commutative algebra
@xmath can impossibly be isomorphic as algebras, we use a vector space
isomorphism @xmath to transfer the multiplicative structure of @xmath
onto @xmath . We then obtain a new product, called star product (or
@xmath -product).

#### 1.1.2 Star Products

Star products are usually defined on Poisson manifolds [ 11 , 10 ] .
Taking the smooth functions on a manifold we get an algebra that we can
deform by means of a star product. Here we want to take an analogous way
but do not want to abandon the concept of formal power series in the
coordinates and do not want to speak about smooth functions on a
manifold. This would direct our attention to problems that are of
secondary interest for the general physical statement and intention of
this thesis. Therefore we want to introduce star products for Poisson
algebras , where a Poisson algebra is an associative algebra @xmath
together with a Poisson-bracket. A Poisson bracket on an algebra @xmath
in turn is defined as a bilinear map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfying

-   @xmath for all @xmath (Anti-symmetry)

-   @xmath (Jacobi-identity)

-   @xmath (Leibniz-rule).

If we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it is easy to see that @xmath is a Poisson bracket for @xmath in the
sense of the above definition. The tensor @xmath is called a Poisson
tensor for @xmath . It is an antisymmetric tensor because of (i) and
satisfies (ii) and (iii).

##### (a) Definition and Remarks

The deformation theory of associative algebras was first studied by
Gerstenhaber [ 12 ] . A formal deformation of a Poisson algebra can be
defined as follows:

###### Definition 1.

Let @xmath be a Poisson algebra. We call a @xmath -bilinear map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that we can write as a formal power series in @xmath ³ ³ 3 This is
always possible. ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath -bilinear maps @xmath a star product (or @xmath -product)
for @xmath if for all @xmath the following holds:

-   @xmath (associativity)

-   @xmath (deformation of the commutative product)

-   @xmath (deformation in direction of @xmath )

-   @xmath .

A star product that satisfies for all @xmath the condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is called a hermitian star product (here the bar denotes the usual
complex conjugation on @xmath ).

Similar to this definition, star products are defined on a Poisson
manifold @xmath taking as algebra the algebra of smooth functions @xmath
[ 11 , 10 ] .

As we see, a star product is a deformation of the commutative product
assuring that the noncommutative theory we establish approaches in the
semi-classical limit @xmath the usual commutative physical theory. The
third condition gives the analog to the quantum mechanical principle of
correspondence: The Poisson bracket @xmath of two observables in
classical mechanics corresponds to the quantum mechanical commutator
@xmath in the classical limit. In our setting, the noncommutative
algebra of quantum mechanical observables is replaced by the
noncommutative algebra of functions on noncommutative space time.

Having specified what we want to demand from a star product to assure
physical interpretation, we discuss how to obtain @xmath -products
satisfying these properties. Using an ordering prescription @xmath with
@xmath (for example @xmath or @xmath given above), we can define a
product for @xmath by pulling back the noncommutative product of the
algebra @xmath onto the algebra @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We want to interpret @xmath as a formal power series in the deformation
parameter @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that we obtain by ( 1.7 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

as algebras.

We claim that the product @xmath defined in ( 1.7 ) actually is a star
product on @xmath in the sense of Definition 1 . To see this, we have to
check some properties:

-   Associativity follows since multiplication in @xmath is associative:

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

-   By definition an ordering prescription @xmath approaches for @xmath
    the identity such that we have @xmath . This yields with ( 1.7 )
    that @xmath .

-   Write @xmath with @xmath and define @xmath . We claim that @xmath is
    a Poisson bracket: It is obviously antisymmetric and to see that the
    Leibniz rule and the Jacobi identity are satisfied we have to use a
    property the maps @xmath possess derived from the fact that @xmath
    is associative as shown in (i): We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Using those two properties for @xmath a longer but easy calculation
    shows that @xmath satisfies the Leibniz rule and the Jacobi identity
    so that @xmath defined as above is indeed a Poisson bracket. Since
    all Poisson brackets on @xmath are of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    with @xmath antisymmetric (this follows from the Leibniz rule and
    the Jacobi identity), we can conclude that actually @xmath for
    functions @xmath . Now we use that @xmath is defined by means of an
    ordering prescription @xmath . As an ordering prescription, @xmath
    goes to the identity for @xmath . Therefore we have @xmath .
    Moreover, we denote by @xmath the projection to the first order of
    @xmath . With that we obtain

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    This yields

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    On the other hand we have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Hence, we can conclude that @xmath and therefore we get @xmath ,
    which is exactly what we wanted to show.

-   @xmath .

Let us summarize what we learned so far: Starting with an arbitrary
ordering prescription @xmath we get by ( 1.7 ) a star product @xmath on
@xmath such that @xmath is isomorphic as algebra to @xmath . Then the
question arises immediately, whether all existing star products
correspond to an ordering prescription. To answer this question we first
have to be able to classify star products. That is why we want to
continue by introducing the notion of equivalence.
Remark: By the above proof we showed in particular the existence of star
products for @xmath . In the setting of a general Poisson manifold the
question of existence is much more difficult. Nevertheless, it is known
that there exist star products for any Poisson manifold [ 13 ] .

##### (b) Equivalence of Star Products

###### Definition 2.

Two star products @xmath and @xmath for @xmath are called equivalent if
there exists a formal series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

of linear operators @xmath such that for all @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

S is called equivalence transformation from @xmath to @xmath and for
hermitian star products we also require that for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us remark that this notion of equivalence indeed defines an
equivalence relation. Moreover, we see that we can formulate equivalence
in the following way, too:
Two star products @xmath and @xmath are equivalent if and only if @xmath
.
We additionally note that by giving an equivalence transformation as in
( 1.9 ) we can construct a new star product defining @xmath as in ( 1.10
), so that to a given star product there exist arbitrarily many
equivalent ones. Then immediately arises the question how many
equivalence classes exist. For a symplectic Poisson manifold, this is a
Poisson manifolds with non-degenerated Poisson tensor, the answer is
indeed known (to get a definition of equivalence in the case of a
Poisson manifold @xmath just substitute in the above definition @xmath
by @xmath ) [ 13 , 14 ] :

Let @xmath be a symplectic Poisson manifold. Then @xmath where @xmath
denotes the equivalence class of the star product @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4 @xmath
denotes the second de Rham cohomology.
In the case @xmath then follows that all star products are equivalent
since @xmath In our example we do not consider a Poisson manifold but
the Poisson algebra @xmath . Nevertheless, we can interpret the Poisson
tensor @xmath as a Poisson tensor on @xmath and star products for @xmath
become star products for the Poisson manifold @xmath . If @xmath is
non-degenerated, we have the case of a symplectic manifold and since on
@xmath all star products are equivalent this leads us to the following
conclusion:

###### Conclusion 1.

For @xmath all star products are equivalent if @xmath is
non-degenerated.

Starting with a certain ordering prescription @xmath and constructing
the corresponding star product @xmath by ( 1.7 ), we now know that all
star products that exist are in fact equivalent to this one. Moreover,
we notice that for an arbitrary equivalence transformation @xmath ,
@xmath again is an ordering prescription and obviously we have @xmath .
Thus, the answer to the question at the end of (a) is:

###### Conclusion 2.

Every star product @xmath for @xmath can be obtained by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an ordering prescription. ⁵ ⁵ 5 In particular, every
star product renders @xmath isomorphic to @xmath . In the general case
of a non-constant Poisson tensor this is not true.

##### (c) Examples for Star Products

-   The symmetric ordering @xmath ( 1.6 ) leads to the star product

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is to be understood as the multiplication map @xmath
    This star product is called Moyal-Weyl star product [ 15 , 4 ] .
    Moreover, we see that @xmath is a hermitian star product (see
    Definition 1 ): Taking into account that @xmath is antisymmetric and
    real, we obtain:

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

-   The normal ordering @xmath ( 1.5 ) leads to the star product

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

    @xmath

-   Let me introduce the following more general star product:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

    @xmath for @xmath
    It is easy to check that @xmath is a star product in the sense of
    Definition 1 . As we know from Conclusion 2 , we can obtain @xmath
    by an ordering prescription. ⁶ ⁶ 6 In general this is not unique. To
    get an impression of how such an ordering prescription looks like,
    we calculate explicitly for @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and therefore

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.15)
                           @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

    where the last equality follows because @xmath is antisymmetric and
    because @xmath .
    With ( 1.15 ) we find that an ordering prescription @xmath which
    starts with the assignments

      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.16)
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath               
      -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

    leads to the star product @xmath . Below we will derive an
    equivalence transformation @xmath from @xmath to @xmath such that
    the entire ordering prescription is given by @xmath . We see that we
    must require @xmath such that @xmath equals the identity map for
    @xmath . The star product @xmath is obviously a generalization of
    the first two examples @xmath and @xmath , since we get @xmath for
    @xmath and @xmath for @xmath as in ( 1.13 ).

##### (d) Example for Equivalence

Can we find an explicit equivalence transformation @xmath (see
Definition 2) to pass over from the usually used Moyal-Weyl product
@xmath to the more general star product @xmath We already know that such
a @xmath exists because of Conclusion 1 and the following Lemma provides
it explicitly.

###### Lemma 1.

The star products @xmath defined in ( 1.11 ) and @xmath defined in (
1.14 ) are equivalent and the equivalence transformation from @xmath to
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath (no summation!). ⁷ ⁷ 7 Compare with [ 10 ] where quantum
mechanics is considered as an example for deformation quantization.

###### Proof.

We have to prove that @xmath for all @xmath . For this purpose we have
to know how to commute the multiplication map @xmath with the operator
@xmath . In this regard the following equation, nothing else than the
Leibniz rule written in tensor notation, turns out to be very useful:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this commutation relation we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used in the third line that partial derivatives commute with
each other, in the fifth that @xmath since @xmath if @xmath and in the
next to last line again that @xmath . Furthermore, we used that @xmath
is an antisymmetric tensor. The last equation follows directly from the
explicit expression of @xmath given in ( 1.11 ). This proves the lemma.

∎

We have finished our discussion of orderings and star products and
proceed to study how far the gauge theory developed in [ 4 , 5 , 7 ] for
the star product @xmath is affected if we take a different star product.

### 1.2 Gauge Field Theory in the Case of a constant Poisson Tensor
@xmath

A detailed description of gauge field theory in the case of a constant
Poisson structure can be found in [ 5 , 4 , 7 , 16 , 17 ] . We assume
the general ideas to be known and present in the first subsection just a
brief summary of results that are important in our context. Then we will
rather concentrate on what has to be modified in the theory if we change
the star product: We will discuss the issue of involution and study how
the Seiberg-Witten maps depend on the choice of the star product.
Finally, in the last subsection we will discuss how far physical
considerations confine the full freedom in choosing a star product.

#### 1.2.1 Noncommutative Gauge Field Theory

Matter fields are functions in @xmath and an infinitesimal
noncommutative gauge transformations of a matter field @xmath is defined
as [ 4 ] : ⁸ ⁸ 8 Functions with a hat are indeed to be understood as
elements of @xmath and not as elements of @xmath . We add the hat to
distinguish noncommutative fields and ordinary commutative fields for
the noncommutative ones will be expressed by the commutative ones ( 1.28
).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since multiplication of @xmath on the left by coordinates is not a
covariant operation, covariant coordinates @xmath are introduced:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has to transform as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

to render @xmath covariant. ⁹ ⁹ 9 This means @xmath . If @xmath is
non-degenerated, we can use @xmath to upper and lower indices and can
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The gauge transformation of @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

since we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . Additionally, a covariant field strength and a
covariant derivative are introduced:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the general case we want to describe non-abelian gauge field theories
based on a Lie algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the noncommutative setting, however, @xmath has to lie in the
enveloping algebra, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This is because the star commutator of two Lie algebra valued
transformation parameters doesn’t close in the Lie algebra anymore [ 6 ]
. On first glance this seems to lead to infinitely many parameters
@xmath , but the gauge transformations can be restricted to those which
permit to express these infinitely many parameters by the finitely many
commutative ones. This is done by means of the so called Seiberg-Witten
maps

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath denotes the commutative gauge parameter, @xmath the
commutative gauge field and @xmath the commutative matter field. To
calculate the explicit dependence of the noncommutative fields on the
commutative ones we assume that it is possible to expand @xmath in the
formal deformation parameter @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, we get the explicit dependence on the commutative fields by
requiring the following consistency condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and by requiring that the noncommutative gauge transformations are
induced by the commutative gauge transformations of the commutative
fields the noncommutative ones depend on:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These equations were explicitly solved in [ 5 ] up to second order in
@xmath for the star product @xmath .
Remark : In [ 6 ] it is shown that for @xmath exists a solution where
the @xmath -th order of @xmath corresponds to the @xmath -th order of
@xmath .

#### 1.2.2 Noncommutative Gauge Field Theory for an arbitrary star
product

Instead of the Moyal-Weyl product @xmath we can also use every other
star product that is equivalent to this one. Let @xmath be an
equivalence transformation from @xmath to @xmath , i.e. we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Matter fields @xmath are still elements of @xmath with the following
gauge transformation law:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can again introduce covariant coordinates

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath must transform under gauge transformations as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is non-degenerated, we can again lower indices using @xmath as
we did in the case of the Moyal-Weyl product and can define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The transformation law of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

New is that in the case of an arbitrary star product we do not have that
@xmath as it is the case for @xmath . The reason is that in general the
usual partial derivative @xmath is not a derivation for @xmath , i.e. in
general @xmath , whereas the commutator @xmath is a derivation.
Nonetheless, we have:

###### Remark 1.

Let @xmath be an arbitrary star product equivalent to @xmath and let
@xmath be the equivalence transformation from @xmath to @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a derivation for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is an equivalence transformation from @xmath to @xmath , we
have for arbitrary functions @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

As @xmath is a derivation for @xmath , we obtain

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

∎

Furthermore, let us consider only those star products, which correspond
to an ordering prescription that maps all coordinates @xmath to their
noncommutative analogs @xmath . ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 If we assign to coordinates the
dimension of length, this is a physical requirement which guarantees
that the dimension is preserved. Until now, we just demanded @xmath
(Subsection 1.1.1 ). In this case we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we indeed obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We know from Conclusion 1 and Conclusion 2 that @xmath corresponds to an
ordering prescription @xmath . One possibility is given by @xmath ,
where @xmath is the symmetric ordering prescription ( 1.6 ), since
obviously

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we require as above that @xmath , this yields @xmath .

In this case we have because of ( 1.22 ) and ( 1.33 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

Thus, we finally derive the gauge transformation law for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously, the field strength and the covariant derivative for an
arbitrary star product @xmath read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we can proceed as done for the star product @xmath in the previous
subsection and express the noncommutative fields in terms of the
commutative ones by means of the Seiberg-Witten maps for the star
product @xmath . A solution for those Seiberg-Witten maps is given
later.

#### 1.2.3 Noncommutative Gauge Theory and Involution

##### Definition and Examples

A *-involution (Don’t mix up * and @xmath !) of an algebra @xmath is an
anti-linear map such that for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we make an important observation:
@xmath together with the symmetric star product @xmath admits the usual
complex conjugation as involution. We have already given the proof in
Subsection 1.1.2 (c), where we checked that @xmath is a hermitian star
product (see ( 1.1.2 )). On the other hand it can be immediately shown
that for @xmath the complex conjugation is not an involution (the
complex conjugation is not even an involution for @xmath whenever @xmath
(cf. ( 1.14 ))).

The question arises how we can find an involution @xmath for an
arbitrary star product @xmath . The following proposition gives the
answer.

###### Proposition 1.

We get an involution for @xmath by defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the ordinary complex conjugation and @xmath is the
equivalence transformation from @xmath to @xmath (whose existence is
guaranteed by Conclusion 1 ).

###### Proof.

Let be @xmath arbitrary. With the definition of @xmath ( 1.38 ), by
using that @xmath is an equivalence transformation and because @xmath is
an involution for @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Obviously @xmath is satisfied, too and @xmath is an involution in the
sense of the definition given above.

∎

##### The Gauge Invariant Matter Field Term

We still haven’t defined a gauge invariant action. For the Moyal-Weyl
product @xmath this was done in [ 8 ] . A noncommutative Yang-Mills
action is defined in this case as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the adjoint matter field. Let us look at this
action: In analogy to the commutative case we want to obtain a gauge
invariant expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This may seem to be trivial but in fact ( 1.41 ) is only true because
@xmath is a hermitian star product ( 1.1.2 ) and thereby

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

We want to demand @xmath to be hermitian, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

in analogy to the commutative case such that ( 1.40 ) is indeed gauge
invariant. Let us recall that in contrast to the commutative case @xmath
does not lie in the Lie algebra but in the enveloping algebra. If we use
a basis of the enveloping algebra that is totally symmetric with respect
to the hermitian Lie-algebra generators @xmath and write @xmath as in (
1.27 ), we apparently obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , where the bar denotes the usual complex conjugation.
Thus, @xmath is hermitian if all coefficient functions are real.

If we want to use an arbitrary star product we have to adjust the
hermiticity condition since the complex conjugation in general will not
be an involution and therefore ( 1.42 ) will not hold. Let us define the
star-dagger

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the involution given in Conclusion 1 that
corresponds to an arbitrary star product @xmath . Let us denote by
@xmath the matter field for the case where we use @xmath . Then, we want
to define the adjoint matter field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, @xmath is to be gauge invariant for an arbitrary star
product, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, we demand the hermiticity condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Can we find a connection between @xmath and @xmath , the gauge parameter
for @xmath ? Having @xmath with @xmath ( 1.43 ), we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the definition of the involution @xmath for an arbitrary
star product given in Proposition 1 . Defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath actually satisfies ( 1.46 ) and therefore @xmath becomes gauge
invariant.
Remark: The gauge parameter @xmath can be expressed in terms of the
commutative fields by solving the Seiberg-Witten equations ( 1.31 ),
which in fact depend on the choice of the star product, too. In the next
subsection we will show that ( 1.47 ) is actually consistent with the
results we get this way.

#### 1.2.4 Seiberg-Witten Map for Arbitrary Star Products

It is convenient to start determining @xmath by means of the consistency
condition ( 1.30 ). We can put the expansion ( 1.29 ) in the consistency
relation ( 1.30 ) and solve the equation order by order. We see that the
consistency condition ( 1.30 ) contains a @xmath . It therefore depends
on the special choice of a star product (remember that @xmath lies in
the enveloping Lie algebra so that @xmath depends on the star product
@xmath even to first order in @xmath ). The solution to zeroth order is
the commutative gauge parameter @xmath whereas for higher orders we
obtain differential equations that depend on the choice of the star
product.

For the Moyal-Weyl product the equation and the solution for the first
order is given in [ 5 ] . We are not interested in the explicit form of
equations and solutions but just want to expand the solution in orders
of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath stands for “symmetric”. We don’t want to specify these
equations but treat the problem generally. Of course it is possible to
solve the equations explicitly order by order if one fixes a star
product, but with the knowledge we have gathered so far we can give a
solution a lot more elegantly and in full generality. So let @xmath in (
1.30 ) be an arbitrary star product. As we know, @xmath is equivalent to
the Moyal-Weyl product @xmath (Conclusion 1 ) and we want to denote the
equivalence transformation from @xmath to @xmath by @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this input we get:

###### Proposition 2.

If @xmath is a solution of the consistency condition ( 1.30 ) for @xmath
then @xmath is a solution of the consistency condition for @xmath

###### Proof.

To show that @xmath satisfies the consistency condition for @xmath given
in ( 1.30 ), we will reduce the problem to the consistency condition for
@xmath such that we can make use of the fact that @xmath is a solution.
This can be done using that @xmath is an equivalence transformation from
@xmath to @xmath which yields ( 1.48 ). This explicitly reads

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which proves the claim.

∎

We emphasize that this result is exactly what we got at the end of the
previous subsection to guarantee an invariant matter field term in the
Lagrangian (cf. ( 1.47 )).

This is a nice result: Obviously we can immediately give a solution for
the consistency condition ( 1.30 ) for an arbitrary star product if we
know it for @xmath (this is known up to second order) and if we know
@xmath (whereas this indeed can be a problem).

Let us continue with searching a solution for @xmath and @xmath . If we
write out the left hand sides of the Seiberg-Witten equations introduced
in ( 1.31 ), we get with the gauge transformation laws ( 1.32 ) and (
1.34 ) the following star product-dependent equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath was introduced in Remark 1 . Again we can take the
expansions of @xmath respectively @xmath in orders of @xmath ( 1.29 )
and solve the Seiberg-Witten equations order by order for a fixed star
product. This was also done up to second order in [ 5 ] for @xmath .
With this solution we then obtain:

###### Proposition 3.

If @xmath and @xmath are a solution of the Seiberg-Witten equations (
1.49 ) for @xmath then @xmath and @xmath are a solution for the
Seiberg-Witten equations for @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
equivalence transformation from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Proof.

We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We used as in the previous proof that @xmath is an equivalence
transformation from @xmath to @xmath and that the Seiberg-Witten
equation is satisfied by @xmath for the star product @xmath . With
Proposition 2 we see that @xmath is a solution for ( 1.49 ).

For the vector field we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used in the last step that for @xmath ( 1.33 ) holds that
@xmath . Thus, if we define @xmath we obtain with Proposition 2 and the
gauge transformation law ( 1.34 ) that @xmath .

∎

Having studied star products and its properties enabled us to get easily
these general results for the solution of the Seiberg-Witten map.
Knowing that, we can now treat the problem of how far “physics” changes
with the change of the star product.

#### 1.2.5 Physics and the Choice of the Star Product

##### The Action

The noncommutative gauge field theory permits to write down a
gauge-covariant Lagrangian and an invariant action ( 1.39 ) using the
Moyal-Weyl product @xmath . ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 See below for gauge invariance. In
the case of an arbitrary star product we obtain with ( 1.35 ) and ( 1.45
)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The crucial question is whether this action differs from ( 1.39 ). If
the action does not change, the equations of motion will not change and
physics will be unaffected by a change of the star product. But if it
changes we will get different physical predictions. The following
conclusion states how the action is affected.

###### Conclusion 3.

Let @xmath and @xmath be a noncommutative Yang-Mills action and
Lagrangian that correspond to a solution of the Seiberg-Witten maps for
the Moyal-Weyl product @xmath . Let @xmath be another star product
equivalent to @xmath by means of the equivalence transformation @xmath
(from @xmath to @xmath ). Then we get a Yang-Mills action and a
Lagrangian, denoted by @xmath and @xmath respectively, that correspond
to a solution of the Seiberg-Witten maps for @xmath by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

We want to understand any matter field and field strength written with a
prime as a solution of the Seiberg-Witten maps for the star product
@xmath . We obtain because of @xmath , because of Proposition 2 and
Proposition 3 and with the definitions for the field strength resp. the
covariant derivative ( 1.35 ) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The equation ( 1.51 ) then follows from the definition of the action (
1.39 ) respectively ( 1.50 ) using once again that @xmath .

∎

Let us comment on this result: As an equivalence transformation, @xmath
(and therefore @xmath as well) starts in zeroth order with the identity.
Therefore we always recover for any star product to zeroth order the
commutative theory. Changes can only occur in higher orders of @xmath .
To get a better feeling for what happens, let us consider for instance
@xmath ( 1.14 ) that we introduced in Subsection 1.1.2 (c) with the
equivalence transformation @xmath from @xmath to @xmath given in ( 1.17
). We get with equation ( 1.51 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

since for non-zero orders we integrate partial derivatives of @xmath
over the whole space which, assuming that fields vanish in infinity,
equals zero.

Usually, an equivalence transformation is defined to be a differential
operator in all orders of @xmath . In this case the two actions @xmath
and @xmath in Conclusion 3 are actually always equal if the equivalence
transformations @xmath consists in all orders of @xmath of purely @xmath
-linear combinations of partial derivatives (a non-constant coefficient
would spoil this property). In this case, as a matter of fact, physics
does not change. But it is not difficult to find an ordering
prescription for which the corrections of the action to non-zeroth order
in @xmath do not vanish. We just have to take any ordering prescription
that in a non-zeroth order contains non-constant coefficients.
Nevertheless, there is a physical reason why we shall not allow star
products in full arbitrariness for our theory: the gauge invariance
principle.

##### Gauge Invariance

Gauge invariance is a fundamental concept of our theory. Knowing the
covariant transformation laws ( 1.26 ) and ( 1.25 ) respectively ( 1.36
) and ( 1.37 ), invariance of the Yang-Mills action is only guaranteed
if the integral satisfies the so called trace property , i.e. if the
integral is cyclic

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . In the usually considered case, where the Moyal-Weyl
product is used, this property is given. We even have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This can be seen by means of partial integration. Again by partial
integration it is not difficult to check that all the star products
@xmath satisfy

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

too.

Obviously, if we do not want to loose the concept of an invariant
action, we are forced to accept only star products that satisfy the
trace property ( 1.53 ). Those star products we want to call star
products with trace property.

Let @xmath be an equivalence transformation from @xmath to a star
product @xmath . Let us summarize which conditions we need to get
equivalent physical theories in the end:

-   @xmath must be a star product with trace property, i.e.: @xmath for
    all @xmath

-   The corresponding actions have to be equal, i.e. @xmath (cf.
    Conclusion 3 ).

If the equivalence transformation @xmath consists in all orders of
purely @xmath -linear combinations of partial derivatives, the property
(ii) is satisfied as we saw above. In this case we obtain, assuming as
always that functions vanish at infinity, that also the first property
is satisfied:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used in the third line that @xmath is a star product with trace
property.

In particular, the transformations @xmath , which we introduced in Lemma
1 , are of this type. Hence, in particular the normal ordered star
product, that is sometimes used instead of the symmetric ordered one,
satisfies both conditions.

However, the first condition, which reflects a physical demand on the
set of star products, does not imply the second one. Thus, the
requirement of trace property is not sufficient to guarantee that all
considered star products lead to the same action.

The question remains, whether there exists another “physical reason”
that confines the set of arbitrary star products to those that finally
obey (ii) as well. An answer may be found by restricting the set of
allowed ordering prescriptions. Until now, an ordering prescription was
just defined as a vector space isomorphism with @xmath that approaches
the identity for @xmath . We recall that we already demanded @xmath in
Subsection 1.2.2 . Nevertheless, in this generality ordering
prescriptions still are not “physical”. Giving the coordinates the
dimension of length, we would like to obtain the same dimensions for the
preimages and images of @xmath . This implies @xmath to be homogeneous.
The presumption is, that if we demand an ordering prescription @xmath to
be additionally homogeneous in all coordinates, that means @xmath is to
preserve the degree of all coordinates, the corresponding equivalence
transformation @xmath with @xmath then ends up to consist in all orders
of @xmath of @xmath linear combinations of partial derivatives. ¹² ¹² 12
The idea is to use the fact that for a monomial @xmath ordering @xmath
such that we get a linear combination of symmetric ordered monomials is
done by commuting coordinates. But commuting two coordinates @xmath and
@xmath in turn can be achieved by applying @xmath such that @xmath will
consist of linear combinations of such contributions Ordering
prescriptions that we would understand to be “physical” then are
actually those which just “order” the coordinates in a special way. As
we discussed above, star products corresponding to those ordering
prescriptions then lead all to the same action as the symmetric star
product does.

## Chapter 2 Gauge Field Theory on the @xmath-Symmetric Plane

In this chapter we will treat a noncommutative space with @xmath
symmetry. By @xmath we denote the @xmath deformed Euclidean group on the
two dimensional space (or more precisely the @xmath deformed algebra of
functions on the two dimensional Euclidean group @xmath ). This is a
simple example which allows us to study how gauge field theory can be
implemented on @xmath deformed spaces, discussing the general
difficulties we meet and giving possible solutions. The considerations
in this chapter are kept general as far as possible so that this work
may be generalized to other @xmath deformed spaces as well.

This chapter is divided into three sections. In the first section, we
briefly introduce the quantum group @xmath and the @xmath symmetric
plane that is underlying the following considerations. In the second
section, we develop gauge field theories on the @xmath -symmetric plane
based on a generalization of the theory developed for the case of a
constant Poisson structure @xmath (cf. Chapter 1 and references within).
We consider infinitesimal gauge transformations of matter fields in full
analogy to the commutative theory, i.e. taking the transformation law of
commutative matter fields and replacing the ordinary, commutative
multiplication by a convenient star product that reflects the algebraic
properties of the noncommutative @xmath symmetric plane. In a second
step, we introduce covariant coordinates and a gauge field @xmath . The
problem arises that we cannot simply lower indices using @xmath as in
Chapter 1 , since a non-constant @xmath in general spoils covariance. A
solution is found by introducing the “covariantizer” @xmath [ 9 ] .
Furthermore, this approach allows us to apply the concept of the
Seiberg-Witten maps on our noncommutative plane. Thus, even for this
@xmath deformed space, the noncommutative functions can be expressed in
terms of the commutative ones. This makes it possible to calculate
explicitly the corrections to the commutative theory in the first order
of the deformation parameter, which this noncommutative theory implies.
This is done at the end of the second section. Unfortunately, it turns
out that the approach we have chosen in this section leads to a theory
that is not covariant with respect to @xmath -transformations of the
space. The problem is the choice of the integral: the invariance
principle forces us to introduce an integral with trace property that is
not invariant under @xmath -transformations. But, starting with a @xmath
deformed plane possessing a quantum group symmetry, we would like to set
up a theory that is covariant with respect to this symmetry
transformations. We try to establish such a theory in the third section,
this time putting priority on the @xmath symmetry. First we construct an
@xmath invariant integral. As we will see, this integral in turn looses
the trace property. In a second step we introduce an @xmath covariant
differential calculus, making it possible to speak about covariant one-
and two-forms. Difficulties appear when introducing gauge
transformations: As the integral is not cyclic anymore, gauge
transformations cannot be defined by usual conjugation with an unitary
element but we have to adjust them somehow. We have to define “ @xmath
deformed” gauge transformations that permit to get a gauge invariant
action. Regrettably, we loose in this approach the concept of
Seiberg-Witten map, at least at the moment we do not know how to convey
it to this setting. Nevertheless, future work could go in this
direction, establishing a Seiberg-Witten map for the @xmath theory…

### 2.1 @xmath and the @xmathSymmetric Plane

In classical physics we have a Lie group acting on a vector space. Since
a Lie group cannot be deformed (the set of semi-simple Lie groups is a
discrete set), one has to consider the algebra of functions on the
considered vector space. For the action of a Lie group on a space is
equivalent to considering the algebra of functions on the Lie group
coacting on the algebra of functions on the space. Those algebras of
functions, both on the Lie algebra and on the space, can be deformed.
The resulting objects are Hopf algebras. First non-trivial examples of
Hopf algebras were for instance introduced by Faddeev, Reshetikhin and
Takhtadjan [ 18 ] . Thus, in the noncommutative realm, the action of a
Lie group becomes the coaction of the corresponding deformed Hopf
algebra on the deformed algebra of functions on the space.

We start introducing the generators @xmath of the quantum group @xmath
with their defining relations and structure maps [ 19 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

If we define new operators @xmath by [ 19 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

(note that @xmath is unitary and can therefore be parametrized by a
hermitian element) the coproduct of @xmath and @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

A Hopf algebra @xmath coacting on an algebra @xmath means that algebra
is a left (or right) @xmath -comodule algebra:

###### Definition 3.

A left coaction of a Hopf algebra H on an algebra A is a linear mapping
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In Sweedler notation we write [ 20 , p. 32] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An algebra @xmath with a left coaction of a Hopf algebra @xmath is
called a left H-comodule algebra.

This definition implies that every Hopf algebra @xmath admits a comodule
structure on itself in virtue of its comultiplication

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore we can interpret the algebra generated by @xmath , which we
want to rename by @xmath to distinguish them from the elements in @xmath
, as the @xmath deformed algebra of functions on the @xmath symmetric
plane. We want to write @xmath for the algebra generated by @xmath .
From ( 2.3 ) we get the following left @xmath -coaction on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We note that it follows from ( 2.1 ) (resp. by requiring @xmath to be a
@xmath -comodule homomorphism) that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that we can write @xmath . We want to extend the coaction of @xmath
to the bigger algebra of formal power series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which we call the algebra of functions on the @xmath symmetric plane .
From now on functions are considered to lie in this algebra. It is
covariant under the @xmath coaction as described above.

We continue by discussing two different approaches to establish gauge
field theory on @xmath starting with a generalization of the concepts we
got to know in Chapter 1 .

### 2.2 Generalization of the Case @xmath

Let us adjust our notation to the notation we used in Chapter 1 ,
especially in the section about orderings and star products. Henceforth,
we will use the following abbreviations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this section we generalize the ideas we studied in Chapter 1 . We
start doing so by constructing a star product for the algebra @xmath
such that it becomes isomorphic as algebra to @xmath in full analogy to
what we have done in the first chapter. Since a star product is a
deformation in direction of a Poisson structure, we will first deduce
the corresponding Poisson structure.

#### 2.2.1 The Poisson Structure for @xmath

To distinguish commutative coordinates and noncommutative ones we want
to denote in this subsection the former by @xmath and the latter by
@xmath . In the following subsections we will only need commutative
coordinates and therefore they cannot be confounded with noncommutative
ones.

We recall that we introduced in the first chapter a formal deformation
parameter @xmath . In this case we want to do so, too. We take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

as formal deformation parameter and our aim is to study deviations from
the commutative theory in orders of this parameter @xmath Thus, the
commutation relations ( 2.8 ) in @xmath become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This yields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We want to construct a star product that renders the commutative algebra
@xmath isomorphic to @xmath . A star product is a deformation in
direction of a Poisson structure. Therefore we need to know which
Poisson structure we have to attribute to @xmath .

Let us suppose we had an arbitrary star product @xmath (star products
exist as we learned in Chapter 1 ) reflecting the algebraic properties
of @xmath , i.e. @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 These are the star products that we are
interested in. A priory star products that correspond to a certain
Poisson structure do not lead to isomorphic algebras. This is only the
case if the star products lie in the same equivalence class. Thus, we
need star products that lie in the equivalence class which consists of
exactly those star products that render @xmath isomorphic as algebra to
@xmath . Let @xmath be the corresponding algebra isomorphism. We want to
assume additionally that @xmath for @xmath such that @xmath (cf. Chapter
1). Thus, we have @xmath and since by definition a star product always
starts with the identity in zeroth order, we obtain for the
star-commutator of the coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we know, the Poisson bracket on @xmath corresponds to the first order
term in @xmath of the star commutator multiplied by @xmath (Definition 1
), such that we can derive from ( 2.12 ) the Poisson structure for
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the Poisson tensor is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Remark: If we write down the commutation relations in terms of the basis
@xmath , where @xmath , we find with @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, we get for a star product @xmath with the above properties:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore the Poisson structure in the basis @xmath reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we get the following Poisson tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notation: We will always write functions depending on @xmath with tilde
and use Greek indices if we consider the basis @xmath , whereas we will
use no tilde for functions depending on @xmath and Latin indices, for
example @xmath , for the basis @xmath . We will also often write @xmath
meaning @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.2.2 A Star Product for @xmath

Again we have a big freedom in choosing a special ordering prescription
@xmath since every ordering prescription leads to a star product by
defining @xmath (cf. Subsection 1.1.1 ). Here, we do not want to repeat
all the discussion of orderings and corresponding star products but just
remark that a star product corresponding to the normal ordering (all
@xmath to the left and all @xmath to the right) is given by (see for
example [ 4 ] or also [ 21 ] where the Manin plane is discussed)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For us the following star product will be of primary interest

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

First of all it can be easily verified, checking all requirements in
Definition 1 , that @xmath defined in ( 2.16 ) is indeed a star product
for @xmath . Let us think about which ordering prescription @xmath
corresponds to @xmath : We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We assume that @xmath is given by an ordering prescription @xmath , i.e.
we assume that @xmath . Than we find with the short calculation given
above that an ordering prescription @xmath that starts with the
assignments ² ² 2 Of course this is not the entire isomorphism @xmath
but we get an impression of how it looks like.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

leads to @xmath . We want to call such an ordering prescription @xmath
symmetric ordering ³ ³ 3 This notion goes back to Peter Schupp. . In
particular we see that @xmath neither corresponds to the symmetric
ordering prescription nor to the normal ordering.

We note that @xmath is indeed a hermitian star product. Thus, complex
conjugation is an involution for @xmath .
Remark: In the real basis @xmath ( 2.16 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we want to determine the corresponding ordering prescription in this
basis things are not so easy. We find for example

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Obviously in this basis the ordering prescription as well as the star
product become more complicated. Therefore it is reasonable to take the
complex basis. Nevertheless, we want to give all results for the usually
used and more familiar real basis as well.

In the next chapter we will learn about gauge field theory on this
noncommutative space. Later we will see why we want to choose especially
@xmath to establish abelian gauge field theory: Actually, @xmath
together with a modification of the common integral leads to an integral
with trace property (see ( 1.53 )), which is necessary to obtain an
invariant action (cf. Subsection 1.2.5 ).

#### 2.2.3 Noncommutative Abelian Gauge Field Theory

We treat the case of abelian, noncommutative gauge field theory on
@xmath This may be generalized to non abelian gauge field theories in a
second step.

Infinitesimal gauge transformations of a matter field @xmath are
introduced as in Subsection 1.2.1 , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The concept of covariant coordinates @xmath with @xmath leads again to a
gauge field @xmath transforming as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One difference to the case where @xmath is constant arises now: we
cannot simply use @xmath to lower indices as we did in Subsection 1.2.1
. Since @xmath is not constant, this would not lead to a gauge covariant
field. Thus, we will stay with the gauge fields @xmath and will try to
analyze and to solve the emerging problems step by step. Let us continue
by giving a solution for the Seiberg-Witten map ( 1.28 ).

##### Seiberg-Witten map

The solution for the Seiberg-Witten map for the gauge field @xmath in
the case of abelian gauge field theory is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Compare with the publication [ 9 ] ⁴ ⁴ 4 Mind that we want to contribute
to every @xmath an order in @xmath . , where a solution for an arbitrary
Poisson structure @xmath up to second order was derived using the
Kontsevich star product. The solution found there was taken and we
checked that it is indeed a solution for @xmath , too.

By @xmath and @xmath we denote the commutative gauge field and field
strength written in the basis @xmath . Expressed in terms of the
ordinary, commutative gauge field @xmath and field strength @xmath , we
have (Appendix A )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and furthermore the commutative field strength @xmath becomes in the
basis @xmath (Appendix A )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 2.2.4 The Field Strength

Let us think about the principles that we want to impose on a field
strength @xmath :

1.  We want the field strength @xmath to be gauge covariant, that means
    that the transformation law of @xmath is to be given by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.19)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.  In the semi-classical limit @xmath resp. @xmath we want to obtain
    the commutative field strength @xmath .

We start treating the first requirement. For this purpose we write the
commutation relations ( 2.8 ) in the following form introducing the
@xmath -matrix:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the upper indices number the rows in the sequence @xmath and the
lower indices the columns in the same sequence. Defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get a covariant expression since @xmath are covariant coordinates.
Thereby ( 2.21 ) can be considered a good candidate for a field
strength.

Let us calculate the first nontrivial order of @xmath to study its
semi-classical limit. To do so, we first have to expand the matrix
@xmath in @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
              @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We introduce the notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that we can write, using that @xmath , the commutation relations (
2.20 ) and the Seiberg-Witten map up to first order in @xmath for @xmath
given in ( 2.18 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We split the calculation and start with the first two terms on the right
hand side for @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath (see above), we get
immediately

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the star-commutator always starts to first order in @xmath by @xmath
times the Poisson structure (cf. Definition 1 ), we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used that @xmath is antisymmetric, too.

We continue with the following term:

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

It is easy to see that this equals zero noting that @xmath is
antisymmetric in @xmath whereas @xmath is symmetric in @xmath . The last
contribution reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

such that we find, putting all contributions together multiplied by
@xmath as in the definition of @xmath and taking into account that
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It can be easily checked that @xmath and we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us remark that the calculation made so far for the semi-classical
limit of @xmath is independent of the choice of a star product, since
until now only the star-commutator up to first order in @xmath entered
into the calculation.

While @xmath defined above transforms covariantly, the semi-classical
limit does not exactly lead to the commutative field strength @xmath .
Therefore @xmath cannot be taken like this as a noncommutative field
strength. Nevertheless, we can modify @xmath : We want to get rid of the
two @xmath ’s without loosing covariance. This can be done by
multiplying @xmath by a covariant function with the property that in the
semi-classical limit we actually obtain @xmath In [ 9 ] we get a hint
how we can do so: Here, covariant functions are introduced generated by
applying a mapping @xmath , called “covariantizer”, to an arbitrary
function @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(applying @xmath to coordinates leads to covariant coordinates). The
covariantizer is defined by requiring

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can determine @xmath up to first order in @xmath . With @xmath ,
where @xmath is the commutative gauge parameter, we see that @xmath
obeys the conditional equation ( 2.25 ). Here @xmath denotes the
commutative gauge field with the gauge transformation law @xmath . Thus,
in our two dimensional case we obtain ⁵ ⁵ 5 The existence of @xmath to
all orders in @xmath was derived in [ 9 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

(the explicit contribution to first order in @xmath will be used later
when we expand the action in @xmath ). We see that because of ( 2.24 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore @xmath admits the right semi-classical limit. Moreover,
@xmath transforms covariantly ( @xmath is the “covariantizer”). Hence,
we can conclude that

-   @xmath is gauge covariant and that

-   @xmath for @xmath

such that @xmath satisfies all we demanded above from a field strength.
Hence, we consider @xmath to be the noncommutative abelian field
strength.

Now we can write down a Lagrangian for a noncommutative, free photon
field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Remark: In the basis of real coordinates we want to define in analogy to
what we studied for the basis @xmath : ⁶ ⁶ 6 See the remark below to get
an explanation for the factor @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given in ( 2.20 ) and @xmath resp. @xmath are the
covariant coordinates (cf. ( 1.19 )). Then @xmath is gauge-covariant. If
we undertake a similar calculation as done above for determining the
semi-classical limit of @xmath , we get for the first non vanishing
order

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Again we want to get rid of the two @xmath that appear
without loosing gauge covariance so that we multiply by @xmath . Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

we get with the definition of @xmath given in ( 2.26 ) up to first order
in @xmath that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Finally, we define the field strength in real coordinates by

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.33)
  -- -- -- --------

and the Lagrangian as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Remark: We found a field strength and a Lagrangian both, in the real and
the complex basis. In both cases we got the right semi-classical limit
and of course it is possible to come from one to the other case by basis
transformation. But we want to underline the following: If we compare
the definitions ( 2.21 ) of @xmath resp. ( 2.30 ) of @xmath made above,
we see that @xmath (for the definition of the basis transformation
@xmath see Appendix A ). Both definitions obviously differ by the factor
@xmath . Where does it come from? We need the factor to guarantee in
both cases the right semi-classical limit. @xmath starts in the first
non-vanishing order with @xmath (see ( 2.24 )). If we write this
expression in terms of the real basis @xmath we have to use that @xmath
(cf. ( 2.14 ) and ( 2.15 )) as well as the fact that @xmath ( A.3 ).
Together this gives @xmath . This factor must not be forgotten if
translating results from the case with complex basis to the case where
we use the real basis. Therefore definitions made here are reasonable
(best proven by the fact that they lead to the right semi-classical
limit as they should).

#### 2.2.5 The Integral with Trace Property

In this section we treat the problem of how to find an integral with
trace property for non-constant Poisson structures (for a constant
Poisson structure the usual integral with an appropriate star product
admits the trace property as we saw in Chapter 1). We will treat the
special example @xmath , the Poisson tensor for @xmath ( 2.14 ), but
considerations made here can be transfered to other, more complicated
Poison structures as well. Thus, the aim is not just to give a solution
for our example but also to discuss two approaches how it may be
possible to find solutions for more general Poisson structures.

##### General Remarks

We want to find a measure @xmath for the usual integral such that for a
given star product @xmath the integral admits the trace property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all functions @xmath . Let us emphasize that this is a combination
of two problems:

-   find a star product and

-   find a measure corresponding to this star product.

In general it surely is not possible to start with an arbitrary star
product for the considered quantum space in the hope to find a measure
giving the integral the above trace property to all orders in @xmath .

##### 1. Calculation

Of course it is possible to start with a special star product that seems
to be “good” in order to try to calculate a corresponding measure. The
problems that arise are that

-   in general it is difficult to find a solution valid to all orders in
    @xmath

-   we have to start with a special choice of a star product without
    knowing if this concrete star product permits a solution, i.e. if
    there exists a measure corresponding to this star product that
    renders the usual integral cyclic in the above sense.

In our example things can actually be done by calculation: First we have
to fix a star product. The star product @xmath ( 2.16 ) seems to be a
good choice since the symmetry of @xmath tells us that @xmath and @xmath
are equal for all even orders of @xmath such that we do not have to
bother about even orders anymore. If one starts first to consider the
condition ( 2.35 ) up to first order in @xmath , a short calculation
leads to the result @xmath for the measure. We can even show that @xmath
is a measure that satisfies ( 2.35 ) to all orders in @xmath :

###### Proposition 4.

For all functions @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us consider the @xmath -th term of the sum on the right hand side

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We introduce the short hand notation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and with that the @xmath th term of the sum can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath this leads after partial integration (we assume always that
functions considered here vanish at infinity) to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is valid for any summand corresponding to @xmath and only the
zeroth order term does not vanish such that at the end we find what we
claimed:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

##### 2. Using a Theorem from Felder and Shoikhet

We will use the following theorem from Felder and Shoikhet published in
[ 22 ] :

###### Theorem 1.

Let @xmath be a Poisson manifold with the bivector field @xmath and let
@xmath be any volume form on @xmath such that @xmath . Then there exists
a star product on @xmath such that for any two functions @xmath one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let me remark on how we have to understand @xmath In [ 22 ] it is
defined as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath is the set of @xmath - polyvector fields and
@xmath denotes the exterior differential. In have the following setting:
@xmath and we write for a general volume form @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we see that if we choose @xmath we get @xmath such that in this case
surely @xmath . With that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

What did we achieve this way? We easily could find a volume form @xmath
such that @xmath . The above theorem then assures the existence of a
star product such that the integral over that volume form is cyclic
(even more: The integral of two functions’ star multiplication is equal
to the integral of the ordinarily multiplied functions). Of course we
still do not know which star product has together with that volume form
this nice property. Nonetheless, the existence at least is assured and
for usual physical applications this can be sufficient: usually we do
only need to know the star product explicitly up to second order and
these orders can be, if the volume form is known, determined by
calculation. In our example the above calculation shows that @xmath is
the right star product corresponding to the volume form @xmath .

We want to remark that for other, more complicated poisson structures
where a solution cannot be found easily by calculation, this approach
could be the more systematic one. It should also be possible for more
complicated Poisson structures to determine a volume form @xmath
satisfying the condition @xmath guaranteeing then by Felder’s and
Shoikhet’s theorem the existence of a star product leading to the trace
property. This star product then hopefully can be determined explicitly
in a second step (but in any case at least the first orders of it).

#### 2.2.6 The Action and the Integral

Having found an integral with trace property for the star product @xmath
as well as a gauge covariant field strength with right semi-classical
limit, we can write down an invariant action:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A new problem arises immediately: Let us determine the semi-classical
limit for @xmath . We know that @xmath for @xmath because of ( 2.33 )
such that we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is not exactly what we want. In the semi-classical limit we do not
find the free action for the flat plane, since the measure we had to
introduce to guarantee the trace property of the integral does not
disappear. Again we have to make a modification, similar to what we
already did for the field strength in ( 2.27 ): we have to multiply by a
covariant term that in the semi-classical limit reduces to @xmath . ⁷ ⁷
7 I want to thank Peter Schupp who put forward this idea. Then, for
@xmath we get the usual integral over @xmath . Let me remark that we do
not loose the gauge invariance of the action if the additional term we
introduce is gauge covariant. We want to multiply by the covariant
coordinates and finally define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as the free action. By this definition we get that

-   @xmath is gauge invariant as well as that

-   @xmath , i.e. it admits the right semi-classical limit.

(The reader might note that we have some freedom in choosing this
additional, covariant term and also in choosing the position where to
place it under the integral. We come back to this topic later.)

##### Expanded Field Strength and Action

We want to expand this action in @xmath to be able to read off directly
the corrections we get to the commutative theory in first order. We
start calculating the first order term in @xmath for @xmath using the
expression for @xmath up to first order in @xmath (see ( 2.32 )) and the
second order term of @xmath given in ( 2.24 ). Additionally we have to
determine the third order term of @xmath and must put all the results
together. This was done making use of ‘‘Mathematica’’ ⁸ ⁸ 8 Special
thanks to Fabian Bachmaier who made this possible. leading to the
following results:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Expansion of the Lagrangian @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally, multiplying the action with the covariant term @xmath to
guarantee the right semi-classical limit (see above) we find for the
action:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

##### Expanded Field Strength and Action in the Real Basis @xmath

The field strength @xmath in the basis @xmath was already introduced in
( 2.33 ). If we now use the star product @xmath in the basis @xmath
given in ( 2.17 ), we obtain the following results up to first order in
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.40)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.41)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The Lagrangian introduced in ( 2.34 ) has the following form up to first
order in @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To get the right classical limit for the integral we must again multiply
by a covariant term. We take @xmath (note that this is not equal to
@xmath !) and finally find for the modified field strength

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Again we find the right semi-classical limit, i.e. the theory we
established approaches for both cases, complex and real basis, the
commutative theory in the limit @xmath Moreover, we can now read off the
correction to the commutative theory this noncommutative theory leads to
up to first order in @xmath .
Let us comment on the results:

-   First we see that we get after transformation in both bases the same
    results for the field strength @xmath respectively @xmath and the
    Lagrangian @xmath respectively @xmath providing us a correctness
    check.

-   The two results for @xmath respectively @xmath are not identically
    equal. The reason is that we multiplied in the case of the real
    basis by the additional covariant term @xmath to compensate the
    measure of the integral in the limit @xmath , whereas we took in the
    case of the complex basis the covariant term @xmath . This was done
    on purpose to show that the results we get here depend on the
    special choice of the additional term (we just required
    gauge-covariance and a special semi-classical limit but these
    requirements do not uniquely determine such an additional term). We
    will comment on this in the following subsection.

-   The results we get lead us to the following interpretation: In first
    order of @xmath we obtain a correction to the common photon
    propagator (quadratic term in @xmath ). Additionally, we get, if we
    interpret @xmath as a background field, some interaction term
    between three photons and the @xmath field (the rest of the action’s
    first-order term).

-   Matter fields could easily be introduced, too, leading to more new
    interactions in the first order of the deformation parameter @xmath
    .

#### 2.2.7 Freedom of the Theory

We established in all detail a gauge field theory on @xmath , the @xmath
symmetric space. We defined a field strength, introduced a cyclic
integral and got finally an invariant action with right semi-classical
limit. At the end the expansion of field strength, Lagrangian and action
in the deformation parameter @xmath was calculated up to first order. We
can read off explicitly how far the theory differs from the commutative
theory.

Nevertheless, it is our obligation to look back and to examine whether
all the assumptions and the definitions we made are dictated by
principles we want to require or how far our considerations actually
admit freedom in defining the introduced physical quantities such as
field strength, Lagrangian and action. The reader might already have
noticed that in the definition of @xmath and of @xmath (cf. ( 2.27 ) and
( 2.34 )) at least the position where to put the appearing @xmath terms
is arbitrary. There is no conceptual criterion that distinguishes one
special choice of position. All possible choices of position lead to the
same semi-classical limit and give covariant expressions and this is all
we required. The hope was, that nevertheless physics might be unaffected
of the choice of position: We hoped that at least the first order term
of the expanded quantities would not depend on the choice of position.
Unfortunately, calculation shows that for example @xmath and @xmath ,
two equivalent, possible ways to define @xmath , differ in first order
of @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that the choice of position of the intervening @xmath terms
influences the physical results.

Moreover, when we defined the action we had to introduce a covariant
expression that compensates in the semi-classical limit the measure
@xmath , which in turn we had to introduce to guarantee the trace
property of the integral (see ( 2.19 ) and Proposition 4 ). At least if
we want to treat gauge field theory on the flat space we cannot do
without this additional term. We added @xmath but a lot of other terms
could have been chosen. For example @xmath admits the same
semi-classical limit as @xmath and is also covariant. None of both can
be regarded the better one. In the way we established the theory, no
conceptual criterion exists to get rid of this freedom.

The other general problem we have with this approach is the following:
Our considerations did not include in all points the background symmetry
of the space, the @xmath two-dimensional Euclidean group. We see that
the integral with the measure we had to choose to get the trace property
is certainly not @xmath - invariant. Nevertheless, having a background
symmetry we should try to keep it and try to set up an @xmath -
covariant theory.

That is why we study in the next section an alternative approach to the
problem. We will establish a theory where the @xmath symmetry stands in
the foreground of all considerations.

### 2.3 @xmath - Covariant Abelian Gauge Field Theory

A covariant, abelian gauge theory was already established on another
noncommutative space: the @xmath deformed fuzzy sphere that is covariant
with respect to the coaction of @xmath [ 23 , 24 , 25 ] . Guided by
these publications, we set up a gauge theory based on @xmath covariance.
At the beginning, we construct an @xmath invariant integral. As we will
see, it is not cyclic. In a second step an @xmath covariant differential
calculus is introduced. We define an exterior differential, @xmath
one-forms, @xmath two-forms and @xmath deformed derivatives. Moreover, a
generator of the exterior differential as well as a frame, a basis of
one-forms that commutes with arbitrary functions, are derived. We
additionally introduce a gauge field @xmath and a field strength @xmath
that in the semi-classical limit @xmath becomes the commutative field
strength. Problems arise when trying to define gauge transformations:
Since the integral does not possess the trace property, we cannot
introduce gauge transformations of gauge fields as we did in the
previous section. By means of an algebra homomorphism @xmath , we define
gauge transformations of one forms in a way that allows us to speak
about a gauge invariant action.

For a detailed discussion of quantum groups the reader is refered to [
26 , 20 , 27 ] .

#### 2.3.1 An Invariant Integral on the @xmath - Symmetric Plane

We need an @xmath - invariant integral to define an action.
Considerations made in this subsection are guided by [ 28 ] , where a
Haar-functional on @xmath extended to formal power series is derived.
Nevertheless, we use another, physically more intuitive basis of the
dual of @xmath and present the necessary calculations. Whereas we
introduced in Section 2.1 the quantum group @xmath and the @xmath
symmetric plane, we proceed to introduce at this point the quantum dual
of @xmath .

##### The Quantum Universal Enveloping Algebra @xmath and Duality

In many cases it is convenient to consider the action of the quantum
groups dual instead of the coaction of the quantum group itself.
Therefore we introduce @xmath , the dual of @xmath .

###### Definition 4.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two Hopf algebras. We say that @xmath and
@xmath are in duality if there exists a bilinear form, called dual
pairing,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the extension of @xmath on
tensor products.

In [ 19 ] the dual to @xmath , called @xmath , is constructed. With the
following identifications for the generators @xmath introduced in this
publication,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we then get that @xmath is generated by @xmath with the following
commutation relations and structure maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the dual pairing on the generators is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The generators @xmath as duals of @xmath can be interpreted as the
@xmath analogs of the generators of translations whereas @xmath , the
dual of @xmath , can be viewed as the generator of rotations (rotations
are not deformed). After having introduced the dual, we can now use the
dual pairing to pass over from the coaction of @xmath to an action of
the dual @xmath on @xmath .

##### The Action of @xmath on @xmath

First of all we want to define what me mean by the action of a Hopf
algebra on an algebra.

###### Definition 5.

We say that a Hopf algebra @xmath is acting on an algebra @xmath from
the right (left) if @xmath is a right (left) @xmath -module such that
@xmath and @xmath are right (left) @xmath -module homomorphisms, that
means if holds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and @xmath . An algebra @xmath with a Hopf algebra @xmath
acting on it from the right (left) is called a right (left) @xmath
module algebra.

###### Lemma 2.

Given a dual pairing between Hopf algebras @xmath and @xmath and a left
coaction @xmath of @xmath on an algebra @xmath , we get a right action ⁹
⁹ 9 Similarly we a get a left action via a dual pairing from a right
coaction. of @xmath on @xmath , @xmath , by defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

We use Sweedler notation.
If we define as in ( 2.49 ) we get from the properties of the dual
pairing (Definition 4 ) that @xmath is a right @xmath -module. For
example we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We prove the remaining requirements again using Definition 4 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                                
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

Thus, with the dual pairing given in ( 2.46 ) and with the coaction of
@xmath given in ( 2.7 ) we can define an action of @xmath on @xmath in
analogy to ( 2.49 ). We obtain for the action of @xmath and @xmath on
the generators @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we want to extend the action of @xmath on the algebra of formal
power series in @xmath respecting the commutation relation ( 2.8 ). This
algebra we denoted by @xmath ( 2.10 ). Before giving explicit formulas,
let us remark that any formal power series @xmath can be decomposed as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are formal power series. To see that, we have to split a
formal power series depending of @xmath into two series, the one
consisting of all summands where the exponent of @xmath is bigger or
equal to that of @xmath and the other consisting of the remaining part.
Taking into account that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be verified using the commutation relation ( 2.8 ) and that
@xmath , we get a decomposition of the above type ( 2.51 ). @xmath and
@xmath in turn can be decomposed in sums consisting of summands of the
following type:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, positive powers of @xmath can be rewritten in terms of
negative powers of @xmath by using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to the following remark:

###### Remark 2.

Any formal power series @xmath can be written in the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are formal power series in @xmath .

To know the action on @xmath we now just have to define it on a summand

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

and extend it linearly to power series ( 2.55 ). Using the structure
maps of @xmath given in ( 2.45 ) it is possible to determine the
right-action of @xmath on such a summand. This is done in Appendix B
leading to the following results:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We see that the action of @xmath on a function @xmath closes in @xmath ,
i.e. we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Remark: A priori it is not clear whether an extension of the action to
formal power series is possible. But the special form of the action on
summands as we got it in ( 2.57 ) shows, that in our case this indeed
can be done: The action on @xmath to the power of @xmath multiplied by a
function @xmath leads in all cases to the powers @xmath or @xmath .
Thus, the action on a formal power series, where also negative powers of
@xmath are allowed, again leads in all cases to finitely many
contributions in every power of @xmath and therefore the linear
extension is actually well-defined.

##### The @xmath Invariant Integral

We will construct a @xmath integral following the methods given in [ 28
] starting by defining what we want to call an invariant integral.

###### Definition 6.

We call an integral (i.e. a linear functional) invariant with respect to
the right action of @xmath if it satisfies the following invariance
condition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath and @xmath .

Here the action of @xmath on @xmath is to be understood as in ( 2.57 ).
Since @xmath is an algebra homomorphism and @xmath an algebra action, it
is sufficient to check the condition ( 2.59 ) for @xmath and @xmath
(recall that @xmath is a basis of @xmath , the extension of @xmath to
formal power series). Let us first consider functions of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case it is apparently true that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

is invariant if for @xmath holds that the exponent of @xmath still is
not equal to 0 (where @xmath ). The only cases where this is not
guaranteed are (cf. ( 2.57 ))

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we have to require that @xmath and @xmath equal zero if
the integral is to satisfy the invariance condition ( 2.59 ). This
implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . If we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the eigenvalues of @xmath in a representation of @xmath
(see for example [ 29 ] ), we see that this integral satisfies ( 2.62 )
and ( 2.63 ). Together with ( 2.61 ), we can now define an invariant
integral. Let us summarize the result in the following Lemma:

###### Lemma 3.

For all functions @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

is an invariant integral under the action of @xmath in the sense of
Definition 6 .

The factor @xmath was added to guarantee the right semi-classical limit
of the integral.

##### Cyclic property of the Invariant Integral

Let us examine whether the integral ( 2.64 ) is cyclic as it is in the
undeformed case.

First of all we provide a commutation relation which we will need later
on.

###### Remark 3.

For any formal power series @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Using ( 2.8 ) we immediately get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Extending this to formal power series, we get the first equation in the
Remark. The second follows similarly.

∎

Let us undertake the following calculation to examine the cyclic
property of the @xmath integral ( 2.64 ) using in the first step the
commutation relation ( 2.65 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath                     
                                
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If we now define an operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and extend it linearly on the entire algebra @xmath , we can write:

###### Lemma 4.

For any two functions @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

A cyclic property of this kind for invariant integrals of functions on
@xmath deformed spaces was first derived by Harold Steinacker in [ 30 ]
, where a @xmath covariant space is considered.

We see that the integral we defined in ( 2.64 ) is not cyclic. Obviously
the demand for @xmath invariance spoils the trace property, whereas the
demand for a cyclic integral implies loosing @xmath invariance (as we
saw in Subsection 2.2.5 ). We will comment on this “dilemma” later. The
considerations made here are important if we want to write down an
action that is invariant under gauge transformations later on. If we
define the gauge transformation of a field strength @xmath in the usual
way, i.e. by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

we will now in the deformed case not get an invariant action because of
( 2.68 ). The only way out without abandoning the demand for an
invariant integral is to define new gauge transformations, to “deform”
them in a way that compensates the property ( 2.68 ). How this can be
done will be treated later.

#### 2.3.2 Covariant Differential Calculus on the @xmath - Symmetric
Plane

Differential calculus on quantum groups was first studied by Woronowicz
[ 31 ] . For more details the reader is also refered to [ 32 ] and [ 33
] . Calculi on noncommutative spaces that are covariant with respect to
the coaction of a quantum group have been studied by Wess and Zumino in
[ 34 ] , where the quantum hyper plane, which is covariant with respect
to the coaction of the quantum group @xmath , is discussed. We will
develop such a differential calculus that is covariant with respect to
the coaction of @xmath .

##### @xmathOne-Forms and @xmathDerivatives

We start with introducing variables @xmath and @xmath , the @xmath
differentials of @xmath and @xmath These are noncommutative
differentials which do not commute with the space coordinates @xmath ,
either. How can we find the corresponding commutation relations?
Certainly, the commutation relations have to be covariant with respect
to the coaction of @xmath on @xmath given in ( 2.7 ). Let me explain how
this is to be understood: We get the coaction of @xmath on the @xmath
differentials @xmath by applying @xmath on the coaction of @xmath on
@xmath , where we want to assume that @xmath applied on elements of
@xmath equals zero. In other words

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

leads to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The requirement of covariance implies the commutation relations between
coordinates and their differentials in the following sense: If we want
to extend the algebra @xmath by generating elements @xmath with the
above coaction and if we want the newly generated algebra to be a left
@xmath comodule algebra, then @xmath has to be a left coaction in the
sense of Definition 3 on the extended algebra. One property of a
coaction on an algebra is that the multiplication in the algebra has to
be a comodule homomorphism, i.e. it has to satisfy @xmath for all
algebra elements @xmath . ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The remaining properties can be
easily checked, too. In our setting, it therefore has to be true that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand we find with the same argument that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has to be true, too. But in the quantum group @xmath we have @xmath (see
commutation relations ( 2.1 )). Thus, @xmath as defined above is only
well-defined if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Analogously follow the remaining commutation relations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that for @xmath coordinates and differentials commute. Let us
remark that these considerations do not lead to any information about
the commutation relations of @xmath and @xmath themselves, since @xmath
. How to find them anyway will be discussed below.

Now we can define an exterior differential @xmath on the entire algebra
@xmath , where by @xmath we want to denote the space of @xmath deformed
one-forms , by demanding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as well as the Leibniz rule

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all elements @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . To see that @xmath is
indeed well-defined we have to check whether it respects the commutation
relations of the algebra, i.e. we need to examine whether

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

This follows immediately from ( 2.70 ) and ( 2.71 ).

In the next step we can introduce @xmath deformed partial derivatives by
defining in analogy to the noncommutative case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

In ( 2.72 ) we saw that @xmath is well-defined such that the partial
derivatives @xmath and @xmath are well-defined, too.
Remark about notation: We want to distinguish notationally on the one
hand applying partial derivatives to a function and on the other hand
understanding @xmath as elements of the algebra and multiplying them by
functions in the algebra itself. When applying @xmath to a function, we
always want to put the function the derivatives are applied on in
brackets, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whereas we won’t use brackets when we interpret @xmath as part of the
algebra itself.

According to definition ( 2.73 ), we find for example for the @xmath
deformed partial derivatives applied to the coordinates

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.74)
  -- -- -- --------

which is just what we expected. Nevertheless, the derivatives @xmath do
not satisfy the usual Leibniz rule but a modified one that we want to
call the @xmath Leibniz rule . It can be derived from the Leibniz rule
of the exterior differential together with the commutation relations of
differentials and coordinates ( 2.70 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.75)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have used the following commutation relations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which we want to prove:

###### Proof.

From ( 2.58 ) we get that @xmath , where the @xmath are formal power
series for all @xmath . Since @xmath , we deduce that @xmath Moreover,
@xmath , such that together follows @xmath , the first claim. A similar
calculation proves the second claim.

∎

On the other hand we have by definition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that with the result in ( 2.75 ) we conclude that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviously, we obtain for @xmath the usual commutative Leibniz rule just
as expected. With the @xmath Leibniz rule it is now possible to derive
the commutation relations of partial derivatives and space coordinates.
Applying the @xmath Leibniz rule ( 2.76 ) on the function @xmath resp.
@xmath and using the results in ( 2.74 ) we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which yields the following commutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, we find, applying @xmath on the function @xmath using the
@xmath Leibniz rule, that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whereas

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that we derive the following commutation relation for the @xmath
derivatives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again for @xmath these commutation relations become those of the
commutative theory. We still do not know the commutation relations for
the @xmath differentials. To derive them, we need to extend the exterior
differential to one-forms: we want to demand for the exterior
differential @xmath in addition to the Leibniz rule ( 2.71 ) that in
analogy to the commutative case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as well as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

for forms @xmath , where @xmath denotes the degree of @xmath . Using
this and applying @xmath on the commutation relation @xmath (cf. 2.70 ),
we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

becoming for @xmath the usual commutation rule of differentials.
Applying @xmath to @xmath respectively @xmath ( 2.70 ), we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To see that this extension of @xmath is indeed well-defined, we remark
that applying @xmath to the remaining equation of ( 2.70 ), namely
@xmath , leads to ( 2.80 ), too.

For completeness we want to derive the commutation relations for @xmath
differentials and @xmath derivatives. For this purpose we assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some constants @xmath . Multiplying for example @xmath by @xmath
from the right and commuting @xmath through to the left using the above
commutation relations ( 2.70 ) and ( 2.77 ) leads to the following:

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

such that we conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similar calculations provide the remaining constants @xmath and we get
as result:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we see, the @xmath differentials and @xmath derivatives become the
classical differentials resp. derivatives in the semi-classical limit
@xmath .
Remark: Above we derived all possible types of commutation relations
between coordinates, differentials and derivatives. Nevertheless, we
still have to check if all these relations are consistent with each
other. If we extend the algebra by @xmath with the relations ( 2.70 )
and ( 2.80 ), these relations have to be consistent with the commutation
relation of the space coordinates @xmath , i.e. multiplying them by
coordinates from the right and commuting the coordinates to the left
must not lead to any inconsistency. For example we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

obviously not leading to any inconsistency. Multiplying the remaining
relations of ( 2.70 ) or ( 2.80 ) by coordinates from the right and
commuting them through to the left, does not lead to inconsistencies,
either. The reason is that the commutation relations are of the
following type: Commuting two arbitrary elements does again reproduce
exactly those two elements multiplied by some power of @xmath . Then,
multiplying any relation from the right by an element of the algebra and
commuting it through to the left, must lead to the same relation we
started with multiplied by a power of @xmath and therefore never
produces any inconsistency. In a second step we introduced the partial
derivatives @xmath with the relations ( 2.77 ),( 2.78 ) and ( 2.81 ). A
lot of the commutation relations are again of the type that commuting an
arbitrary derivative with a differential or a coordinate reproduces
exactly the same elements multiplied by a power of @xmath . By the same
consideration as above, at least all cases, in which the commutation
relations @xmath or @xmath do not enter the calculation, don’t lead to
inconsistencies. If these two commutation relations enter in the
calculation, an additional term @xmath appears. Those cases remain to
check. We easily verify

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

A short calculation shows that we don’t get inconsistencies for the
other equation @xmath , either. The last equation, @xmath , still has to
be multiplied by coordinates from the right commuting them through to
the left since again @xmath terms will enter:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

All together we have seen that the calculus established above withstands
all consistency checks.

The above considerations give in all detail an @xmath covariant
differential calculus on @xmath . We saw that differentials and
functions do not commute. This makes calculations complicated and
therefore we will try in a next step to find a basis @xmath of the space
of one-forms, called frame, that commutes with all functions (Frames
exist on other noncommutative spaces as well (cf. for example [ 25 , 3 ]
) and @xmath is the usually used notation that is not to be mixed up
with the Poisson structure @xmath !).

##### A Nicer Basis of One-Forms: A Frame

We are looking for a new basis @xmath of @xmath commuting with all
functions. Let us consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then:

###### Lemma 5.

We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all functions @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Using the commutation relations ( 2.8 ),( 2.70 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath follows making use of the same commutation relations.

∎

It is even possible to find a one-form @xmath that generates the
exterior differential.

##### A Generator for the Exterior Differential

In the following lemma we introduce a one-form @xmath that generates the
exterior differential @xmath Later on, @xmath will play an important
role when considering gauge fields and gauge transformations.

###### Lemma 6.

Consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all functions @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We remember that the @xmath commute with all functions and with that we
get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Plugging in the explicit expressions ( 2.82 ) for @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where in the last step we used the commutation relations ( 2.70 ).
Taking @xmath and @xmath we get with the commutation relations of the
space coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, @xmath and analogously follows @xmath . Hence, on the generators
of the algebra of functions the claim is true. Since @xmath is a
derivation, we can now conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all functions @xmath .

The second claim, @xmath , is shown by the following calculations: First

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used the commutation relations ( 2.7 ), ( 2.70 ) and (
2.80 ), and secondly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used @xmath and @xmath which follows with the @xmath Leibniz
rule applied on @xmath ∎

Remark : We notice that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is not invariant under translations. It is only invariant under
rotations.

##### @xmathTwo-Forms

We can also write the extension of the exterior differential @xmath to
one-forms in a nice form:

###### Lemma 7.

Let @xmath be defined as in Lemma 6 . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any one-form @xmath . Here @xmath denotes the anti-commutator.

###### Proof.

We have @xmath and @xmath for arbitrary functions @xmath and arbitrary
one-forms @xmath . Thus, @xmath satisfies the Leibniz-rule ( 2.79 )
which implies that @xmath .

∎

This finishes the discussion of the differential calculus and we will
now attend to gauge fields and the action.

#### 2.3.3 Gauge Fields and Action

We consider only the easiest case: noncommutative abelian gauge fields.
They are one-forms @xmath . We can express @xmath in the basis @xmath
(found in the last subsection) that commutes with arbitrary functions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, we write [ 23 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, as we will see, @xmath is the analog of the commutative gauge
field, and define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

the noncommutative field strength. With ( 2.86 ) and since @xmath (Lemma
6 ) and @xmath (Lemma 7 ) we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of components with respect to the frame @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used in the last step that @xmath (Lemma 5 ). If we
additionally denote the components of @xmath in the basis @xmath by
@xmath and @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The explicit expressions of @xmath given in Lemma 6 and the commutation
relations ( 2.70 ) yield @xmath and @xmath . Thus, we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 6 we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Together with @xmath we finally have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thereby the above expression for @xmath approaches in the semi-classical
limit @xmath the following expression:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, we see that in fact the field strength defined as above becomes
the commutative field strength (cf. Appendix A ) in the semi-classical
limit and @xmath admits the interpretation of a noncommutative gauge
field. Therefore ( 2.87 ) seems to be in this regard a reasonable
definition for a noncommutative field strength. Of course gauge
covariance is another important requirement for @xmath . This issue will
be treated in the after next subsection.

At this point we want to continue introducing the action. For this
purpose we consider the Hodge dual @xmath of @xmath : In our
two-dimensional case we can express any two-form @xmath in the basis
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some coefficient function @xmath Then we define @xmath on two-forms
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the integral found in Subsection 2.3.1 we can now write down an
action:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It admits the right semi-classical limit for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can even assign to @xmath a gauge-invariance property for special
“deformed” gauge transformations, as we will see later, but first we
need the following subsection as preparation.

#### 2.3.4 The Algebra Homomorphism @xmath

We construct an algebra homomorphism @xmath which we will need in the
following subsection when defining gauge transformations in analogy to [
23 ] , where such a homomorphism is introduced, too (even though in a
different way). Nevertheless, we do not look for an arbitrary algebra
homomorphism. It shall have the additional property that the
right-action @xmath of an arbitrary element @xmath on an element @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This property we will need to obtain a gauge invariant action later on.
For this purpose it is convenient to consider the cross product algebra
@xmath (cf. for example [ 20 ] ) which is as vector space isomorphic to
the tensor space @xmath and where multiplication is defined as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is common to omit the tensor signs and to identify @xmath and @xmath
, leading with the multiplication as defined above to the so called
commutation relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In our case this reads, if we use the explicit form for coproduct and
right-action of @xmath given in ( 2.50 ):

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath

6.  @xmath

Let us try to find an algebra homomorphism @xmath that on @xmath is the
identity (in a second step such a @xmath can be restricted to @xmath
leading to an algebra homomorphism @xmath with all the demanded
properties). Knowing the above commutation relations we can explicitly
construct @xmath . Being an algebra homomorphism, for example implies
because of 1. above:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we see that ( 2.92 ) is indeed satisfied. Similarly we find how to
define @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, 3. above yields, if @xmath is to be an algebra homomorphism
with @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is satisfied for

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To show that @xmath defined on the generators of @xmath as suggested
above really gives an algebra homomorphism @xmath , we have to prove
that the defining commutation relations of the generators in @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are respected, too. This can easily be checked using the commutation
relation of the coordinates @xmath For example

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the rest follows similarly. Anyhow, as explained above, our aim is
to find a homomorphism @xmath . By restricting @xmath to @xmath we
obtain such an @xmath :

###### Lemma 8.

The assignments

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.93)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

define an algebra homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath and @xmath

###### Proof.

As restriction of the algebra homomorphism @xmath we get that @xmath is
an algebra homomorphism. Moreover, the property @xmath follows directly
because in the cross algebra @xmath the right-action is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(just use the definition of the multiplication in the cross algebra (
2.91 ) to verify this). Taking into account that @xmath is an algebra
homomorphism with @xmath we then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Remark: The element

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a Casimir operator of the quantum group @xmath . This may give
another hint how to define the algebra homomorphism @xmath mapping it on
a constant in @xmath , the only Casimir operator of @xmath .

With the tools gathered so far, we are now ready to treat the topic
gauge transformation and gauge invariance.

#### 2.3.5 Gauge Transformations and Gauge Invariance

As we have seen in Subsection 2.3.1 the @xmath integral is not cyclic
anymore. Therefore the usual gauge transformation @xmath does not lead
to a gauge invariance principle for @xmath Thus, we have to modify gauge
transformations so that for @xmath we get the usual, commutative gauge
transformation on the one hand and a reasonable gauge invariance
principle for @xmath on the other hand.

##### Gauge Transformations

In analogy to the procedure in [ 23 ] we introduce the following gauge
transformation of a one-form @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the algebra homomorphism found in Subsection 2.3.4 .
@xmath is closed under multiplication and to draw analogy to the
commutative case we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The image @xmath can be interpreted as a sub-algebra of the algebra of
functions @xmath . @xmath reflects the unitarity condition of a
commutative unitary gauge parameter and an arbitrary gauge parameter can
be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On account of the property ( 2.94 ) and since the @xmath commute with
arbitrary functions ( 2.83 ), the gauge transformation for the
components reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

With @xmath follows then for the gauge transformation of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we have used the fact that @xmath generates the exterior
differential @xmath (Lemma 6 ), that @xmath is an algebra homomorphism
(Lemma 8 ) and that @xmath for @xmath . Hence, we conclude:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Gauge Invariance

The field strength defined in ( 2.87 ) as @xmath transforms
“gauge-covariantly ”:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

since @xmath for @xmath . If we write @xmath this yields, since @xmath
and @xmath commute with all functions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

We already saw in ( 2.89 ) that @xmath has the right semi-classical
limit such that we really gave a reasonable definition for @xmath .

Moreover, the action @xmath is gauge invariant: As defined in ( 2.90 ),
@xmath . Therefore, we get with ( 2.98 ) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for gauge transformations. Thus,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Since the homomorphism @xmath has the property @xmath for all @xmath and
@xmath (Lemma 8 ) and the integral is invariant with respect to the
action of @xmath (cf. Subsection 2.3.1 ), we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, the action is indeed gauge invariant.

##### The Semi-classical Limit @xmath

We consider the first contribution of a gauge transformation of a
one-form @xmath given in ( 2.97 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

for @xmath . In the limit @xmath , the commutator vanishes and we
conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, the second term in the transformation of @xmath reads
with @xmath (Lemma 6 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us calculate an example to get a better understanding of these
deformed gauge transformations. If we take @xmath , we first see that
@xmath and @xmath (see ( 2.45 ) and ( 2.47 )). Thus, @xmath is an
element of @xmath . Using the structure maps of @xmath given in ( 2.45
), we get:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath , we obtain with @xmath that @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we finally obtain with ( 2.100 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath this becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Altogether we see that, if we write @xmath , the gauge transformation of
@xmath becomes in the semi-classical limit @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this is indeed a commutative gauge transformation. This gives us an
impression of the semi-classical of the @xmath deformed gauge
transformations.

Nevertheless, this is not fully satisfying. We still have to examine
whether the same result follows for an arbitrary gauge parameter @xmath
. Unfortunately, it was not possible to give a general answer in the
framework of this thesis. Further considerations at this point are
missing and could be part of ongoing research on this topic.

However, we want to add some general considerations for the interested
reader. The gauge group we considered so far is not the most general
choice. It is possible to make the following generalization for the
“gauge group” @xmath [ 35 ] :

Let @xmath be a subset of a Hopf algebra @xmath such that the following
requirements are satisfied:

1.  There exists an algebra homomorphism

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  For all @xmath we have

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (2.101)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    with @xmath as defined in ( 2.67 ).

3.  For all @xmath we have @xmath .

Let us point out that in particular @xmath and @xmath as defined in (
2.96 ) satisfy those demands. We just have to use the homomorphism
@xmath constructed in Subsection 2.3.4 to check that the second
condition is satisfied: It is easy to verify that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Thus, we have to check whether

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath , this indeed is true.

Defining gauge transformations again as the adjoint action of an element
@xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain that the action @xmath is gauge invariant:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used in the second line the cyclic property of the @xmath
integral (Lemma 4 ) and in the last but one step the second property
from above.

The hope is to find by this generalization a gauge group @xmath that is
big enough together with an adequate homomorphism @xmath such that we
get in the semi-classical limit @xmath classical gauge transformations
even for arbitrary gauge parameters.

#### 2.3.6 Summary and Last Remarks

In this section we established an @xmath covariant gauge field theory.
First we found a @xmath invariant integral. This integral is uniquely
determined by the invariance requirement. We saw that unfortunately this
integral does not admit a trace property (cf. ( 2.68 )) such that we
already concluded at this point, that defining gauge transformations of
a field strength as usual by conjugation with an unitary element, will
not lead to an invariant action. We further studied the properties of
the @xmath symmetric space developing a covariant differential calculus
in all detail. To make calculations easier, a convenient basis of one
forms, a frame, was introduced as well as a generator for the @xmath
deformed exterior differential. This made it possible to talk about one-
and two-forms in a nice language, finally enabling us to define a gauge
field @xmath and a field strength @xmath that becomes the commutative
field strength in the semi-classical limit @xmath . At this point gauge
transformations still have not been introduced but after having
established an algebra homomorphism @xmath with the property @xmath for
all @xmath and @xmath we defined gauge transformations as the action of
elements of a certain sub-algebra of @xmath , that we considered as the
gauge group, on functions in @xmath (see 2.95 ). The homomorphism @xmath
gave the gauge group an interpretation as functions in @xmath and the
way of defining gauge transformations itself led to the notion of an
gauge invariant action that is @xmath as well. At the end, we tried to
give the @xmath gauge transformations a classical interpretation in the
limit @xmath . Although the explanation is surely not fully satisfying
it leads us to the assumption that we indeed introduced reasonable gauge
transformations which become ordinary gauge transformations for @xmath .
Nevertheless, more detailed considerations are certainly missing at this
point and give incentive to ongoing research on this topic. Moreover,
future work could be to develop some analogons of the Seiberg-Witten
maps we considered in Section 2.2 . The aim would be to express
noncommutative quantities in terms of the commutative ones in such a
way, that commutative gauge transformations of the commutative
quantities induce the “deformed” gauge transformations we considered in
this section. If such a Seiberg-Witten map exists, it should be
possible, together with the star-product formalism developed in the
previous section, to express all noncommutative gauge fields in terms of
the commutative ones and expand them in the deformation parameter
similarly as we did in Section 2.2 . This would allow us to read off
explicitly order by order the corrections this noncommutative theory
predicts for the commutative theory, just as in the previous section but
this time for a theory that respects the background symmetry of the
space.

However, before solving this problem we surely have to understand better
the nature of the “deformed” symmetry transformations we introduced.
Since elements in @xmath are in general not group-like, we get that for
example the gauge transformation of a product of functions implies
transforming each factor differently because of @xmath . This curious
transformation property has to be reconciled with the physical
interpretation.

## Chapter 3 Conclusion

We studied in the first chapter how far a change of a star product
changes the resulting action in the case of canonical deformation of the
space, i.e. in the case of a constant Poisson tensor @xmath . The result
is, that in general two different star products will lead to two
different actions but that for a large class of star products the
corresponding actions indeed end up to be equal. The presumption is that
a physical reason implies a restriction of all allowed ordering
prescriptions and that we are obliged to consider only particular star
products that fit in this physical requirement. For those star products,
the actions would all be equal. Thus, the gauge field theory developed
using the Moyal-Weyl star product would actually be independent of the
choice of star product within this set.

In the second part of this thesis two approaches to gauge field theory
on the @xmath symmetric plane were established. The first, as
generalization of the theory developed in the case of a constant Poisson
structure, admits the expression of the noncommutative physical fields
in terms of the commutative ones. An explicit expansion of the action in
orders of the deformation parameter @xmath leads to new interactions
that do not exist in the commutative theory. However, a freedom in
defining the gauge field and the field strength could not be avoided.
Moreover, the fact that we introduced infinitesimal gauge
transformations of a gauge field by the star commutator with the gauge
parameter, forced us to introduce an integral with trace property which
in turn is not @xmath invariant.

In a second approach we set up a theory that is @xmath covariant
constructing an @xmath invariant integral and an @xmath differential
calculus. We defined a noncommutative field strength which approaches
the classical field strength in the semi-classical limit @xmath . It is
a result of the demand for @xmath of the theory that the integral is not
cyclic. That is why we were forced to introduce @xmath deformed gauge
transformations. We found a gauge invariant action and discussed the
semi-classical limit of gauge transformations.

The conclusion of the work in the second chapter is the following: If we
establish gauge field theories on quantum spaces we encounter the
following dilemma: Either we introduce gauge transformations of gauge
fields as conjugation with an unitary element. In this case we have to
introduce a cyclic integral, which will in general not be invariant
under the quantum group symmetry, to get a gauge invariant action. Or we
consider the quantum group covariance as the fundamental concept. We
then have to construct an invariant integral which at the end is in
general not cyclic, forcing us to define deformed gauge transformations
that are difficult to interpret.

In this thesis we exemplified this dilemma discussing two approaches to
establish gauge field theory on the @xmath plane. We pointed out the
conceptual problems we meet in each case and presented possible
solutions.

## Appendix A Change of basis @xmath

Let us define a change of basis by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then one-forms transform as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

such that we conclude:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Two-forms transform in the following way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This becomes, if @xmath is antisymmetric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In Chapter 2, we need to know @xmath for the case where @xmath is the
commutative, abelian field strength, i.e. @xmath . To calculate @xmath
we first want to express the partial derivatives @xmath and @xmath in
terms of partial derivatives with respect to @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this we can calculate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix B The Right-Action of @xmath on @xmath

Knowing the structure maps for @xmath (see ( 2.45 )) and their action on
@xmath (see ( 2.50 )) we can determine the action of @xmath on arbitrary
functions using @xmath for arbitrary @xmath (cf. Definition 5 ). Since
an arbitrary function @xmath can be decomposed in @xmath (see ( 2.55 ))
it is sufficient to know the action on a summand

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a formal power series in @xmath . We will derive the
formulas even for negative powers of @xmath , i.e. @xmath . We start
with the action on @xmath :

###### Claim 1.

For @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

The first equation can be shown by induction. Let us start to prove it
for @xmath :

-   We have @xmath such that the claim is true for @xmath .

-   Supposing the claim to be true for @xmath we find for @xmath , using
    @xmath as well as the actions of @xmath and @xmath on @xmath given
    in ( 2.50 ), we get

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    Thus, the claim is proved for @xmath But for @xmath we get @xmath
    and the claim is true in this case, too. For @xmath we first of all
    need to know how @xmath acts on @xmath . We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    such that we conclude

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    This is consistent with ( B.1 ) since in fact @xmath . An induction
    as done for the case @xmath finally proves the claim for @xmath ,
    too and with that follows the claim for @xmath .

The last two equations finally follow immediately with @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath first for @xmath and then with @xmath also for @xmath .

∎

To determine the action on @xmath we start considering the action on a
summand @xmath :

###### Claim 2.

For @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

The last equation follows immediately with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
The first equation follows again by induction. We start treating the
case @xmath :

-   We have @xmath and the claim is proved for @xmath .

-   Supposing the claim to be true for @xmath we get, using as in the
    previous proof that @xmath as well as the actions of @xmath and
    @xmath on @xmath given in ( 2.50 ),

      -- -------- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --

    such that the claim follows for @xmath

If @xmath , then @xmath , which is consistent with the claim. To derive
the action of @xmath on @xmath we calculate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that we can conclude

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is consistent with ( B.2 ), too. For @xmath the claim then follows
by induction similar as for the case @xmath

Finally, the second equation follows by a similar induction as done for
the first equation.

∎

Putting these results together and using @xmath we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where we used the commutation relation @xmath , too. A similar
calculation finally leads to the following results:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------