This Thesis is based on quantum electrodynamic (QED) bound-state
calculations [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ,
14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 ] , as well as on
investigations related to divergent series, convergence acceleration and
applications of these concepts to physical problems [ 23 , 24 , 25 , 26
, 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 ] .

The subjects which are discussed in this Thesis include: the self energy
of a bound electron and the spin-dependence of QED corrections in bound
systems (Chs. 1 – 5 ), convergence acceleration techniques (Chs. 6 and 7
), and resummation methods for divergent series with an emphasis on
physical applications (Ch. 8 ).

In Chapter 1 , we present numerical results [ 12 ] , accurate to the
level of 1 Hz for atomic hydrogen, for the energy correction to the K
and L shell states due to the one-loop self energy. We investigate
hydrogenlike systems with low nuclear charge number @xmath – @xmath .
Calculations are carried out using on-mass shell renormalization, which
guarantees that the final result is written in terms of the physical
electron charge. The purpose of the calculation is twofold: first, we
provide accurate theoretical predictions for the one-loop self energy of
K and L shell states. Second, the comparison of the analytic and
numerical approaches to the Lamb shift calculations, which have followed
separate paths for the past few decades, is demonstrated by comparing
the numerical values with analytic data obtained using the @xmath
-expansion [ 32 , 1 , 2 ] . Our calculation essentially eliminates the
uncertainty due to the truncation of the @xmath -expansion, and it
demonstrates the consistency of the numerical and analytic approaches
which have attracted attention for more than five decades, beginning
with the seminal paper [ 33 ] . The most important numerical results are
summarized in Table 1.5 .

In Chapter 2 , we investigate higher-order analytic calculations of the
one-photon self energy for excited atomic states. These calculations
rely on mathematical methods described in Sec. 2.2 which, in physical
terms, lead to a separation of the calculation into a high- and a
low-energy part for the virtual photon. This separation does not only
permit adequate simplifications for the two energy regions [ 1 , 2 ] ,
but also an adequate treatment of the infrared divergences which plague
all bound-state calculations (see also Ch. 7 of [ 34 ] ). The
investigation represents a continuation of previous work on the subject
[ 32 , 1 , 2 ] . The calculations are relevant for transitions to highly
excited states, which are relevant for the extraction of fundamental
constants from the high-precision measurements in atomic hydrogen [ 35 ]
, and for the estimation of QED effects in more complex atomic systems
where some of the electrons occupy highly excited states.

Chapter 3 . We investigate the two-loop self energy. The calculation is
based on a generalization of the methods introduced in Sec. 2.2 .
Historically, the two-loop self energy for bound states has represented
a major task for theoretical evaluations. We present an analytic
calculation [ 16 ] of the fine-structure difference of the two-loop self
energy for P states in atomic hydrogen in the order @xmath . This energy
difference can be parameterized by two analytic coefficients, known as
@xmath and @xmath (see Sec. 3.2 ). These coefficients describe the
two-loop self energy in the sixth order in @xmath , with an additional
enhancement due to a large logarithm @xmath (in the case of the @xmath
-coefficient). The calculations are relevant for an improved theoretical
understanding of the fine-structure in hydrogenlike systems. They are
also in part relevant for current experiments on atomic helium [ 36 , 37
, 38 , 39 ] , whose motivation is the determination of the
fine-structure constant with improved accuracy. Finally, it is hoped
that numerical calculations of the two-loop effect will be carried out
in the near future for which the current analytic evaluation will be an
important consistency check. The calculation of the analytic corrections
discussed in Sec. 3 represents a solution for the most problematic set
of diagrams on the way to advance our understanding of the
fine-structure in atomic hydrogen to the few-Hz level. Explicit results
for the fine-structure difference of the @xmath - and @xmath
-coefficients can be found in Eqs. ( 3.59 ) – ( 3.64 ).

In Chapter 4 , We investigate the spin-dependence of the Breit
hamiltonian and quantum electrodynamic effects in general. Specifically,
we consider a bound system of two spinless particles. The calculation is
motivated in part by current experiments (DIRAC at CERN) whose aim is
the experimental study of pionium, which is the bound system of two
(spinless) oppositely charged pions. The evaluation of the two-body
relativistic corrections of order @xmath leads to a different result [
17 ] than expected for a system of two spin- @xmath particles of equal
mass, e.g. positronium. In particular, we conclude in Sec. 4.3 that the
so-called zitterbewegung term is absent for a system of two spinless
particles (the absence of the zitterbewegung term in a bound system
consisting of a spinless and a spin- @xmath particle was previously
pointed out in [ 40 ] ). Final results for the relativistic correction,
the vacuum polarization, and the self energy of a system of two scalar
particles can be found in Eqs. ( 4.15 ), ( 4.21 ) and ( 4.31 ). A
summary of the QED calculations is provided in Chapter 5 .

In the second part of this Thesis, we discuss methods for accelerating
the convergence of series, and for the resummation of divergent series .
As discussed in Chapter 6 and Sec. 7.1.1 , convergence acceleration is
essentially based on the idea that information hidden in trailing digits
of elements of the sequence can be used in order to make “educated
guesses” regarding the remainder term, which can be used for the
construction of powerful sequence transformations (see Sec. 7.1.5 ). In
Chapter 7 , we discuss convergence acceleration in detail. After a short
overview of relevant mathematical methods (Sec. 7.1 ), we discuss
applications in applied biophysics (Sec. 7.2.1 ), in experimental
mathematics (Sec. 7.2.2 ), and other applications, mainly in the
evaluation of special functions (Sec. 7.2.3 ). In particular, Secs.
7.2.1 – 7.2.3 illustrate how the combined nonlinear-condensation
transformation (CNCT) described in Sec. 7.1.6 can be used for the
accelerated evaluation of nonalternating series, with an emphasis to
applications of practical significance (Sec. 7.2.1 ).

The discussion on convergence acceleration in Ch. 7 is complemented in
Chapter 8 by an overview of resummation techniques and relevant
applications. Using the Stark effect and the associated autoionization
width as a paradigmatic example, we discuss basic concepts like the
Borel resummation method and its generalizations (Sec. 8.2.2 ), and the
conformal mapping of the complex plane (Sec. 8.4 ). We then proceed to
discuss further applications of resummation methods like
zero-dimensional model theories (Sec. 8.3.1 ), the QED effective action
(expressed as a perturbation series in the fine structure constant, see
Sec. 8.3.2 ), and the quantum-mechanical double-well problem (Sec. 8.3.3
). Within the context of the double-well problem, we perform an analytic
evaluation of higher-order corrections to the two-instanton effect and
demonstrate the consistency of numerically determined energy levels with
the instanton expansion.

We conclude with a summary of the results in Chapter 9 , where we also
explain the interrelations and connections between the different
subjects treated in this Thesis.
