###### Contents

-    Introduction
-    1 Noncommutativity in physics
    -    1.1 General arguments for noncommutativity in spacetime
    -    1.2 Examples of noncommutative canonical spacetimes
        -    1.2.1 Canonical noncommutativity in condensed matter
            systems
        -    1.2.2 Canonical noncommutativity in string theories
        -    1.2.3 Breakup of Lorentz symmetry in canonical spacetimes
    -    1.3 Example of Lie-algebra noncommutative spacetime: @xmath
        -Minkowski spacetime
        -    1.3.1 Planck length as a minimum wave-length
        -    1.3.2 @xmath -Poincaré Hopf algebras
        -    1.3.3 Phenomenology of @xmath -Poincaré
        -    1.3.4 @xmath -Minkowski Spacetime from @xmath -Poincaré
            duality
        -    1.3.5 Covariance of @xmath -Minkowski Spacetime
    -    1.4 @xmath -Minkowski spacetime and canonical spacetime from
        general Lie-algebra spacetimes
-    2 Waves in noncommutative Spacetimes
    -    2.1 Review of waves in Minkowski spacetime
    -    2.2 Proposal of a description of wave-packets in Canonical
        Spacetime
    -    2.3 The challenge of Waves in @xmath -Minkowski Spacetime
        -    2.3.1 Differential calculus and Fourier calculus in @xmath
            -Minkowski
        -    2.3.2 Group velocity in @xmath -Minkowski
    -    2.4 Comparison with previous analyses
        -    2.4.1 Tamaki-Harada-Miyamoto-Torii analysis
        -    2.4.2 @xmath -Deformed phase space
-    3 Quantum Field Theories on Canonical Spacetimes
    -    3.1 Weyl Quantization in canonical and @xmath -Minkowski
        spacetime
        -    3.1.1 Weyl Quantization in the phase space of ordinary
            quantum mechanics
        -    3.1.2 Weyl quantization for canonical noncommutativity
        -    3.1.3 Weyl quantization for @xmath -Minkowski spacetime
        -    3.1.4 Functional formalism in noncommutative space
    -    3.2 Scalar @xmath -theory in canonical spacetime
        -    3.2.1 Action, functional derivatives and equation of motion
        -    3.2.2 Feynman diagrams
        -    3.2.3 One-loop 1PI effective action and the IR/UV Mixing.
    -    3.3 Unsolved problems for QFT in @xmath -Minkowski spacetime:
        @xmath example
    -    3.4 Gauge theories in canonical spacetime
    -    3.5 Supersymmetric theories in canonical spacetime
    -    3.6 Causality and unitarity in canonical spacetimes
    -    3.7 Open problems related to the IR/UV mixing in canonical
        spacetime
        -    3.7.1 IR/UV mixing and renormalization group flow
        -    3.7.2 IR/UV mixing and the subtraction point
        -    3.7.3 IR/UV Mixing and the Goldstone theorem.
        -    3.7.4 IR/UV Mixing and the scalar-theory phase diagram
-    4 Critical analysis of the phenomenology in CNC spacetimes
    -    4.1 IR/UV Mixing and Phenomenology in canonical spacetime
    -    4.2 Effects of UV SUSY on IR physics
        -    4.2.1 A model with SUSY restoration in the UV
        -    4.2.2 Self-energies and IR singularities
        -    4.2.3 Further effects on the low-energy sector from UV
            physics
    -    4.3 Conditional bounds on noncommutativity parameters from
        low-energy data
    -    4.4 Futility of approaches based on expansion in powers of
        @xmath
-    5 CJT formalism for phase transition on CNC spacetime
    -    5.1 CJT formalism
    -    5.2 CJT formalism in canonical-noncommutative spacetime
    -    5.3 The effective potential
        -    5.3.1 Commutativity limit
        -    5.3.2 Strong noncommutativity limit
        -    5.3.3 Effective potential in the general case
    -    5.4 Remarks on the structure of the CJT effective potential in
        canonical noncommutative spacetime
-    6 Conclusions
-    A Hopf algebras

## Introduction

It is widely believed that spacetime at lengths scales of the order of
the Planck length @xmath is no longer describable as a smooth manifold.
Nonclassical properties of spacetime are expected to affect processes
involving particles of ultrahigh energy. There are in principle, at
least, two ways to address the issue of nonclassical properties of
spacetime and their observable effects. A first way, which is in a sense
more fundamental, is the one of trying to construct a whole quantum
theory of spacetime according to some picture of the unification of
General Relativity with Quantum Mechanics, and then look at its
low-energy predictions. This is, for instance, the strategy adopted by
the most studied and, presently, most promising approaches to Quantum
Gravity, such as string theory and (canonical) loop quantum gravity. A
possible reason of concern for these type of approaches is that one has
to make a correct guess of the laws of Nature at an energy scale @xmath
that is very far away from the energy scales currently explored in the
laboratory @xmath . This is a difficult task as the one of trying to
grasp the details of weak interaction @xmath just by studying the
properties of the common macroscopic objects of everyday life @xmath

A second, more humble way to approach research on nonclassical
properties of spacetime is the one of effective theories. One tries to
model some nonclassical spacetime effects without necessarily assuming
full knowledge of the short-distance structure of spacetime. Among these
proposals there has been strong interest in the idea that it might be
fundamentally impossible to fully specify the position of a particle.
This can formalized through a spacetime uncertainty principle of the
form

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

that would introduce in spacetime an uncertainty relation which is
analogous to the Heisenberg phase-space uncertainty relation @xmath . At
the formal level the Heisenberg uncertainty principle turns out to be
described by Hermitian operators satisfying the noncommutativity
relation @xmath Following the analogy one is led to consider similar
commutation relations in the spacetime sector

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

which imply noncommutativity of spacetime.

In the last few years noncommutative spacetimes have attracted interest
from many authors not only for the reasons we have outlined, which make
them interesting on their own, but also since they emerge as a possible
description of spacetime in theory constructed without assuming, a
priori, noncommutativity of spacetime. In particular the so-called
canonical spacetimes ² ² 2 Here @xmath is a coordinate-independent
antisymmetric matrix.

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

emerge in the descriptions of string theory in presence of external
fields [ 1 , 2 ] , and it is also a useful-alternative tool in the
description of electronic systems in external-magnetic field [ 3 , 4 , 5
] . While, certain Lie-algebra noncommutative spacetime ( @xmath ),
emerge in the framework of some approaches to Quantum Gravity that
predict a minimum wavelength. This is, for instance, the case of the
so-called @xmath -Minkowski spacetime

  -- -------- -------- -- -----
     @xmath   @xmath      (4)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -----

that is connected by duality relation to a deformation of the Poincaré
group as a quantum group known as @xmath -Poincaré. This @xmath
-Poincaré quantum group has been extensively studied in literature [ 6 ,
7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 ] especially since it involves not only an invariant
velocity scale @xmath but also an invariant length scale @xmath .

In this thesis we will analyze the popular noncommutative spacetimes of
Eqs.( 3 ) and ( 4 ), focusing on some key theoretical issues and their
phenomenological implications. We will start our study from the problem
of wave construction and propagation in these types of noncommutative
spacetime. The analysis of waves is a key element for planned
experimental studies which hope to detect nonclassical effects of
spacetime. It is expected in fact [ 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] that
spacetime noncommutativity might manifest with detectable modifications
of the usual laws of particle production and propagation. Moreover, over
the last few years, there has been a sharp increase in the interest
toward experimental investigations of Planck-scale effects (see, e.g. ,
Refs. [ 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 ] ). In particular,
studies such as the ones planned for the GLAST space telescope [ 25 ]
would be sensitive to small, Planck-scale suppressed, deviations from
the special-relativistic relation between group velocity and momentum.
Within the framework of Planck-scale spacetime noncommutativity such
modifications of the relation between group velocity and momentum are
often encountered. In this respect, while canonical spacetime is
expected to play a minor role (alterations of in-vacuum propagation seem
to be relevant mainly for polarization-connected effects [ 26 ] ), such
effects are expected to have deeper implications in @xmath -Minkowski
spacetime, where they are believed to manifest in the deformation of
in-vacuum dispersion relations and (related) modifications of the energy
thresholds for certain particle-production processes [ 21 , 22 ] . The
effect of spacetime discreteness should be significant for particles of
high energy. Deviations from standard propagation are expected to be
suppressed as powers of the ratio between Planck length and particle
wavelength, but in spite of this huge suppression the mentioned planned
experiment should be able to see them. In preparation for these planned
experimental studies, on the theory side there has been an intense
debate on the proper description of the notion of velocity in a
noncommutative spacetime. Here (in Chapter 2) we analyze velocity in
@xmath -Minkowski spacetime. This notion of velocity had been already
discussed in several studies (see Refs. [ 7 , 10 ] and references
therein), under the working assumption that the relation @xmath , which
holds in Galilei spacetime and Minkowski spacetime, would also hold in
@xmath -Minkowski. This leads to interesting predictions as a result of
the fact that, upon identification of the noncommutativity scale @xmath
with the Planck length @xmath , the dispersion relation @xmath that
holds in @xmath -Minkowski is characterized by Planck-length-suppressed
deviations from its conventional commutative counterpart. Recently the
validity of @xmath in @xmath -Minkowski has been questioned in the
studies reported in Refs. [ 27 , 28 ] ; moreover in the study reported
in Ref. [ 11 ] the relation @xmath was considered on the same footing as
some alternative relations. Especially in light of the plans for
experimental studies, this technical issue appears to be rather
significant. We approach the study of @xmath -Minkowski adopting the
line of analysis proposed in Ref. [ 10 ] . We argue that key ingredients
for the correct derivation of the relation between group velocity and
momentum are: a fully developed @xmath -Minkowski differential calculus,
and a proper description of energy-momentum in terms of generators of
translations. Our analysis provides support for the adoption of the
formula @xmath , already assumed in most of the @xmath -Minkowski
literature. We discuss the ad hoc assumptions which led to alternatives
to @xmath in Refs. [ 27 , 28 ] , and we find that the analysis in Ref. [
28 ] was based on erroneous implementation of the @xmath -Minkowski
differential calculus, while the analysis in Ref. [ 27 ] interpreted as
momenta some quantities which cannot be properly described in terms of
translation generators.

We also discuss the proposals of construction of field theories on
noncommutative spacetimes based on the Weyl-Moyal map. We focus mainly
on the canonical spacetime which up to now has been the most extensively
studied. A key characteristic of field theories on canonical spacetimes,
which originates from the commutation relation, is nonlocality. At least
in the case of space/space noncommutativity ( @xmath ), to which we
limit our analysis for simplicity ³ ³ 3 The case of space/time
noncommutativity ( @xmath ) is not necessarily void of interest [ 29 ,
30 , 31 , 32 , 33 ] , but it is more delicate, especially in light of
possible concerns for unitarity. Since our analysis is not focusing on
this point we will simply assume that @xmath . , this nonlocality is
still tractable although it induces an intriguing mixing of the
ultraviolet and infrared sectors of the theory. This IR/UV mixing has
wide implications both for the phenomenology and for the theoretical
understanding of these models. One of the manifestations of the IR/UV
mixing is the emergence of infrared (zero-momentum) poles in the
one-loop two-point functions. In particular one finds a quadratic pole
for integer-spin particles in non-SUSY theories [ 34 ] , while in SUSY
theories the poles, if at all present, are logarithmic [ 35 , 36 , 37 ]
. It is noteworthy that these infrared singularities are introduced by
loop corrections and originate from the ultraviolet part of the loop
integration: at tree level the two-point functions are unmodified, but
loop corrections involve the interaction vertices, which are modified
already at tree level.

There has been considerable work attempting to set limits on the
noncommutativity parameters @xmath by exploiting the modifications of
the dressed/full propagators [ 26 , 38 ] and, even more, the
modifications of the interaction vertices [ 39 , 40 , 41 ] . Most of
these analyses rely on our readily available low-energy data. The
comparison between theoretical predictions and experimental data is
usually done using a standard strategy (the methods of analysis which
have served us well in the study of conventional theories in commutative
spacetime). We are mainly interested in understanding whether one should
take into account some of the implications of the IR/UV mixing also at
the level of comparing theoretical predictions and data. It appears
plausible that the way in which low-energy data are used to constrain
the noncommutativity parameters may be affected by the IR/UV mixing.
These limits on the entries of the @xmath matrix might not have the
usual interpretation: they could be seen only as “conditional limits”,
conditioned by the assumption that no contributions relevant for the
analysis are induced by the ultraviolet. The study we report here is
relevant for this delicate issue. By analyzing a simple noncommutative
Wess-Zumino-type model, with soft supersymmetry breaking, we explore the
implications of ultraviolet supersymmetry on low-energy phenomenology.
Based on this analysis, and on the intuition it provides about other
possible features of ultraviolet physics, we provide a characterization
of low-energy limits on the noncommutativity parameters.

To explore the consequences of the IR/UV mixing using a nonperturbative
technique (effectively resumming infinite series of 1PI Feynman
diagrams) we present an application of the Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis
(CJT) [ 42 ] formalism to the noncommutative scalar theory. The CJT
formalism has proven to be a powerful nonperturbative approach to the
problem of phase transition in QFT in commutative spacetime (see Refs. [
42 , 43 ] ) and in Thermal-Quantum-Field Theories [ 43 , 44 , 45 ] .
These theories suffer from severe infrared problems which recall those
related to the IR/UV mixing in noncommutative theories. We analyze in
the CJT formalism the issues of phase transitions and renormalizability
of (canonical) noncommutative scalar- @xmath theory. We discuss the
applicability of the CJT formalism in a  noncommutative framework. Then
we focus on the so-called Hartree approximation that is equivalent to a
selective resummation of the diagrams of the common perturbative
expansion, in particular summing all the so-called “daisy” and “super
daisy” diagrams. In the Hartree approximation, and under the hypothesis
of translational invariance of the vacuum, we calculate the effective
potential that will be expressed in terms of a mass parameter to be
determined as solution of a gap equation. In particular, we analyze the
renormalizability of the gap equation and of the potential. We find that
whereas in the symmetric phase (characterized by a zero
vacuum-expectation value of the scalar field) both the gap equation and
the potential are renormalizable, in the broken-symmetry phase
(characterized by a non-zero vacuum-expectation value of the scalar
field) the gap equation and the potential do not renormalize. These
results appear to reinforce the hypothesis that in noncommutative
theories because of the IR/UV mixing there might be a stable (or
quasi-stable) translation-non-invariant vacuum.

This thesis is structured as follows. In Chapter 1, that is a review
chapter, we introduce spacetime noncommutativity focusing on canonical
noncommutativity and @xmath -Minkowski noncommutativity. We discuss the
physical frameworks from which they emerge and study their symmetries,
and we also briefly review the (rather technical) mathematical
structures that are used in the rest of the thesis.

In Chapter 2, that is based on Ref. [ 46 ] , we analyze wave propagation
both in canonical and @xmath -Minkowski spacetimes. We focus on the
concept of group velocity in view of its relevance for planned
experimental studies and stress the differences between the two
noncommutative spaces.

In Chapter 3, that is a review chapter, we introduce the quantum field
theories in noncommutative spacetime. We outline the standard strategy
of quantization, based on the Weyl-Moyal map, and discuss its
application to the noncommutative spacetimes. While this procedure of
quantization can be successful implemented in canonical-noncommutative
spacetime, in @xmath -Minkowski spacetime it is still not well
understood. Then, for the rest of the chapter (and of the thesis) we
focus only on canonical spacetime and especially on the problems related
to the IR/UV mixing.

In Chapter 4, that is based on Ref. [ 47 ] , we study the implications
of the IR/UV mixing for the phenomenology. We discuss how the IR/UV
mixing renders the low-energy prediction sensitive to the (unknown)
structure of the UV sector. We illustrate our point in a Wess-Zumino
model with soft supersymmetry breaking. We show how ultraviolet
supersymmetry can modify drastically the low-energy predictions of the
theory, and analyze the implications of these observations for studies
attempting to constrain the non-commutativity parameters using
low-energy data. We conclude on the implication of this analysis for the
selection of reliable theoretical models from low-energy-experimental
data.

In Chapter 5, that is based on Ref. [ 48 ] , we review the CJT formalism
and apply it to the noncommutative scalar theory. We analyze the
effective potential and discuss the problem of its renormalization both
in the symmetric phase and in the uniformly-broken phase. We focus on
the so-called “bubble approximation”. We study under the hypothesis of
translational invariance of the vacuum, the gap equation and the
effective potential discussing also the planar limit (strong
noncommutativity) and the commutative limit. Then we discuss the
renormalization of both the gap equation and the potential in the
symmetric and in the broken-symmetry phase. In Chapter 6 we present our
conclusions.

## Chapter 1 Noncommutativity in physics ⁰ ⁰ footnotetext: * In this
Chapter we review the issue of noncommutativity in physics.

*  The idea of extending to the spacetime sector noncommutativity of the
phase space is rather old. The first paper on this subject was published
by Snyder in 1947 [ 49 ] although the first proposal of noncommutativity
among coordinates is attributed to Heisenberg in the late 1930s.
Heisenberg hoped that noncommutativity would improve the short-distance
singularities typical of the quantum field theories while extending the
uncertainty relations to the coordinate sector. Apparently [ 4 ]
Heisenberg suggested this idea to Peierles who used it in a
phenomenological approach to the study of electronic systems in an
external field [ 3 ] . Then Peierles told about Heisenberg’s idea to
Pauli, who in turn told to Oppenheimer, who told it to his student
Snyder.

In this chapter we briefly review the main arguments that, beyond
Heisenberg’s idea, support the introduction of noncommutativity in the
spacetime. Then we will focus on canonical spacetime and @xmath
-Minkowski spacetime.

The interest for the canonical spacetime is motivated by the fact that,
since it involves coordinate-independent commutators, it is the simplest
noncommutative spacetime and can also be seen as the zeroth-order
approximation of a very general class of noncommutative spacetimes. We
briefly discuss how canonical noncommutativity plays a role in the
description of electronic systems in strong magnetic field and how it
emerges in certain string theories in strong external field.

The interest in @xmath -Minkowski spacetime comes from the fact that it
is dual to a quantum deformation of the Poincaré group which has
recently attracted a lot of interest especially for the relevance in
Double Special Relativity theories. We discuss the basic features of
such Double Special Relativity (DSR) theories. We analyze how DSR
theories find precise realization in the mathematical scheme of @xmath
-deformed (quantum) Poincaré group and we discuss the duality relation
that leads to @xmath -Minkowski spacetime. Then we also discuss how
@xmath -Minkowski spacetime and canonical spacetime emerge as the only
possible flat noncommutative spacetimes that can be constructed from a
general Lie-algebra spacetime and from the hypothesis of invariance
under undeformed spatial rotations ( @xmath -Minkowski spacetime) or
undeformed translations (canonical spacetime).

### 1.1 General arguments for noncommutativity in spacetime

As mentioned the first studies of spacetime noncommutativity were
motivated by the analogy with quantum mechanics and by the idea that one
could use noncommutativity of spacetime coordinates to introduce an
effective cutoff to cure the divergences appearing in quantum field
theories. We will analyze the issue of the regularization of the
divergences in the next chapters when a formulation of the quantum field
theory will have been introduced. Here we consider the analogy with
quantum mechanics.

Starting from the classical phase space in which a point can be
localized without any limit of precision, one can define the quantum
phase space by substituting canonical positions and momenta @xmath and
@xmath with Hermitian operators which obey to the Heisenberg commutation
relations @xmath From the uncertainty relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

follows that in a quantized phase-space there exists a maximum in the
precision with which a point can be localized. Upon quantization the
classical phase-space becomes smeared out and the notion of point must
be replaced by that of Planck cell whose characteristic size is @xmath .
One expects to become sensitive to the quantization of the phase space
when the action of the system under consideration, which has the same
dimensions of @xmath is of the size of the Planck constant ¹ ¹ 1 In the
path integral language one obtains sensitivity to the quantum
phase-space when @xmath and also the paths different from the classical
one ( @xmath ) give contributions to the dynamics. .

By analogy with the phase-space quantization one can attempt to
represent spacetime by replacing classical coordinates @xmath with the
Hermitian generators of a noncommutative algebra of functions satisfying
the commutation relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since coordinates do not commutate they cannot be simultaneously
diagonalized and one can expect spacetime uncertainty relations of the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

that, as already emphasized in the Introduction, may be appropriate for
a description of quantum spacetime fluctuations.

In this case the notion of spacetime point loses its meaning. Spacetime
points are replaced by cells of area of size @xmath The quantum
fluctuations of the spacetime prevent the exact localization of the
events inside this area. Now we could expect to acquire sensitivity to
the quantum structure of spacetime when the size of the system, or of
the probe, is of order of @xmath ² ² 2 The nature of the uncertainty
principle implied by ( 1.2 ) is still subject of study. These
commutation relations don’t imply by themselves a minimal length, in the
same way in which ( 1.1 ) doesn’t prevent exact measures of position or
momentum. Each edge of the quantum cell can be arbitrarily small if the
other is accordingly large. Only their product is bounded from the
below. For this reason in the case of ( 1.2 ) one should perhaps speak
of a minimal area. .

Expectations similar to ( 1.3 ) for the description of spacetime at
extremely small distances come also from string theory presently one of
the best candidates for a quantum theory of gravity. Strings possess an
intrinsic length-scale @xmath , and using string states as a probe it is
not possible to observe distances smaller than @xmath . It is not
surprising that in certain string theories [ 50 , 51 , 52 ] (but also in
many other approaches to quantum gravity, see [ 53 , 54 ] ) modified
Heisenberg uncertainty relation has been found of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

If one minimizes ( 1.4 ) with respect to @xmath one obtains a lower
bound on the measurability of lengths in spacetime: @xmath Therefore
also from the point of view of string theory the space of the
configurations is smeared out and the notion of point is meaningless.
More generally uncertainty relation has been postulated [ 55 , 56 ] of
the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

that directly follows from noncommutativity of spacetime ( 1.2 ).

### 1.2 Examples of noncommutative canonical spacetimes

Beyond these general arguments there are explicit examples in physics in
which noncommutativity plays an important role and some theoretical
frameworks in which noncommutativity is not assumed a priori, but
eventually follows from the analysis. In this section we want to discuss
some of these examples showing how canonical noncommutativity of
coordinates arises.

#### 1.2.1 Canonical noncommutativity in condensed matter systems

A first physical system which exhibits noncommutativity comes from
condensed matter (see, e.g., [ 57 ] ). Let us consider a point-particle
moving on a 2-d plane ³ ³ 3 In condensed matter certain systems are
effectively 2-d in space. in presence of an external magnetic field
@xmath perpendicular to the plane. The equation of motion for the
particle is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath gives the position of the particle, @xmath is the particle
velocity and @xmath are some external conservative forces: @xmath

In the limit of strong magnetic field @xmath the equation ( 1.6 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This last equation predicts that the particle moves always in a
direction orthogonal to that of the external force (for example if the
force is constant along the @xmath axis, the particle moves with a
constant velocity along the @xmath axis. If the force vanishes, the
particle stops).

Equation ( 1.6 ) is also simply obtained from the observation that the
Lagrangian of the system is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the gauge @xmath , setting @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This expression is of the form @xmath where ( @xmath ) are a canonical
pair. This implies that the system can be equivalently described by an
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and variables satisfying (Poisson) relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that, in the strong field limit, the original system is
equivalent to another system in which no external field is present but
with (Poisson) noncommuting coordinates. What happens in the strong
field limit is that the Lagrangian becomes of the first order in time
derivatives so that the original-commutative coordinate space can be
viewed as an effective-noncommutative phase-space ( 1.11 ).

These arguments can be extended to the quantum level simply substituting
the Poisson brackets with commutators. In this case ( 1.11 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the strong magnetic field limit corresponds to the projection on the
lowest Landau level. This is a first example of canonical
noncommutativity which involves constant (spacetime independent)
commutation relations.

#### 1.2.2 Canonical noncommutativity in string theories

Besides being relevant for electronic systems in external magnetic
field, canonical noncommutativity has recently attracted a lot of
interest since it emerges also from certain limits of string theory. As
an example we briefly discuss here bosonic open string in a flat space
in presence of a constant @xmath -field and Dp-branes [ 2 ] . If we
indicate with @xmath the rank of the matrix @xmath , we can assume that
@xmath since the component of the field @xmath not along the brane can
be gauged away. Denoting with @xmath the stringy worldsheet, the stringy
action reads:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that can be also written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the tangent derivative along the string worldsheet
boundary @xmath The equations of motion for @xmath along the Dp branes
are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a normal derivative to the worldsheet boundary @xmath

In the strong field limit the propagator becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is incompatible with classical (commutative) coordinates
and one can show [ 2 ] that this implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the strong field limit the first term in ( 1.13 ) becomes negligible
so that the action takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is purely topological. The boundary degrees of freedom become the
dominant ones.

This is a second example of canonical noncommutativity. We observe that,
though in a different context, the mechanism which generates this type
of noncommutativity is always the same. A strong field renders the
action topological (i.e. dependent only on a first derivative) and
through the equation of motion the original commutative space transforms
in an effective noncommutative phase-space.

#### 1.2.3 Breakup of Lorentz symmetry in canonical spacetimes

We now want to comment briefly on the fate of the classical (Poincaré)
symmetries in canonical noncommutative spacetime @xmath As already
emphasized canonical noncommutativity is the weakest form of
noncommutativity, in the sense that it involves coordinate independent
commutation relations, and can be viewed as the zeroth-order
approximation of the more general form @xmath . Here we suppose that the
infinitesimal action of the Poincaré group on the coordinates is not
changed by noncommutativity (i.e. @xmath @xmath @xmath ). It can be
easily verified that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These expressions show that canonical spacetime is not, in general,
covariant under rotation and boosts while it is covariant under
translations. Physically this means that there is not equivalence
between different inertial observers (in the usual sense) since there is
a preferred class of reference frames. Moreover in each frame of this
class there is a preferred direction (which breaks rotations) but not a
preferred origin (translations symmetry is preserved). It is also worth
noticing that if noncommutativity does not involve time (i.e. @xmath )
and one only considers infinitesimal boosts then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Actually in this case we have also covariance under finite
non-relativistic boosts.

These mathematical results are in good agreement with the physical
picture of canonical noncommutativity that comes from the description of
charged particles in strong magnetic field. The covariance under boosts
is lost since we are not considering transformation of the magnetic
field ( @xmath in the noncommutative analogy), the rotational covariance
is lost because the magnetic field selects a preferred direction while,
the uniformity of the magnetic field (spacetime independent @xmath )
ensures translational covariance.

### 1.3 Example of Lie-algebra noncommutative spacetime:
@xmath-Minkowski spacetime

In this section we discuss a much-studied example of Lie-algebra
noncommutative spacetime which turns out to play a role in attempts to
describe Planck length @xmath as a minimum wave-length @xmath . We first
show how to implement such minimum-wavelength condition in a way that is
compatible with the relativity postulates. Then we discuss the quantum
group that can provide the corresponding mathematical framework and show
that @xmath -Minkowski Lie-algebra spacetime is dual to this quantum
group.

#### 1.3.1 Planck length as a minimum wave-length

We have already discussed how there exist many different approaches to
the unification of General Relativity with Quantum Mechanics which share
the prediction of a minimum length. The existence of a minimum length is
not by itself in contrast with the Poincaré symmetry, as the
quantization of the angular momentum is not in contrast with the
invariance under continuous rotations. However if one wants to promote
the Planck length to an invariant length, in the same sense in which the
speed of light is an invariant velocity, one finds immediately
inconsistence with Special Relativity. As the introduction of an
invariant velocity scale necessarily induces some modifications in the
Galilei group, so the introduction of a invariant length scale
necessarily leads to modifications of the Lorentz group. Not all the
elements of the Lorentz group will require modifications. For example,
as intuition suggests, the idea of an invariant length scale is not in
contrast with symmetry under spatial rotations therefore we should
expect an unmodified rotation’s sector. Deep modifications instead will
be unavoidable in the boost sector, where the invariant length scale
must appear as a deformation scale. In fact if the Planck scale is
treated not as a (rescaled) coupling constant but as an
observer-independent scale then one becomes in contrast with the
Lorentz-Fitzgerald length contraction that prohibits
observer-independent lengths.

Relativistic theories that admit two invariant scales, a velocity scale
@xmath and a length scale @xmath were first introduced in the papers [ 6
, 7 ] and have been extensively studied in the recent literature (see
e.g. [ 8 , 10 , 27 , 58 , 59 , 60 ] ). These theories, commonly called
“Doubly Special Relativity” (DSR) theories, can be formulated just in
the same way in which Special Relativity is formulated: by introducing
some corresponding postulates. One example of DSR postulates whose
logical consistency has been analyzed in details in [ 61 ] is the
following

-   The laws of physics involve a fundamental velocity @xmath and a
    fundamental length scale @xmath .

-   The value of the fundamental velocity scale @xmath can be measured
    by each inertial observer as the speed of light with wavelength
    @xmath much larger than @xmath (more rigorously, @xmath is obtained
    as the @xmath limit of the speed of light)

-   Each inertial observer can establish the value of @xmath (same value
    for all inertial observers) by determining the dispersion relations
    for photons which takes the form @xmath where the function @xmath is
    the same for all the inertial observers and in particular all
    inertial observers agree on the leading @xmath dependence of @xmath
    i.e.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.22)
      -- -------- -- --------

It is worth noticing that the notion of relativity in DSR theories is
conceptually very similar to the notion of relativity in Galilean
Relativity and in Special Relativity. The laws of physics are the same
for all inertial observers. Inertial observers will not necessarily
agree on the measured value of a given quantity but those relations
among measurement results, which we call laws of physics, will hold for
all inertial observers. For example, two inertial observers do not, in
general, agree on the value of the momentum of an electron, but if they
measure energy and momentum of the electron, both observers will find
that the measurements results satisfy the same dispersion relation.
Among the laws of physics an important role is played by those which
identify relativistic invariants quantities whose measurement gives the
same result in all inertial frames.

In Galilean Relativity, for example, all inertial observers agree on the
dispersion relations @xmath This relation does not involve any invariant
scale other than the mass of the particle. In Special Relativity all
inertial observers agree on the dispersion relation @xmath , which
involve only one invariant scale ( @xmath ), other than the mass of the
particle. In DSR theories all inertial observers agree on the relation
of the type ( 1.22 ), which involves two invariant scale ( @xmath ),
other than the mass of the particle. All these theories are
relativistic.

As already discussed the introduction of such postulates does not
require to modify the rotation sector, but boosts do need to be
modified. At the first order in @xmath one can adopt the ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it is easy to verify that one has consistency with the dispersion
relation ( 1.22 ) if @xmath and @xmath are such that the above
expression takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Directly from ( 1.22 ) follows that @xmath . This deviation from the
Special Relativistic dispersion relation @xmath implies that when @xmath
the dependence of momentum on the energy change in the softest @xmath
This is a evidence of the momentum saturation that we will discuss more
in detail when an all-orders form of @xmath will have been obtained.

For a massless particle, if we retain the usual definition of speed ⁴ ⁴
4 We will discuss in the next chapter how this definition, beyond to be
the more natural in the momentum sector, also is the one which comes
from a proper analysis of the wave-packet motion in spacetime. , in the
energy-momentum sector we get @xmath @xmath which predicts for
sufficiently-energetic photons the possibility of @xmath . Moreover the
usual energy-momentum conservation rule needs to be modified in such way
to be covariant under the new transformations rules. We will discuss
more in details these point in the next section in the framework of
@xmath -Poincaré quantum group.

#### 1.3.2 @xmath-Poincaré Hopf algebras

It was observed in Refs. [ 62 , 63 ] that the generators of (modified)
boost and (unmodified) rotations constructed from DSR postulates
correspond at the leading order in @xmath to the Lorentz-sector
generators of a well known quantum group: the bicrossproduct-basis
@xmath -Poincaré Hopf algebra. The dispersion relation ( 1.22 ) if then
the approximation at the leading order in @xmath of the Casimir of this
Hopf algebra. It is useful for us to give here a brief review of the
structure of @xmath -Poincaré Hopf algebra in the “bicrossproduct basis”
[ 8 , 7 , 10 ] showing in particular the connection with @xmath
-Minkowski noncommutative spacetime.

@xmath -Poincaré algebras were introduced in [ 6 , 64 ] as one of the
softest possible deformations of the usual Poincaré group as an Hopf
algebra. It is defined in the algebraic sector by the commutation
relations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the four-momentum generators, @xmath are the spatial
rotation generators and @xmath are the boost generators.

The algebraic relations ( 1.25 - 1.28 ) are accompanied by coalgebraic
structures of the coproducts

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

and by the antipodes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

A general description of Hopf algebras and in particular of their
co-algebraic properties is given in Ref [ 65 ] (see also Appendix).
Actually for the purposes of this thesis it suffices to notice that
while the algebra describes products of generators the coalgebra
essentially describes sums of generators. Nontrivial coproducts are
related to non-Abelian addition law for the energy and momentum.

Now we analyze more closely the action of the Lorentz sector of this
(quantum) Hopf algebra on the momentum sector. In a Lie-algebra context
the action is obtained directly by the commutators (infinitesimal
transformation) and by their exponentiation (finite transformation). In
an Hopf algebra the action of a subalgebra on another subalgebra is
generalized by the concept of action and coaction. From the definition
of covariant (left)-adjoint action and from the expressions of
coproducts ( 1.29 ) and of antipodes ( 1.30 ) we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We observe that

-   The action of rotations is undeformed.

-   The action of boosts on the translation generators is deformed but
    it is still formulated through commutators.

-   The action of boosts on boost/rotation generators is deformed and
    cannot be formulated through commutators.

From the above expression one can also easily write down the
infinitesimal actions on a generic function, for example, of the momenta

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These last expressions indicate that the action of the Lorentz sector
@xmath on generic functions of the translation generators is still
described by commutators. Also the usual Leibniz rule is satisfied

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Leibniz rule ( 1.33 ) and ( 1.31 - 1.32 ) it is easy to
calculate that for a generic finite transformation @xmath the action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action ( 1.34 ) on functions of momenta is the usual one in spite of
the non-trivial coalgebraic structure ( 1.29 - 1.30 ). This is due to
the fact that the action of the Lorentz sector on the momentum sector is
still obtained through commutators. The “mass Casimir” of this Hopf
algebra is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the action of Lorentz sector generator is still through
commutators the Casimir @xmath preserves the property of being invariant
under the covariant left adjoint action ( 1.31 ) and ( 1.32 ). Moreover
the mass Casimir allows an unique, all-order determination of the
function @xmath introduced in ( 1.22 ), whereas DSR postulates fix it
only to the lowest order in @xmath . The same is true for the boost
action ( 1.32 ) that is an all-order generalization of ( 1.24 ).
Therefore we see that the DSR proposal is naturally realized in this
Hopf-algebra quantum scheme and that all-order results in the
deformation parameter can be obtained in this scheme. All-order
expressions for the energy-momentum transformation rules between
different inertial observers have been obtained in [ 63 ] and an
all-order analysis of the scattering processes is reported in [ 66 ] .

#### 1.3.3 Phenomenology of @xmath-Poincaré

It is perhaps appropriate to pause for a few considerations regarding
the phenomenological implications of @xmath -Poincaré kinematics. The
mathematical formalism described so far already implies some profound
modifications of the conventional special-relativistic kinematics
framework. In particular from ( 1.35 ) one gets immediately [ 62 ] the
important general conclusions that

-   @xmath when @xmath which means that there is a maximum momentum (
    @xmath ).

-   @xmath which means that the speed of light tends to infinity when
    the momentum tends to the maximum allowed momentum.

It should be noticed that infinite velocities are allowed only when
@xmath so that an infinite amount of energy is needed to obtain a photon
with infinite speed. Real photons have finite energy and therefore
finite speed. Of course @xmath is a striking characteristic of this
framework but for our “low-energy” particles ( @xmath ) the effects are
negligibly small [ 7 , 10 ] . In practice this new framework is
indistinguishable from the usual one at the presently-accessible
energies. Therefore this striking prediction of the @xmath -Minkowski
framework does not have troublesome phenomenological implications, but
there is of course still an intense debate concerning the logical
consistency of this scenario for @xmath . In particular, it appears
necessary to develop a new concept of causality. Actually, even before a
full development of this new concept of causality, especially in
cosmology there has been interest in the @xmath -Minkowski motivated
idea of a light cone that effectively becomes wider as the energies
available increase. Let us consider, for example, the horizon problem
that is one of the main motivations for inflation theory. Horizon
problem consists in the fact that zones of the sky which are angularly
separated by more than a few degrees should be causally separated,
whereas we observe significant large-scale homogeneity. The analysis of
Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation, for instance, indicates that the
temperature is the same in all directions, with a precision of one part
in 10 @xmath The hypothesis, predicted by DSR theories, of an
energy-dependent speed of light might provide a simple explanation of
this paradox [ 67 ] , without recurring to the inflation theory. The
greatly-energetic photons of the early stages of the universe in fact
are predicted by DSR theories to have speeds high enough that they could
causally connect zones of the universe that would otherwise, according
to Special Relativity, be causally disconnected.

There are also other physical applications of @xmath -Poincaré
kinematics that allow to explain certain paradoxes of physics based on
the Special Relativity. A much studied example is the one in which one
gives a @xmath -Poincaré/DSR description of the cosmic-ray paradox.
According to the classical Poincaré symmetry of classical Minkowski
spacetime ultra-high-energy-cosmic rays should loose energy interacting
with the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation by producing pions (
@xmath ). Considering the typical energies ( @xmath ) of the CMRB
photons and the typical distances from the Earth of the cosmic-ray
sources, the assumption of validity of the Special Relativistic
kinematic rules should lead to an upper (GZK) limit @xmath on the energy
of the observed cosmic rays [ 68 , 69 ] . Instead detection of several
cosmic rays above the GZK limit has been reported [ 70 ] . One can
calculate the thresholds for photopion production in the DSR scheme.
Using the dispersion relation ( 1.22 ) and the energy-momentum
conservation laws one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath @xmath is the proton (pion) mass. Of course in the @xmath
limit one recovers the usual photopion-production threshold. We observe
that in the correction term the smallness of @xmath (which, as
mentioned, we expect to be of order @xmath ) is compensated by the huge
ratios @xmath The result is that [ 21 , 22 ] according to ( 1.36 ) even
the observation of E @xmath protons becomes possible providing an
explanation to the observed cosmic rays.

Conceptually similar to the GZK paradox is the Markarian-501 paradox.
High energy photons emitted by Markarian 501 with energies higher than
10TeV should collide with the Far Infrared Background Radiation (FIRBR)
producing electron-positron pairs @xmath Instead photons from Markarian
501 with energies higher than 20 TeV have been detected [ 71 ] .
Markarian 501 paradox can be explained in a way analogous to the GZK
paradox. The relevant process in this case is @xmath . The DSR-threshold
for this process obtained from the dispersion relation ( 1.22 ) and
energy-momentum conservation law is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given the value involved in the energy @xmath of the FIRBR, the
threshold is shifted up to @xmath explaining the observations.

There are other physical situations, besides the ones mentioned so far
in which @xmath -Poincaré kinematics might lead to detectable effects.
Particularly promising in this sense appear to be the so-called
time-of-flight studies in astrophysics. The velocity formula @xmath
obtained in the @xmath -Poincaré framework predicts a difference in the
times of arrival on Earth for two simultaneously-emitted photons

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the source-Earth distance and @xmath is the difference
between the energies of the two photons. Certain astrophysical objects
produce very energetic photons that travel very large distances. From
searches of a time-of-arrival difference of the type ( 1.38 ) it is
possible to obtain bounds on the deformation parameter @xmath .
Presently, the best bound is @xmath obtained by [ 18 ] . Future planned
experiments, such as AMS [ 72 ] and GLAST [ 25 , 73 , 74 ] , are
expected to move this bound to the Planck scale ( @xmath ) and beyond.
In summary the phenomenology in the @xmath -Poincaré/DSR framework is
rather rich: the new effects are small enough to agree with all
available robust data, but large enough to provide candidate solutions
for emerging experimental paradoxes and for testing in planned
experiments.

#### 1.3.4 @xmath-Minkowski Spacetime from @xmath-Poincaré duality

Having reassured the reader that the phenomenology of @xmath -Poincaré
kinematics is acceptable and interesting, we go back to the analysis of
the mathematical structure in order to identify a spacetime on which
@xmath -Poincaré acts covariantly. Given the enveloping algebra of
translation @xmath , it is rather natural to take for the spacetime
coordinate space its dual @xmath that will also be an algebra on which
@xmath necessarily acts in a covariant way. The structure of the
coordinate space @xmath is univocally determined by the axioms of the
Hopf algebra duality:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
     @xmath      (1.40)
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are introduced in the sense of the
standard notation for the coproduct

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see immediately from ( 1.40 ) that commutation rules in the momentum
sector correspond to co-commutation rules in the coordinate sector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation ( 1.39 ) and ( 1.41 ) can be used to define spacetime
coordinates. One gets that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which it follows that @xmath and comparing with ( 1.41 ) one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This is the noncommutative spacetime called @xmath -Minkowski. We
observe that spacetime noncommutativity in this case directly follows
from the fact that the momentum sector, although being commutative, is
not co-commutative, and from the duality relations pairing the two
algebras ( 1.39 - 1.41 ).

#### 1.3.5 Covariance of @xmath-Minkowski Spacetime

The duality between @xmath -Minkowski and (bicrossproduct) @xmath
-Poincaré is related with the covariance, in the sense of Hopf algebras,
of @xmath -Minkowski under @xmath -Poincaré action. The action of an
element of the Lorentz sector @xmath on the coordinates is implicitly
defined by the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the action of @xmath on functions of the momenta @xmath is the
(left) adjoint one ( 1.31 - 1.32 ) and : @xmath is ordered in the form ⁵
⁵ 5 We observe that every smooth function of noncommutative coordinates
can be written in this form.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using ( 1.31 - 1.32 ). and ( 1.48 ) one obtains the actions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.50)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These actions are covariant in the Hopf algebra sense

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.52)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We also observe that the action of boosts and rotations on the
coordinates is the same as in Special Relativity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

and can be described as an action through commutators.

Differences occur only in higher powers of the coordinates ( 1.50 - 1.51
). Now we have to define the action of @xmath on the coordinate space.
This action is defined by the (left) canonical action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that a finite transformation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is a simple translation ⁶ ⁶ 6 It is worth noticing that defining
the action of @xmath on @xmath through the commutators of some quantum
phase space (see for example ( 2.26 ) ), this action can’t be a
translation. . This concludes our analysis of covariance of @xmath
-Minkowski.

### 1.4 @xmath-Minkowski spacetime and canonical spacetime from general
Lie-algebra spacetimes

In this section we observe that @xmath -Minkowski and canonical
spacetime have the noticeable property that, among all the possible
Lie-algebra spacetimes of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

they are selected from simple symmetry requirements. In particular if we
demand invariance under undeformed rotations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain that it must be @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first spacetime ( 1.59 ) is known as fuzzy sphere, since @xmath is a
Casimir of this algebra. In the second spacetime ( 1.60 ) we recognize
@xmath -Minkowski spacetime.

On the other hand if we require invariance of ( 1.57 ) under undeformed
translations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

we select

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is just canonical spacetime. This shows that among all the possible
Lie-algebra spacetime the request of (undeformed) rotational invariance
selects @xmath -Minkowski spacetime and the fuzzy sphere spacetime,
whereas the request of (undeformed) translational invariance uniquely
selects canonical spacetime.

To resume, with respect to the classical symmetries, we can construct
the following table

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Both @xmath -Minkowski and canonical spacetime are candidate
noncommutative version of Minkowski spacetime ⁷ ⁷ 7 Fuzzy sphere is not
a good candidate since it represents a nonflat space. which in general
preserve 4 undeformed classical symmetries (3 rotations + 1 time
translation for @xmath -Minkowski, 3 spatial translations + 1 time
translation for canonical spacetime). However, as discussed above, in
addition to the 4 classical/undeformed symmetries, @xmath -Minkowski
also enjoys 6 additional quantum-deformed symmetries, and its full
symmetry structure is described by the 10 generators of @xmath -
Poincaré Hopf algebra.

In the case of canonical noncommutativity the four classical symmetries
are all there is (there are no additional deformed symmetries). This
reflects the fact that canonical noncommutativity requires the support
of a preferred class of inertial observers. In particular we know that
canonical noncommutativity can be described as a commutative geometry in
presence of a background (magnetic) field, and the presence of field
allows the selection of a preferred class of inertial observer.

## Chapter 2 Waves in noncommutative Spacetimes ⁰ ⁰ footnotetext: * In
this Chapter we discuss in detail the analysis reported more briefly in
Ref. [ 46 ] .

*  In this chapter, after a brief review of the properties of waves in
classical Minkowski spacetime, we analyze the concept of wave in a
noncommutative spacetime. We show that the usual picture of propagating
wave-packets can be implemented in a noncommutative context as well. We
discuss how in the case of canonical noncommutativity this construction
is very close to the commutative case: the phase velocity and the,
physically more relevant, group velocity are the same as in the
Minkowski spacetime in spite of the appearance of some extra
(unobservable) phases that depend on the noncommutativity parameters. On
the other hand, in @xmath -Minkowski spacetime, we find significant
differences with respect to the commutative case. In particular we find
that the description of the group velocity is still governed by the
relation @xmath but the dispersion relation @xmath is significantly
modified as discussed in the previous chapter.

### 2.1 Review of waves in Minkowski spacetime

Both in theories in Galilei spacetime and in theories in Minkowski
spacetime the relation between the physical velocity of signals (the
group velocity of a wave packet) and the dispersion relation is governed
by the formula

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

in components

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is basically a result of the fact that our theories in Galilei and
Minkowski spacetime admit Hamiltonian formulation. In classical
mechanics this leads directly to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In ordinary quantum mechanics @xmath and @xmath are described in terms
of operators that satisfy the commutation relations @xmath , and in the
Heisenberg picture the time evolution for the position operator is given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath and, again, @xmath , also in ordinary quantum mechanics one
finds @xmath (but in quantum mechanics @xmath is the operator @xmath and
the group-velocity relation strictly holds only for expectation values).

Given a spacetime, the concept of group velocity can be most naturally
investigated in the study of the propagation of waves. It is useful to
review that discussion briefly. For simplicity we consider a classical
1+1-dimensional Minkowski spacetime. We denote by @xmath the frequency
of the wave and by @xmath the wave number of the wave. [Of course,
@xmath is governed by the dispersion relation, by the mass Casimir of
the classical Poincaré algebra.] A plane wave is described by the
exponential @xmath . A wave packet is the Fourier transform of a
function @xmath which is nonvanishing in a limited region of the
spectrum ( @xmath , @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The information/energy carried by the wave will travel at a
sharply-specified velocity, the group velocity, only if @xmath . It is
convenient to write the wave-packet as @xmath , from which the
definition of the wave amplitude @xmath follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The wave packet is therefore the product of the plane-wave factor @xmath
and the wave amplitude @xmath . One can introduce a “phase velocity”,
@xmath , associated with the plane-wave factor @xmath , but there is no
information/energy that actually travels at this velocity (this
“velocity” is a characteristic of a pure phase, with modulus @xmath
everywhere). It is the wave amplitude @xmath that describes the time
evolution of the energy/information actually carried by the wave packet.
From ( 2.4 ) we see that the wave amplitude stiffly translates at
velocity @xmath , the group velocity. In terms of the group velocity and
the phase velocity the wave packet can be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In ordinary Minkowski spacetime the group velocity and the phase
velocity both are 1 (in our units) for photons (light waves) travelling
in vacuum. For massive particles or massless particles travelling in a
medium @xmath . The causality structure of Minkowski spacetime
guarantees that @xmath , whereas, since no information actually travels
with the phase velocity, it provides no obstruction for @xmath .

The main idea to extend the above construction to a noncommutative
spacetime is that of writing the function of noncommutative variables as
the inverse Fourier transform of a commutative energy-momentum-space
function. Thus in general one writes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Fourier transform of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath and @xmath are commuting variables while @xmath are
noncommuting variables. The function @xmath must be consistent with the
Fourier calculus and must reduce in the commutative limit to the usual
@xmath The advantage in using Fourier formulation is that one can do
products of fields once it is known how to do products of the phases
@xmath This last ones are usually evaluated using the
Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula.

### 2.2 Proposal of a description of wave-packets in Canonical Spacetime

We now try to extend the construction just outlined to waves in
canonical spacetime. As a first step we have to define the phase @xmath
. The simplest possible choice is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Once that single plane wave has been identified the next step is to
consider products of waves. From the canonical noncommutativity
relations we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Waves packets are constructed summing plane waves in the usual way

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Following the procedure outlined in the Minkowski case we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is formally similar to ( 2.4 ). Using ( 2.8 ), defining @xmath and
@xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As in the Minkowski case we can individuate an amplitude here

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and write the wave packet as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath and @xmath At this point some remarks are
in order. A first observation regards the overall phase factor @xmath
which appears in ( 2.10 ). This factor doesn’t give any modification of
the group velocity and is just an overall phase velocity. A second
observation regards the fact that we would have reached the same
conclusion by factorizing the phase contribution to the right:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only difference being now that the overall phase factor acquires an
opposite sign with respect to the previous case. However the results for
@xmath do not depend on this sign.

These observations seem to suggest that in the case of canonical
noncommutativity there is no observable modification of the in vacuum
propagation of wave packets.

### 2.3 The challenge of Waves in @xmath-Minkowski Spacetime

In this section we try to construct wave packets in @xmath -Minkowski
spacetime following the line of the previous sections. We use the
Fourier calculus in noncommutative spaces developed in [ 75 ] for a
proper definition of the wave packet. This assure the right covariance
properties of the packets under @xmath -Poincaré transformations and
allow us to get phase velocity and group velocity.

#### 2.3.1 Differential calculus and Fourier calculus in
@xmath-Minkowski

The only consistently-developed differential calculus [ 65 ] on the
enveloping algebra of @xmath -Minkowski is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The notation @xmath , conventional in the @xmath -Minkowski literature,
is reserved for time-to-the-right-ordered ¹ ¹ 1 In @xmath -Minkowski
spacetime (with its commuting space coordinates and nontrivial
commutation relations only when the time coordinate is involved), it is
easy to see that the natural functional calculus should be introduced in
terms of time-to-the-right-ordered functions or (the equivalent
alternative of) intuitive rules for time-to-the-left-ordered functions.
In other noncommutative spacetimes the choice of ordering may not be so
obvious. functions of the noncommutative coordinates. The standard
symbolism adopted in Eqs. ( 2.12 )-( 2.13 ) describes noncommutative
differentials in terms of familiar actions on commutative functions. The
symbols “ @xmath ” and “ @xmath ” refer to elements of the differential
calculus on @xmath -Minkowski, while the symbols “ @xmath ” and “ @xmath
” act as ordinary derivatives on a time-to-the-right-ordered function of
the @xmath -Minkowski coordinates. For example, Eq. ( 2.12 ) states that
in @xmath -Minkowski @xmath and @xmath , i.e. @xmath acts as a familiar
@xmath -derivative on time-to-the-right-ordered functions. Of course,
the @xmath -Minkowski commutation relations impose that, if derivatives
are standard on time-to-the-right-ordered functions, derivatives must be
accordingly modified for functions which are not time-to-the-right
ordered. For example, since @xmath and @xmath (the functions @xmath and
@xmath are time-to-the-right ordered), also taking into account the
@xmath -Minkowski commutation relation @xmath , one can obtain the
@xmath -derivative of the function @xmath , which must be given by
@xmath . Similarly, one finds that @xmath (in fact, using the @xmath
-Minkowski commutation relations one finds that @xmath ).

The time derivative described by Eq. ( 2.13 ) has analogous structure,
with the only difference that the special role of the time coordinate in
the structure of @xmath -Minkowski spacetime forces [ 65 ] one to
introduce an element of discretization in the time direction: the time
derivative of time-to-the-right-ordered functions is indeed standard
(just like the @xmath -derivative of time-to-the-right-ordered functions
is standard), but it is a standard @xmath -discretized derivative
(whereas the @xmath -derivative of time-to-the-right-ordered functions
is a standard continuous derivative).

A central role in the @xmath -Minkowski functional calculus is played by
the ordered exponentials:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are four real numbers and @xmath are @xmath -Minkowski
coordinates. These ordered exponentials enjoy a simple property with
respect to the generators @xmath of translations of the @xmath
-Minkowski coordinates:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also note that, using the @xmath -Minkowski commutation relations,
one finds the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which turns out to be useful in certain applications.

The ordered exponentials @xmath also play the role of plane waves in
@xmath -Minkowski since on the mass-shell ( i.e. @xmath ) they are
solutions [ 10 ] of the relevant wave (deformed Klein-Gordon) equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath -deformed D’Alembert operator, properly
defined [ 65 , 10 ] in terms of the so-called “ @xmath -Minkowski shift
operator” @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The ordered exponentials are also the basic ingredient of the Fourier
theory on @xmath -Minkowski. This Fourier theory [ 65 ] is constructed
in terms of the canonical element @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
dual bases, which satisfy the relation @xmath . On the basis of ( 1.39 -
1.41 ) one finds that the canonical element is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The canonical element ( 2.18 ) retains the notable feature that, if we
define the transform @xmath of an ordered function @xmath through

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the choice of the integration measure @xmath and the definition ( 1.48 )
of the actions of boosts/rotations on the coordinates guarantee that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath . This is a relevant property because it implies that
under a finite transformation both @xmath and @xmath change, but they
remain connected by the Fourier-transform relations. The action of a
transformation on the @xmath is equivalent to the inverse transformation
on the @xmath . This is exactly what happens in the classical-Minkowski
case ( @xmath ), through the simple relation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In @xmath -Minkowski the action of boosts does not allow description in
terms of a matrix @xmath , but it is still true that the action of a
transformation on the @xmath is equivalent to the “inverse
transformation” on the @xmath (where, of course, here the “inverse
transformation” is described through the antipode).

#### 2.3.2 Group velocity in @xmath-Minkowski

The elements of @xmath -Minkowski functional analysis we reviewed in
Section 2 allow us to implement a consistent deformation of the analysis
that applies in commutative Minkowski spacetime, here reviewed in the
preceding subsection. In order to present specific formulas we adopt the
@xmath -Minkowski functional analysis based on time-to-the-right-ordered
noncommutative functions, but the careful reader can easily verify that
the same result for the group velocity is obtained adopting the
time-to-the-left ordering prescription.

We are little concerned with the concept of phase velocity (which is not
a physical velocity). In this respect we just observe that the phase
velocity should be a property of the @xmath -Minkowski plane wave

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, since the @xmath -Minkowski calculus is structured in such a way
that the properties of time-to-right-ordered functions are just the ones
of the corresponding commutative function, this suggests that the
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

should be valid.

But let us focus on the more significant (physically meaningful)
analysis of group velocity. Our starting point is the wave packet

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this equation ( 2.3.2 ) for simplicity we denote with @xmath an
integration measure which includes the spectrum of the packet. In fact,
the precise structure of the wave packet is irrelevant for the analysis
of the group velocity: it suffices to adopt a packet which is centered
at some @xmath (with @xmath and @xmath related through Eq. ( 1.35 ), the
dispersion relation, the mass Casimir, of the classical Poincaré
algebra) and has support only on a relatively small neighborhood of
@xmath , i.e. @xmath and @xmath .

Next, in order to proceed just following the same steps of the familiar
commutative-spacetime case, we should factor out of the integral a “pure
phase” with frequency and wavelength fixed by the wave-packet center:
@xmath . Consistently with the nature of the time-to-the-right-ordered
functional calculus the phase @xmath will be factored out to the left
and the phase @xmath will be factored out to the right:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This way to extract the phase factor preserves the
time-to-the-right-ordered structure of the wave @xmath , and therefore,
also taking into account the role that time-to-the-right-ordered
functions have in the @xmath -Minkowski calculus, should allow an
intuitive analysis of its properties.

From ( 2.21 ) one recognizes the @xmath -Minkowski group velocity as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

just as in Galilei and Minkowski spacetime. Just as one does in
commutative Minkowski spacetime, the integral can be seen as the
amplitude of the wave, the group velocity @xmath is the velocity of
translation of this wave amplitude, which be meaningfully introduced
only in the limit of narrow packet (small @xmath and @xmath ).

Notice that

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.23)
  -- -- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore the evaluation of the velocity of translation of this wave
amplitude turns out to be independent of the way in which the
exponentials are arranged (but this is an accident due to the fact that
for small @xmath and @xmath one finds that @xmath .

### 2.4 Comparison with previous analyses

Because of the mentioned interest in the phenomenological implications [
17 , 18 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 74 , 25 ] , the introduction of group velocity
in @xmath -Minkowski has been discussed in several studies. In the large
majority of these studies the concept of group velocity was not
introduced constructively (it was not a result obtained in a full
theoretical scheme: it was just introduced through an ad hoc relation).
This appeared to be harmless since the ad-hoc assumption relied on the
validity of the relation @xmath , which holds in Galilei spacetime and
Minkowski spacetime (and for which the structure of @xmath -Minkowski
appears to pose no obstacle).

Taking as starting point the approach to @xmath -Minkowski proposed in
Ref. [ 10 ] , we have here shown through a dedicated analysis that the
validity of @xmath indeed follows automatically from the structure of
@xmath -Minkowski and of the associated functional calculus.

At this point it is necessary for us to clarify which erroneous
assumptions led to the claims reported in Refs. [ 27 , 28 , 76 ] , which
questioned the validity of @xmath in @xmath -Minkowski.

#### 2.4.1 Tamaki-Harada-Miyamoto-Torii analysis

It is rather easy to compare our analysis with the study reported by
Tamaki, Harada, Miyamoto and Torii in Refs. [ 28 , 76 ] . In fact, Ref.
[ 28 ] explicitly adopted the same approach to @xmath -Minkowski
calculus that we adopted here, with Fourier transform and functional
calculus that make direct reference to time-to-the-right-ordered
functions. Also the scheme of analysis is analogous to ours, in that it
attempts to derive the group velocity from the analysis of the time
evolution of a superposition of plane waves. However, the @xmath
-Minkowski functional calculus was applied inconsistently in Ref. [ 28 ]
: at the stage of the analysis were one should factor out the phases
@xmath and @xmath from the wave amplitude (as we did in Eq. ( 2.21 ))
Ref. [ 28 ] does not proceed consistently with the
time-to-the-right-ordered functional calculus. Of course, as done here,
in order to maintain the time-to-the-right-ordered form of the wave
packet it is necessary to factor out the phases @xmath and @xmath
respectively to the left and to the right, as we did here. Instead in
Ref. [ 28 ] both phases are factored out to the left leading to a form
of the wave packet which is not time-to-the-right ordered. In turn this
leads to the erroneous conclusion that @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

This inconsistency with the ordering conventions is the key factor that
affected Ref. [ 28 ] failure to reproduce @xmath , but for completeness
we note here also that Ref. [ 28 ] leads readers to the erroneous
impression that in order to introduce the group velocity in @xmath
-Minkowski one should adopt the approximation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

for generic values of @xmath and @xmath . Actually, unless @xmath and
@xmath are very small, this approximation is very poor: it only holds in
zeroth order in the noncommutativity scale @xmath and therefore it does
not describe reliably the structure of @xmath -Minkowski (since it fails
already in leading order in @xmath , it does not even reliably
characterize the main differences between classical Minkowski and @xmath
-Minkowski). As we showed here there is no need for the approximation (
2.25 ) in the analysis of the group velocity of a wave packet in @xmath
-Minkowski.

#### 2.4.2 @xmath-Deformed phase space

As discussed in the preceding Subsection, it is very easy to compare our
study with the study reported in Ref. [ 28 ] , since both studies
adopted the same approach. We must now provide some guidance for the
comparison with the study reported by Kowalski-Glikman in Ref. [ 27 ] .
Also this comparison is significant for us since Ref. [ 27 ] , like Ref.
[ 27 ] , questioned the validity of the relation @xmath , which instead
emerged from our analysis.

Our approach to @xmath -Minkowski, which originates from techniques
developed in Refs. [ 8 , 10 ] , is profoundly different from the one
adopted in Ref. [ 27 ] . In fact, the differences start off already at
the level of the action of @xmath -Poincaré generators on @xmath
-Minkowski coordinates. The actions we adopted are described in
Section 2. They take a simple form on time-to-the-right ordered
functions, but they do not allow description as a “commutator action” on
generic ordering of functions in @xmath -Minkowski. Instead in Ref. [ 27
] the action of the @xmath -Poincaré generators on @xmath -Minkowski
coordinates was introduced in fully general terms as a commutator
action. This would allow to introduce a “phase-space extension” of
@xmath -Minkowski [ 27 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking this phase space ( 2.26 ) as starting point, Kowalski-Glikman
then found, after a rather lengthy analysis, that “massless particles
move in spacetime with universal speed of light” @xmath [ 27 ] , in
conflict with the relation @xmath and the structure of the mass Casimir
( 1.35 ). Kowalski-Glikman argued that this puzzling conflict with the
structure of the mass Casimir might be due to a mismatch between the
mass-Casimir relation, @xmath , and the dispersion relation, @xmath :
the puzzle could be explained [ 27 ] if the usual identifications @xmath
and @xmath were to be replaced by @xmath and @xmath .

We observe that the correct explanation of the puzzling result obtained
by Kowalski-Glikman is actually much simpler: the commutator action (
2.26 ) adopted in Ref. [ 27 ] , in spite of the choice of symbols @xmath
, @xmath , cannot describe the action of “momenta” @xmath on coordinates
@xmath . Momenta should generate translations of the coordinates, which
requires that they may be represented as derivatives of functions of the
coordinates, but the commutator action @xmath clearly does not allow to
represent @xmath as a derivative with respect to the @xmath coordinate,
because of the spurious factor @xmath . Similarly, those commutation
relations do not allow to represent the @xmath coordinate as a
derivative with respect to @xmath , and therefore in a Hamiltonian
theory, with Hamiltonian @xmath , one would find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and this is basically the reason for the puzzling result @xmath obtained
in Ref. [ 27 ] . Kowalski-Glikman finds a function @xmath but this
function cannot be seen as describing the relation between velocity and
momentum, since the “ @xmath ” symbol introduced in ( 2.26 ) does not
generate translations of coordinates, and therefore “ @xmath ” is not a
momentum.

## Chapter 3 Quantum Field Theories on Canonical Spacetimes ⁰ ⁰
footnotetext: * In this Chapter we review the issue of QFT construction
in noncommutative spacetimes.

*  In this chapter we discuss the construction of quantum field theory
in noncommutative spacetimes. We observe that the analysis of
quantization in @xmath -Minkowski spacetime is still at a preliminary
stage. Thus we focus mainly on the quantization in canonical spacetime
which has been extensively analyzed in literature. The most common
strategy to construct a quantum field theory on noncommutative space is
through the Weyl map which allows to introduce certain structures in
noncommutative spacetimes in analogy with the corresponding structures
in commutative spacetime. The product of functions in the commutative
space is described through a deformed “*” or “Moyal” product of
corresponding functions. Here we will discuss the main features of the
quantum field theories obtained through this procedure. In particular we
focus on the so-called IR-UV mixing which is one of the most interesting
and distinguishing features of these theories.

### 3.1 Weyl Quantization in canonical and @xmath-Minkowski spacetime

#### 3.1.1 Weyl Quantization in the phase space of ordinary quantum
mechanics

Weyl quantization is a technique used (see e.g. [ 77 , 78 ] ) to
describe quantum mechanics using the phase-space of classical mechanics.
The general idea consists in defining a mapping between the algebra of
operators on the quantum phase space and the algebra of functions on the
classical phase space. This map must of course be compatible with the
product in the noncommutative algebra of quantum operators. To achieve
this goal one has to deform the usual product of commutative functions
on the phase space in a new product called Weyl-Moyal product. In
quantum mechanics the Weyl map is given by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Fourier transform of @xmath If we consider products
of functions of the quantum phase space we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since it holds that @xmath it follows that, as introduced, the Weyl map
does not preserve the usual product of commutative functions on the
phase space. However the same formula ( 3.2 ) suggests how to modify the
product to have compatibility. We notice that ( 3.2 ) can be easily
evaluated using the commutation relation @xmath and the
Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff expansion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

from which follows that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
              @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus one is led to introduce a new product “ @xmath ” between
commutative functions on the classical phase space such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can easily verify that this @xmath product has the following
differential expression on the phase space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Weyl-Moyal @xmath product so defined is associative but
noncommutative and in particular one has that commutation relation is
properly mapped

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 3.1.2 Weyl quantization for canonical noncommutativity

To deal with the quantization of spacetime one can repeat for spacetime
the procedure just outlined for the phase-space of quantum mechanics. A
first point to notice is the relevance of the choice of the Weyl map and
in particular the choice of the order of noncommuting coordinates in the
expression that defines the Weyl map. Different choices lead to
different Weyl-Moyal products. A second important point is that this
proposal of quantization, eventually, takes into account only the
quantization of spacetime. Quantization of the phase-space must anyway
be implemented separately. We will assume the conservative hypothesis
that it can be implemented with the usual strategies as, for instance,
that of the path-integral formulation. We start considering Weyl
quantization for canonical spacetime. In this case one can define the
map between functions on noncommutative spacetime and functions on
commutative spacetime as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Fourier transform of @xmath Now let us consider
products of functions of canonical spacetime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Al already discussed it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
              @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again it is natural to introduce a Moyal @xmath -product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way we automatically have that @xmath Also this Moyal @xmath
-product is associative but it is noncommutative. One can easily verify
that the commutation relations are properly mapped:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the product of several waves one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas complex coniugation gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can also introduce integrals directly in the noncommutative space by
defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are noncommutative coordinates. Using the above formula one
can calculate integrals of every noncommutative function as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

It also results that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore canonical noncommutative integrals defined by ( 3.20 ) reduce
to the @xmath -deformed commutative integrals. Using these relations and
the Fourier transform properties it is easy to verify the following
properties of the star product under integration:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

The first property implies that under integration the @xmath -product of
two functions is the same as the common product of functions. The second
properties says that under integrations the @xmath -product is invariant
under cyclic permutations. The third property relates (under
integrations) @xmath -products of functions with products of their
Fourier transforms.

One can also introduce a differential calculus on canonical
noncommutative spacetime defining derivatives through the formulas

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These formulas are compatible with the spacetime commutation relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is also easy to verify that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these definitions of integrals and derivatives, it is possible to
define noncommutative versions of the usual commutative actions. An
example that we will analyze in detail in the following sections is
provided by the noncommutative scalar theory whose action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of commutative functions this action is written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.1.3 Weyl quantization for @xmath-Minkowski spacetime

In the case of @xmath -Minkowski spacetime the procedure is exactly the
same. The first step is to fix the Weyl map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means to choose the ordering in @xmath . On the basis of the
considerations already discussed in the previous chapter one is
naturally led to adopt the ordering prescription

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now let us consider the products of functions in the quantum spacetime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again we have that @xmath which means that the Weyl map does not
preserve the usual product of commutative function. Using the
commutation relation of @xmath -Minkowski and the
Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff expansion one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the above expression we can rewrite ( 3.32 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the Weyl-Moyal product for @xmath -Minkowski is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -product is associative but it is noncommutative. And in
particular we have that the commutation relations are properly mapped

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and waves combine in agreement with ( 3.33 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again one can introduce integrals directly in the noncommutative space
by defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the noncommutative coordinates. From the above formula
one can calculate the integrals of every noncommutative function in
@xmath -Minkowski spacetime as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

It results that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One can also verify the useful formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , plays the role of a integration measure. We observe that
most of the properties under integration of the canonical @xmath
-product are not shared by the @xmath -Minkowski @xmath -product. Most
notably the integral @xmath product of functions is not symmetric under
cyclic permutations of the argument functions and in the integral of
@xmath -product of two functions the dependence on the noncommutative
parameter does not disappear.

We also observe that Fourier momenta combine nonlinearly in the
arguments of the @xmath - function. This will produce profound
implications in the construction of the quantum field theory.

#### 3.1.4 Functional formalism in noncommutative space

The basic hypothesis of the most popular approach to QFT in
noncommutative spacetime is that the Hilbert space is not modified by
the noncommutativity so that the physicals relevant information is still
encoded in the Green functions defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

All the dependence on the noncommutativity parameters is contained in
the new action @xmath . We observe that this popular approach may be
also viewed as an assumption of “minimality”: the action is modified but
the entire procedure that from the action lead us to the physical
predictions is assumed to be unaffected by noncommutativity. It is not
inconceivable that a meaningful QFT in NCST might also be introduced
through a more profound modification of the conceptual structure adopted
in commutative-spacetime frameworks, but such alternative formulations
remain so far largely unexplored.

One can obtain the Green functions ( 3.46 ) from a  generating
functional defined as usual

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we notice that the source @xmath is coupled to the field @xmath in
the usual way. In this scheme all the machinery of the ordinary field
theory can be carried on. For example we define as usual the generating
functional for the connected Green’s function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the 1PI-effective action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath

Also the usual perturbative expansions (weak coupling expansion, loop
expansion ecc.) in this framework hold unchanged.

### 3.2 Scalar @xmath-theory in canonical spacetime

#### 3.2.1 Action, functional derivatives and equation of motion

According to the arguments discussed in the previous chapter
noncommutative scalar theory is simply obtained from the usual
commutative scalar theory with the only prescription of substituting
every product of the fields with a @xmath -product. As already
emphasized the substitutions do not change the quadratic part of the
action. For example in the case of scalar @xmath -theory the action can
be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

As usual one obtains the equation of motion from the request of
stationarity of the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have adopted the usual definition of functional derivative. We
stress that we are now working in a commutative space of functions, in
which however just the product is deformed.

From the action ( 3.50 ) and the fact that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
              @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

one easily obtains the equation of motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is worth noticing some differences for the solutions of this equation
of motion with respect to the commutative case. For example in
noncommutative @xmath one finds solitonic solutions whereas in classical
(4d-commutative) @xmath -scalar theory Derrick theorem prohibits the
existence of all finite energy classical solutions. Derrick theorem is
based on the observation that if all lengths are scaled as @xmath both
the kinetic and the potential energies decrease so that no finite-size
minimum can exist. It is not surprising that this argument fails in
presence of a characteristic length scale, such as @xmath in the
canonical noncommutative case. In fact it was shown in Ref. [ 79 ] that
for sufficiently large @xmath stable solitons can exist in the
noncommutative theory. Mathematically this is due to the fact that
equations of the type @xmath which is a typical example of solitonic
equation for the scalar theory, admit non-trivial solutions (whereas the
corresponding equation @xmath for the commutative case only has constant
solutions).

#### 3.2.2 Feynman diagrams

The analysis of Feynman diagrams in theories constructed on canonical
noncommutative spacetime is particularly interesting since important
differences emerge with respect to the commutative counterpart. We start
considering a generic scalar interaction given by the vertex

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

A first observation is that the usual @xmath -function of
energy-momentum conservation is still present so that the usual
energy-momentum conservation rules, at each vertex, hold unchanged. This
is in agreement with what suggested by the analysis of symmetries of
canonical spacetime in Section 1.4 . The important differences with
respect to the usual Feynman rules, of the corresponding commutative
interaction, is the appearance of the phase factor @xmath . This factor
must be taken into account and in particular one must preserve the order
of the lines attached to each vertex. The order of the lines attached at
each vertex is not in general important, but in noncommutative case it
is crucial.

##### Planar diagrams and nonplanar diagrams

Noncommutative theories have the feature that the total contribution to
Green functions, while still symmetries under momenta exchange, is
obtained summing vertices which are not themselves symmetric under the
exchange of momenta entering the vertex. This means that in the usual
perturbative expansion one must pay particular care, even in a
single-field theory, keeping track of the order of the momenta attached
at each vertex ¹ ¹ 1 This operation is of course without consequences in
the commutative counterpart thanks to the symmetry of the vertex. .
Particularly important with respect to this issue is the distinction
between diagrams that are or nonplanar in the noncommutative-theory
sense. This noncommutative theory concept of planarity is best
introduced through an example.

Let us consider the diagrams contributing to the self-energy of @xmath
scalar theory. We distinguish the line incoming into a vertex by the
numbers 1,2,3,4. Given the first external line (of associate momentum
@xmath ) we can attach the vertex by one of the lines 1,2,3 or 4. In a
vertex without any symmetry under exchange of the momenta, these
different choices correspond to different contributions. In our case,
thanks to the symmetry under cyclical exchanges, all these choices gives
the same contributions. We have only to multiply the results times the
number of possible choices (four in this case). Now let us consider the
case in which the external momentum @xmath is attached to the vertex
line-1 (Fig. 3.1 ).

There are of course three possible ways to attach the second external
line of momentum @xmath to the vertex. If we choose the vertex line-2 or
the vertex line-4 (Fig. 3.2 ) we can connect by a propagator the
remaining vertex lines in a way to obtain planar diagrams

These diagrams all have will give the same @xmath -product induced phase
contribution ( @xmath ). Instead, if we attach the second external line
to the vertex line-3, (Fig. 3.3 ) the only way we have to connect the
remaining vertex lines 2,4 is through a propagator which intersects at
least one line

This means that this diagrams is nonplanar. Its phase factor is @xmath .
We will discuss the implications of these phases in the next sections.
Finally for the self energy we have 4 nonplanar diagrams with the phase
factor @xmath and 8 planar diagrams with phase factor 1.

More in general nonplanar diagrams are those diagrams than cannot be, in
any way, drawn in a plane without intersecting (at least) two lines.
Planar diagrams are those diagrams that are not nonplanar. It the usual
Feynman diagrammatic planar diagrams, though always well distinct from
the nonplanar ones, give the same numerical contributions. This is
essentially due to the invariance of the vertices under generic
permutation of the momenta. In theories in which the order of the lines
incoming in each vertex is important, in general, different combinations
give different contributions. However, in the case of the theory we are
considering we have the important properties of the momenta-conservation
at each vertex and the invariance of the vertex under cyclic permutation
of the attached momenta. With this properties one can prove that the
phase factor is the same for all the possible complex-planar diagrams
and reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

It depends only on the order of the external momenta: it is insensitive
to the internal structure of the graph. This implies that the
contribution of a planar graph is precisely the same of the
corresponding diagrams of the corresponding commutative theory
multiplied by @xmath The eventual divergencies also are the same and
they can be treated similarly to the commutative case.

We said that nonplanar diagrams cannot be drawn in a plane in such way
that propagators do not cross each other. It is rather easy to see that
any nonplanar graph, for each crossing of the momenta @xmath and @xmath
will acquire an extra phase

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

in addition to the phase associated with the ordering of external
momenta. Therefore one has for the complete phase factor of a nonplanar
graph

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is as in ( 3.56 ) and @xmath is an intersection matrix that
counts the number of times that the i-th line (internal or
external) crosses the over the j-th line. Crossing are counted as
positive if @xmath crosses @xmath with @xmath moving to the left. There
is not an one to one correspondence between graphs and @xmath matrices
since different way of drawing the graph will lead to different
intersections. However all these matrices give the same Feynman
integral. We see that in the case on nonplanar graph the @xmath
-dependence cannot be factorized out as in the planar case. This @xmath
-dependence is the cause of profound differences in the behavior of the
diagrams. In particular one has that the phase factor improve the UV
convergence of the diagrams and one might expect that, with the
exception of divergent planar subgraphs, all nonplanar graphs to be
finite. We will see however that new IR divergences appear. Moreover as
a consequence of the internal phase factor nonplanar diagrams vanishes
in the @xmath limit (strong commutativity limit). In this limit the
theory is the sum of planar diagrams only (planar limit).

#### 3.2.3 One-loop 1PI effective action and the IR/UV Mixing.

As an explicit example of calculation with this new diagrammatic we
consider the 1PI two-point function. At the lowest order we have that it
is simply the inverse propagator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is unchanged. At one loop one has to sum the diagrams of Figs. 3.4
- 3.5

The first (Fig. 3.4 ) is a planar diagram while the second (Fig. 3.5 )
is a nonplanar diagram. We observe that in the @xmath limit the two
diagrams become the same (planar) diagrams with the right commutative
combinatorial factor. Their contributions are respectively

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.60)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We observe that in the @xmath limit the integrands of the two diagrams
become equal. The planar contribution ( 3.60 ) is the same as in the
commutative case (up to a numerical factor) and it is quadratically
divergent in the ultraviolet sector, whereas the nonplanar contribution
( 3.61 ) is finite thanks to the oscillation produced by the phase in
the integrand. To evaluate explicitly ( 3.60 - 3.61 ) it is useful to
use the Schwinger parametrization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting ( 3.62 ) in ( 3.60 ) and ( 3.61 ) and integrating in the
Gaussian variables @xmath one obtains

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.63)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We have introduced in both diagrams explicitly the cut-off @xmath We
observe that the planar contribution behaves as usual (i.e. it has a
leading-quadratic divergence for large momenta), whereas the nonplanar
contribution is finite even after removing the cutoff. The evaluation of
the above expressions gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.65)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a modified-Bessel function of the first kind.

We observe that the contributions coming from the nonplanar diagrams
remain finite in the @xmath limit and that in the same limit @xmath
Noncommutativity regularizes the divergences in the nonplanar diagrams
but the planar ones remain divergent as in the commutative case.
Moreover unexpected ² ² 2 In the usual quantum picture of spacetime a
caracteristic length scale @xmath introduce new features only at lenght
scale smaller than @xmath . Instead in the case of canonical
noncommutativity, where the new length scale is @xmath corrections are
introduced at lenght scale larger than 1/ @xmath (IR-)divergences appear
in the limit of vanishing momenta @xmath Explicitly up to one-loop the
two-point effective action reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
              @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the renormalized mass. It is worth noticing that

-   In the limit @xmath one recovers @xmath and the effective action (
    3.68 ) becomes

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.71)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   Instead if @xmath one obtains @xmath and the commutative expression

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.72)
      -- -------- -- --------

    is recovered, where @xmath is the commutative renormalized mass.

We see that in ( 3.71 ) there are singularities in the infrared ( @xmath
) limit, involving quadratic and logarithmic poles. Surprisingly the
same poles persist even in the limit @xmath . This means that after the
renormalization of the theory (i.e. after the removal of the cutoff
@xmath ) the limit @xmath does not give back the commutative theory. If
we instead work at fixed cutoff @xmath the limit @xmath can always be
taken and it always gives back the commutative theory. The fact that the
ultra-violet (UV) limit @xmath and the infra-red (IR) limit @xmath do
not commute is a manifestation of a mixing of the ultraviolet degrees of
freedom with the infrared ones. In literature this mixing is known as
IR/UV mixing [ 34 ] .

##### On the validity of perturbative expansion

We want to report some observations regarding the validity of the
perturbative expansion in these theories [ 34 ] . The point is that even
if the 1-loop contributions are all of order @xmath , with respect to
the tree level, they diverge in the @xmath limit. This might motivate
some skepticism toward the validity of the perturbative expansion. The
one-loop contribution becomes greater than the tree level one when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the @xmath -th order the divergent dependence in @xmath of the
nonplanar diagram may be read from the dependence on @xmath of the
planar diagrams. Thus one expects at the @xmath -th order the leading
singularities in @xmath are of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

This higher order contributions are as large as the first order when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

which yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a dimensionless constant. Therefore the one loop
approximation is valid for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that the range of momenta in which the loop expansion is
meaningful is exponentially small in terms of the inverse of the
coupling constant.

##### One-loop vertex function

The tree-level vertex is easily obtained from ( 3.55 ) by functional
derivatives. It reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have already observed how the usual rules of energy-momentum
conservation still hold. The new observation here is that we have
recovered the symmetry under any exchange of external momenta in spite
of the fact that the phase associated to each vertex is only cyclically
symmetric.

Now let us consider one-loop corrections. We have already discussed the
emergence of infrared singularities in the two-point function connected
to the IR/UV mixing. Here we want to investigate if the IR/UV mixing has
similar implications for the 4-point vertex function. The relevant
one-loop diagrams have the same structure of the corresponding
commutative ones but as usual an appropriate @xmath -dependent phase
factor is present in each vertex. The analysis proceeds using the same
techniques already used in eqs. ( 3.60 )-( 3.65 ) and the final results
is [ 34 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.80)
              @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

that is again divergent for vanishing external momenta (or vanishing
noncommutative parameter @xmath ). As one could guess from simple
arguments, whereas for the two point function the divergences were
quadratic, here we find only logarithmic infrared divergences. However
again we observe the effect of the IR/UV mixing: the UV logarithmic
divergences of the commutative theory become the IR divergences of the
corresponding nonplanar diagrams. It is also worth noticing that in
spite of these new infrared divergences the theory has been shown to be
renormalizable up to two loops [ 80 ] .

### 3.3 Unsolved problems for QFT in @xmath-Minkowski spacetime: @xmath
example

The issue of quantization of noncommutative theories on @xmath
-Minkowski spacetime has not yet been extensively studied in literature
(see however [ 66 , 81 , 82 , 83 , 84 ] ). The obstacles to the
implementation of these theories are closely connected to the properties
of the @xmath products. Here we want to briefly consider one example of
these theories, @xmath scalar theory, and discuss the basic differences
with respect to the canonical counterparts. Construction of scalar field
theory in functional formalism has been discussed in [ 66 , 82 ] . The
starting point is the generating functional

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

A first point to notice is that in the @xmath -Minkowski case some
ambiguities arise already in the introduction of the sources. In this
case in fact expressions like @xmath and @xmath do not give the same
contributions. This is different from the canonical case where the
corresponding terms give the same contributions thank to the properties
of the canonical @xmath -product. The ambiguity between a @xmath and a
@xmath source term has been tentatively approached, as shown in [ 66 ] ,
by introducing both terms but some of the pathologies of QFT in @xmath
-Minkowski might be even due to this initial assumption (which one may
have to modify eventually).

Using relations ( 3.44 - 3.45 ) one can write the above expression in
the momentum space as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.84)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One can also perform the Gaussian integration of ( 3.82 ) obtaining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain Green functions from the above expression one first needs a
generalization of the functional derivative. A proper generalization
results to be

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.87)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using these new functional derivative, expression ( 3.44 - 3.45 ) and
the fact that @xmath from ( 3.86 ) one can find the two-point function
at the tree level

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

An important point to notice is that being @xmath expression ( 3.89 )
predicts the usual rule of energy momentum conservation in spite of the
nontrivial coproducts governing the algebra of @xmath -Poincaré
symmetries. So far, at the level of having considered only the tree
level propagator, the theory still looks healthy. However serious
pathologies are encountered already in the analysis of the one loop
contribution to propagator and tree level vertex.

One-loop formulas for the propagator may be obtained [ 66 , 82 ] with
the usual procedure from ( 3.85 ) and ( 3.86 ). A distinction between
planar and nonplanar diagrams, in analogy with the canonical case,
results to be useful. For planar diagrams no problems arise and the
energy-momentum conservations rules: they are the same as in the tree
level formulas. Instead for planar diagrams nontrivial problems are
encountered, mainly due to the fact that a modification of the
momentum-conservation rule occurs that cannot even be described as a
modified conservation law. The terms involving loop momenta in fact do
not cancel each other in the argument of delta functions. With respect
to the vertex function, functional formalism provide a way to overcome
the problem of the ordering in the vertex, that has been considered one
of the main obstacles towards the construction of a field theory.
However other urgent problems in the vertex function occur already at
the tree level. The most relevant problems is represented by the lacking
of covariance under @xmath -Poincaré transformations of the argument of
the @xmath ³ ³ 3 More properly the argument of the @xmath is covariant
in form but when it vanishes in a given inertial system it does not
vanish in all other inertial systems. This has for example the illogical
consequence that different inertial observers may not agree on the
creation of a particle in a given process. function which represents the
energy-momentum-conservation law. These fundamental problems render
non-reliable the construction of QFT on @xmath -Minkowski spacetime and
however no general consensus is present in literature on the strategy
adopted for quantization. These consideration led us to stop here our
analysis of QFT theories in @xmath -Minkowski spacetime. From here on we
will focus exclusively on QFT in canonical spacetime.

### 3.4 Gauge theories in canonical spacetime

In this section we want to sketch the construction of gauge theories in
the case of canonical noncommutativity. Commutative non-abelian-gauge
theories contain at most logarithmic divergences. So one might
conjecture that noncommutative gauge theory to be free from quadratic
and linear poles. We will see that this naive expectation is not
fulfilled.

Noncommutative gauge theories are constructed as in the commutative case
[ 85 ] , starting from a Lie algebra whose generators satisfy the
commutation rules

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the structure constants of the algebra. The
transformations of the fields can be defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.91)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.92)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has been already introduced in Section 3.1.2. and @xmath .

One can also define the field strength as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This field strength has the noteworthy property of transforming under
infinitesimal gauge transformations according to the adjoint
representation of the gauge group

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe also that gauge symmetry is realized on the fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

The usual Yang-Mills Lagrangian density can be modified in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath acts, as usual, on the gauge indices. We notice that ( 3.96
) is not invariant under gauge transformations. In fact using ( 3.93 )
is easy to check that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.97)
              @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

However when we consider the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

we recover the gauge invariance ( @xmath ). We observe that to recover
gauge invariance the cyclicity property of the @xmath -product under
integration is crucial ⁴ ⁴ 4 In the @xmath -Minkowski case where the
@xmath product is not cyclically invariant, attempts of construction of
gauge theories have been so far unsuccessful. . The action ( 3.99 ) has
all the required features to represent a generalization of the @xmath
Yang-Mills action in a canonical noncommutative framework. We observe
also that the procedure just outlined is of rather wide applicability in
dealing with noncommutative spacetimes. The only property one needs is
the mentioned cyclical invariance of the star product under integration.
It is also worth noticing that, differently from the commutative case, (
3.99 ) is written in terms of the U(N) gauge bosons in such a way that
one cannot separate out a SU(N) sector from a residual U(1) sector ⁵ ⁵ 5
The interaction terms couple these two sectors since in general @xmath .

One can also define covariant derivatives as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is easy to check that they have the right gauge transformation
properties

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

With the notion of covariant derivative one can construct an action for
the spinor fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whose gauge invariance is again easily verified though again its
Lagrangian density is not gauge invariant.

To analyze the properties of noncommutative Yang-Mills theory, one needs
to adapt the standard Faddeev-Popov technique to the noncommutative
case. Here we will not discuss this technical point (see however [ 86 ,
87 , 88 ] ) since we are mainly interested in the phenomenon of the
IR/UV connection, which is largely independent from this issue.

Feynman rules for canonical noncommutative gauge theory can be obtained
from the actions ( 3.99 ) and ( 3.102 ). In particular explicit
calculations of the gauge bosons self energy [ 35 ] lead to the result

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of scalar degrees of freedom and @xmath is
the number of fermionic degree of freedoms in the theory.

We will comment on the phenomenological implication of this result in
the next chapter. Here we observe only that again the quadratic pole
arises in the limit @xmath and in limit @xmath (again for @xmath one
does not recover the commutative theory). We also observe that the
coefficient of the quadratic divergent term is proportional to the
number of bosonic degrees of freedom minus the number of fermionic
degrees of freedom of the theory and that the gauge bosons contributes
with two degrees of freedom (the contribution 2 in @xmath ). In
particular if one has the same number of bosonic and fermionic degrees
of freedom this coefficient vanishes. This occurs in supersymmetric
theories and also in softly-broken SUSY theories. We will show an
example in the next chapter. Moreover it is worth noticing that while
renormalizability of gauge theories has been largely studied (see e.g. [
88 , 89 ] ) an all-order prove of renormalizability is still lacking.

### 3.5 Supersymmetric theories in canonical spacetime

There are two main motivations that render noncommutative supersymmetric
theories interesting [ 90 , 91 , 92 ] . The first is that, as discussed
in the case of the noncommutative gauge theories, an equal number of
fermionic degrees of freedom and bosonic degrees of freedom may improve
the infrared behavior of noncommutative theories. The second is the
expectation that, as in the commutative case, SUSY noncommutative
theories might manifest a more regular ultraviolet behavior. It will be
not surprising to discover that actually both ultraviolet and infrared
properties of noncommutative theories are improved by SUSY.

A first point to consider in the construction of a supersymmetric
noncommutative theory is the compatibility of the commutation relations
@xmath whit the supersymmetric algebra. Here we will consider only
@xmath =1 supersymmetric theories although the general construction does
not depend on the number of supersymmetries nor on the number of
spacetime dimensions.

A superspace formulation of supersymmetry was given in [ 93 ] where
instead of investigating the noncommutative superspace formalism it was
considered the usual superspace and superfields. The result is that
given the commutative supersymmetric action written in terms of
superfields it is possible to obtain the noncommutative supersymmetric
action by the only prescription of replacing the ordinary product
between superfields with the @xmath -product.

We use the standard notation of [ 94 ] , (except for the spacetime
indices), which are denote here by @xmath … We start considering the
chiral superfields which satisfy @xmath . Using the coordinates @xmath ,
chiral superfields can be written as @xmath . The supersymmetry
transformations are identical to the ones of the commutative
counterparts simply because we are considering the ordinary superfields

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The most generic action which can be constructed from the chiral
superfields @xmath takes the form ⁶ ⁶ 6 We use the notation @xmath Also
notice that standard notation @xmath for both noncommutative parameters
and SUSY Grassmann variables. From the context it should be clear when
we refer to one or to the other.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath . This is invariant under @xmath . The action
can be written in terms of the component fields straightforwardly, but
rather than doing this in full generality we focus on a couple of
specific examples. First we consider the action with @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath is some numerical coefficient. Note that in this case the
part of the action which depends on @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This action clearly contains the derivatives of the auxiliary field
@xmath Thus @xmath may become a propagating field if the noncommutative
parameter @xmath for some @xmath . However in the case which are
relevant in our future discussions the canonical Kähler potential is of
the type @xmath and in this case the action with non vanishing
superpotential does not involve derivatives of @xmath and then @xmath
plays the role of an auxiliary field, which can be eliminated as in the
commutative case.

A model on which we want focusing our attention (and also the simplest
supersymmetric model) is the Wess-Zumino model. Its action in terms of
superfields reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the mass matrix @xmath is symmetric in its indices but the
coupling @xmath is not necessarily symmetric. One easily finds that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The equation of motions of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the supersymmetry transformation becomes ( 3.104 ) with this @xmath
. We note that the typical scalar potential has the form @xmath and the
notion of holomorphy is still valid at @xmath . One can also consider
vector superfield @xmath and construct supersymmetric gauge theories [
90 ] . Here we only state the main results. A first result is that the
Wess-Zumino model is renormalizable to all orders of perturbation theory
[ 36 ] and no signs of infrared poles are found in the two point
effective action.

Instead @xmath =1 and @xmath =2 theories with generic @xmath gauge group
were found [ 37 , 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 ] to be divergent, at one loop, only
in the two point function. However no quadratic divergences were found.
Only logarithmic divergences appear. UV divergences in the planar sector
and IR divergences in the nonplanar sector have been found. They signal
that UV/IR mixing is present in these theories though it has less strong
effects. Supersymmetric noncommutative @xmath =4 theory was studied in [
99 , 100 , 101 ] . In [ 101 ] it was shown to be free from infrared
poles and, more remarkably, it was also argued to be finite (like its
commutative counterpart).

### 3.6 Causality and unitarity in canonical spacetimes

In this section we briefly describe the issues of unitarity and
causality in canonical noncommutative field theories. Perturbative
unitarity was for the first time discussed in this context in [ 29 ] .
It was noticed that unitarity is lost if noncommutativity involves the
time coordinate. If @xmath is the transition matrix element between the
state @xmath and the state @xmath , for on-shell matrix elements
unitarity implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The sum over intermediate states is intended in the right hand side of
the above expression. The rule ( 3.110 ) can be expressed in terms of
Feynman graphs. This produces the so-called generalized-unitarity
relations or cutting rules ⁷ ⁷ 7 Actually cutting rules are more
restrictive than ( 3.110 ) since they involve off-shell conditions.
Unitarity of the S-matrix ( 3.110 ) follows from the cutting rules. .
Cutting rules state that the imaginary part of a Feynman diagram can be
obtained as follows: first one must cut the diagrams by a line through
virtual lines, then one must place that virtual particle on-shell by
replacing the propagator with a delta function

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

wherever the cut intersects the virtual line, and finally the sum over
all cuts is the imaginary part of the Feynman diagram. For example in
the case of the two-point function in the noncommutative @xmath theory
one has that unitarity implies what reported in Fig. 3.6

@xmath and explicit calculations shows [ 29 , 31 ] that this relation is
only satisfied for the case @xmath The same result has been proved for
other graphs of the @xmath scalar theory ⁸ ⁸ 8 However for other studies
that seem to disagree with these results see [ 32 ] . .

The analysis of causality leads to similar conclusions. It was noticed
in [ 102 ] that nonlocal effects arising in NC field theories may lead
to a violation of causality if the time coordinate is involved in
noncommutativity. The example treated in [ 102 ] is that of scattering
of wave packets. An outgoing signal appears before the incoming
particles reach each other. Acausal effects are not found in the case of
space-space noncommutativity.

In general it seems that time-space noncommutativity leads to violation
of both unitarity and causality whereas space-space noncommutativity
preserves both of them ⁹ ⁹ 9 There are however some recent attempts to
circumvent these problems (see for example [ 31 , 103 ] ). .

### 3.7 Open problems related to the IR/UV mixing in canonical spacetime

So far we have discussed how low-energy poles appear in the Green
functions of different NCQFT. We have also stressed how these poles
originate from the ultraviolet sector of loop integrals so that they can
be viewed as manifestations of the mixing between the UV and IR degrees
of freedoms. It is also worth noticing that infrared poles are only one
of the manifestations of mixing and theories that are free from these
singularities must not be considered free from IR/UV mixing ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10
This point is often misunderstood in literature where absence of poles
in the propagator if often identified with absence of the IR/UV mixing.
. Moreover this correlation between short distances (IR) and large
distances (UV) is not accidental in canonical noncommutative theories
but, on the contrary, it is in a sense to be expected. This expectation
comes directly from the commutation relations, which imply that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This uncertainty relations implies that if a coordinate (say @xmath ) is
known with an uncertainty @xmath the other coordinate (say @xmath ) must
be determined with an uncertainty @xmath This implies correlation
between energies larger than @xmath with energies smaller than @xmath
Correlations of this type are rather unusual in the common language of
physics where one usually observes the decoupling of the energy scales.
Now we want to analyze more in detail the wide implications of this
IR/UV mixing.

#### 3.7.1 IR/UV mixing and renormalization group flow

We start our analysis of the implications of the IR/UV mixing from a
discussion on the fate of the Wilsonian picture in QFT in a canonical
spacetime. According to the usual Wilson picture to QFT, every theory,
unless seen as fundamental, is defined with some cut-off which indicates
our ignorance of the correct theory beyond the cut-off energy scale [
104 , 105 ] . Thus the theory is predictive at least below the cut-off,
say @xmath , and is understood as embedded in an unknown more
fundamental theory beyond it. One typically studies how the theory
appears at an observer which tests the theory at scales much lower than
the cut-off. High-energy modes of the theory only generate the
low-energy couplings of the effective theory. In the usual Wilsonian
picture the high-energy cut-off, the bare couplings and the high-energy
degrees of freedom may be entirely encoded in a definition of the
parameters of the low-energy theory. Thus whatever a theory is at its
natural high-energy scale its predictions for the low-energy regime
depend only on a finite number of parameters. In this way different
energy scales may be decoupled and one can perform low-energy
experiments (i.e. “studying chemistry”) and make predictions, knowing
very little on the details of the high-energy interactions (i.e. the
fundamental interactions). All the necessary information are encoded in
a definition of the couplings (i.e. the fine structure constant).

Wilson-Polchinski renormalization group tells us how these couplings
change upon varying the scale. Given an action @xmath that describes
quantum field theory up to the scale @xmath one can obtain the action
@xmath which describes physics up to the scale @xmath by integrating out
the degrees of freedom between @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.113)
              @xmath      (3.114)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If one is interested in processes that take place at energy @xmath one
can equivalently use @xmath or @xmath The difference between the two
possible choices lies in the fact that while using @xmath one has to
integrate in a huge range in the loop momenta (the range @xmath ), in
@xmath the integration in the range @xmath - @xmath has already been
performed and its effects are encoded in the coefficients of @xmath .
However the price to pay in this second case is that in general @xmath
involves infinite interactions. From the fact that it must be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

one can also write the following integral-differential-flux equation
(known as Polchinski equation) for the effective action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the initial condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a cut-off function which is equal to one below @xmath
and rapidly vanishes above @xmath .As for the action one might rewrite
the same equation for the connected action @xmath or the 1PI-effective
action @xmath ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 It is worth observing that the equation for
@xmath can be regarded as an infinite-dimensional heat equation. .
Although in principle ( 3.117 ) might be valid at non-perturbative level
(see i.e. [ 106 , 107 ] ), one may use it for a perturbative calculation
by performing a vertex expansion of the action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where vertices @xmath may be evaluated by loop-expansion. The same may
be done for the 1PI-effective action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One obtains for the vertices an equation of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with an appropriate function @xmath . Then one can isolate in each of
@xmath the contributions of the relevant operators and of the irrelevant
operators. Relevant operators are those operators whose couplings
increase along the renormalization-group flow whereas irrelevant
operators are those whose coupling are suppressed in the flow. The
couplings of the relevant operators are all one needs for a low-energy
theory (the irrelevant-operator couplings vanish in the infrared). For
example one can write

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath               (3.122)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.123)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the renormalization point (e.g. the scale at which
renormalized coupling are fixed) and @xmath @xmath represent the
irrelevant contributions to the two-point and four-point effective
actions.

The same formal techniques can be applied to the
canonical-noncommutative framework but some important differences
emerge. In the commutative case, at any order of perturbation theory, it
can be shown that irrelevant operators @xmath are suppressed by positive
powers of @xmath . This means that the low-energy theory @xmath depends
on the high-energy theory only through the renormalized mass @xmath and
the renormalized coupling @xmath (up to corrections of order @xmath )
@xmath This is a finite number of parameters. The theory is
renormalizable and the energy-scale decoupling mechanism works @xmath

In the noncommutative case one finds [ 108 ] that as long as @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath , for example, depends on @xmath in a exponentially
suppressed way so that Wilsonian picture still holds: there is
negligible influence on the physics at momentum scales @xmath from the
high-energy ( @xmath ) sector of the theory. In these regime,
energy-scale decoupling still works. Instead if one considers external
momenta @xmath less than @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which means that the Wilsonian picture of energy-scale decoupling is
spoiled and that low-energy prediction under the scale @xmath are highly
sensitive to the (unknown) details of the ultraviolet sector of the
theory ¹² ¹² 12 It is important to notice that this does not imply the
theory  is nonrenormalizable. One can still formally consider the
infinite cut-off limit and obtain predictions in terms of a finite
number of parameters (this is what we mean with renormalizability).
However physically, the infinite cut-off limit is only justified by the
mechanism of energy-scale decoupling and therefore it is unmotivated in
these theories in canonical noncommutative spacetime. In the next
chapter we consider a theory with a large mass scale and find that,
after removal of the cut-off scale, this large mass scale still affects
significantly the low-energy  sector of the theory. . This spoils the
usefulness of the concept of effective low-energy action useless and
affects the procedure usually adopted to test a physical model by
comparing the predictions of the model with the low-energy data. We will
investigate this important point in the next chapter.

#### 3.7.2 IR/UV mixing and the subtraction point

Other effects related to the IR/UV mixing are the different scaling laws
of the Green functions at different momenta and certain problems with
the choice of the subtraction point. Let us consider as an example the
case of the scalar theory already analyzed. For the two-point function
we have for large @xmath the scaling

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

if @xmath . Instead, if @xmath we have the scaling

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Closely related to this difference in the scaling of the Green function
is the problem of the choice of the renormalization point. If we set
renormalization conditions at a momentum scale @xmath we find for the
one-loop renormalized parameters

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.127)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.128)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Instead if we choose a subtraction point @xmath the renormalized
parameters are the same as in the commutative case and they read

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.129)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

This implies that if we choose @xmath as renormalization point,
(subtracted) Green functions for general external momenta are not finite
in the @xmath limit and the theory will appear to be non renormalizable.
If we choose a subtraction point at @xmath , (subtracted) Green
functions are finite but poles, of the type of the ones already
described, appear for @xmath

Another way to obtain the renormalized parameters ( 3.129 ) is the one
of considering the effective potential which is the generator of
1PI-Green functions at zero momentum

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At one-loop level the effective potential is the same as in the
noncommutative case since at zero momentum nonplanar diagrams give the
same contributions of the planar ones:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The renormalized parameters are now obtained from the relations

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.132)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.133)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

These relations will lead to a couple of equations identical to ( 3.129
) which correspond to nonrenormalizable Green functions.

We also notice that the considerations we are doing hold rather in
general and are not restricted to the scalar-theory case. For example
similar problems manifest in the analysis of the noncommutative
Gross-Neveu model [ 109 ] . In general if the renormalization conditions
are set at zero external momentum the theory does not renormalize
whereas if the renormalization conditions are set at a nonzero external
momentum the theory renormalizes. The origin of this behaviors is in a
sort of non analytic structure that canonical noncommutativity induces
at zero momentum. Since the noncommutativity parameters appear in
diagrams only through factor of the type @xmath for @xmath the diagrams
reproduce the commutative spacetime limit, whereas as soon as @xmath the
@xmath parameter cannot be ignored and induce large contribution at low
energy. As we shall show in Chapter 5 this peculiarities of the
zero-momentum limit have profound implications for nonperturbative
estimates of the effective potential.

#### 3.7.3 IR/UV Mixing and the Goldstone theorem.

In this section we discuss the implication of the UV/IR mixing for the
validity of the Goldstone theorem which is at the basis of the mechanism
of mass generation (Higgs mechanism). The statement of the Goldstone
theorem roughly is that for every spontaneously broken symmetry (i.e. a
symmetry of the action that is not a symmetry of the ground state of the
theory) there must be a massless particle. For example in the case of
the linear sigma model with @xmath symmetry broken to @xmath the numbers
of symmetries changes from @xmath to @xmath so that @xmath symmetries
are broken and @xmath massless particles (Goldstone bosons) appear. At
the quantum level instead of considering the action @xmath one has to
consider the effective action @xmath which besides having has the same
symmetries of the classical theory ¹³ ¹³ 13 If regularization does not
break these symmetries.

The problem of the validity of the Goldstone theorem in noncommutative
theories was first addressed in [ 110 ] . We consider scalar @xmath
theory whose action is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the sum over the @xmath index is omitted.

This model enjoys the symmetry @xmath where @xmath is a spacetime
constant, @xmath orthogonal matrix @xmath If @xmath the classical
potential

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

has a minimum for the constant field configuration

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore the @xmath symmetry of the action is no more a symmetry of the
vacuum, which is to say that the @xmath symmetry is broken. The relation
( 3.136 ) identifies the @xmath dimensional manifold (actually, in this
case, a sphere) on which the classical potential assumes its minimum. We
can choose one point on this manifold to identify with the vacuum of the
broken phase. We choose the configuration

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath Hence we define the new fields

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in such a way that @xmath The action ( 3.134 ) in terms of the new
fields reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The absence of the terms quadratic in the pion filed @xmath is a prove
of the Goldstone theorem at the tree level in canonical noncommutative
theories. Also the breaking of the symmetry from @xmath down to @xmath
is manifest. To check if the Goldstone theorem also holds at the quantum
level one must verify that pion fields remain massless at the quantum
level as well. This is the case if @xmath vanish at @xmath Explicit
one-loop calculation of @xmath have been carried out in [ 110 ] . The
result is that if one considers first the @xmath limit and then the
@xmath limit @xmath does not vanish, actually it diverges. Instead if
one first imposes @xmath and then considers the @xmath limit one
recovers @xmath and the validity of the Goldstone theorem ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 It is
worth observing that absence of violations of the Goldstone theorem has
been proved at one loop in noncommutative-scalar U(N) theories in [ 111
] or in other particular cases [ 112 ] . . This is another manifestation
of the failure of the commutation of the zero-momentum limit ( @xmath )
with large cut-off limit ( @xmath ), again a consequence of the IR/UV
Mixing.

#### 3.7.4 IR/UV Mixing and the scalar-theory phase diagram

We have discussed various problems connected to the zero-momentum limit
of these theories. For example we have seen that Green functions at
@xmath are not renormalized by renormalization conditions fixed at
zero-momentum, whereas, if the renormalization conditions are set away
from @xmath the Green functions exhibit a pole in the zero-momentum
limit after removal of the cut- off ( @xmath . The stiffness of the
zero-momentum modes ( @xmath ) has direct, and deep, implications also
for the analysis of phase transitions. We know in fact that phase
transitions are related to the condensations of some momentum modes and,
in particular, phase-transition to translation-invariant vacuum are
related to the condensation of the zero-momentum modes. We want to
observe how in canonical noncommutative theories just because
zero-momentum modes are stiff, transition to translation-invariant
ordered phases are not trivial. As an example we consider the Ward
identities for the scalar theory with global @xmath symmetry [ 113 ] .
The action of this theory is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the symmetric phase the Ward identities are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.141)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In the broken phase the symmetric vacuum becomes unstable and one, as
usual, finds the new vacuum by a shift of the fields

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.142)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Ward identities in the broken phase now read

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We know that in the corresponding theory in commutative spacetime both (
3.141 ) and ( 3.143 ) hold true. In the noncommutative theory explicit
one-loop calculations [ 113 ] show that the identities of the symmetric
case ( 3.141 ) are still satisfied but the identities of the
translational-invariant broken phase ( 3.143 ) are violated. The point
is that the shift @xmath implicitly assumes a translational-invariant
vacuum. If one considers transitions to a vacuum @xmath which is not
translational invariant one obtains the following Ward identities

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which have been shown to be verified at one loop [ 113 , 114 ] . This
argument strongly favors the idea of stable nonuniform phases.

Phase transitions in scalar theories have been more carefully analyzed
in Ref. [ 115 ] using a self-consistent one-loop analysis. The authors
find some evidence of condensation of nonzero modes corresponding to an
ordered phase which breaks translational invariance. Also relying on the
natural assumption that at fixed cut-off @xmath in the @xmath limit one
must recover the ordered translational-invariant phase of the
commutative theory, Ref. [ 115 ] the phase diagrams here reported in for
the scalar @xmath theory

Essentially three phases can be distinguished. The first phase is the
ordered phase, characterized by the zero vacuum expectation value @xmath
This phase is dominant for large positive values of the ratio @xmath .
For sufficiently large but negative values of the ratio @xmath one
encounters the ordered phase @xmath . For small value of @xmath one has
a translational-invariant ordered phase characterized by @xmath similar
to the one found in the commutative limit. For large value of @xmath
(i.e. in the limit in which only planar diagrams contribute) one finds
an ordered translational-non-invariant phase which has been argued [ 115
] to be a stripe phase, characterized by a vev of the type @xmath Where
@xmath is the condensating momentum. In Chapter 5  we explore these
issues concerning phase transitions in canonical noncommutative
spacetimes using the Corwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis approach, a powerful
nonperturbative technique of evaluation of the effective potential. This
will also allow us to investigate the implications for nonperturbative
renormalizability of the peculiar structure of the zero-momentum limit
of theories in canonical noncommutative spacetime which was here briefly
introduced in Subsection 3.7.

## Chapter 4 Critical analysis of the phenomenology in CNC spacetimes ⁰
⁰ footnotetext: *  In this Chapter we discuss in detail the analysis
reported more briefly in Ref. [ 47 ] .

*  In this chapter we investigate the implications of the IR/UV mixing
for the derivation of experimental limits on the parameters of canonical
noncommutative spacetimes. By analyzing a simple Wess-Zumino model in
canonical noncommutative spacetime with soft supersymmetry breaking we
explore the implications of ultraviolet supersymmetry on low-energy
phenomenology. The fact that new physics in the ultraviolet can modify
low-energy predictions affects significantly the derivation of limits on
the noncommutativity parameters based on low-energy data. These are, in
an appropriate sense here discussed, “conditional limits”. We also find
that some standard techniques for an effective low-energy description of
theories with non-locality at short distance scales are only applicable
in a regime where theories in canonical noncommutative spacetime lack
any predictivity, because of the strong sensitivity to unknown UV
physics.

### 4.1 IR/UV Mixing and Phenomenology in canonical spacetime

We have discussed how a key characteristic of field theories on
canonical spacetimes, which originates from the commutation rules, is
nonlocality. At least in the case of space/space noncommutativity (
@xmath ), to which we limit our analysis for simplicity, this
nonlocality is still tractable although it induces a characteristic
mixing of the ultraviolet and infrared sectors of the theory. This IR/UV
mixing has wide implications, including the possible emergence of
infrared (zero-momentum) poles in the one-loop two-point functions. In
particular one finds a quadratic pole for some integer-spin particles in
non-SUSY theories [ 34 ] , while in SUSY theories the poles, if at all
present, are logarithmic [ 35 , 36 , 37 ] . It is noteworthy that these
infrared singularities are introduced by loop corrections and originate
from the ultraviolet part of the loop integration: at tree level the
two-point functions are unmodified, but loop corrections involve the
interaction vertices, which are modified already at tree level.

There has been considerable work attempting to set limits on the
noncommutativity parameters @xmath by exploiting the modifications of
the interaction vertices [ 38 , 116 , 40 , 41 ] and the modifications of
the dressed/full propagators [ 26 ] . Most of these analyses rely on our
readily available low-energy data. The comparison between theoretical
predictions and experimental data is usually done using a standard
strategy (the methods of analysis which have served us well in the study
of conventional theories in commutative spacetime). We are here mainly
interested in understanding whether one should take into account some of
the implications of the IR/UV mixing also at the level of the techniques
by which one compares theoretical predictions with data. In Ref. [ 26 ]
it was argued that the way in which low-energy data can be used to
constrain the noncommutativity parameters is affected by the IR/UV
mixing. These limits on the entries of the @xmath matrix might not have
the usual interpretation: they could be seen only as “conditional
limits”, conditioned by the assumption that no contributions relevant
for the analysis are induced by the ultraviolet. The study we report
here is relevant for this delicate issue. By analyzing a simple
noncommutative Wess-Zumino-type model, with soft supersymmetry breaking,
we explore the implications of ultraviolet supersymmetry on low-energy
phenomenology. Based on this analysis, and on the intuition it provides
about other possible features of ultraviolet physics, we provide a
characterization of low-energy limits on the noncommutativity
parameters. Our analysis provides additional encouragement for
combining, as proposed in Ref. [ 26 ] , high-energy data, from
astrophysics, with the more readily available low-energy data.

### 4.2 Effects of UV SUSY on IR physics

In this section we analyze a mass deformed Wess-Zumino model in
canonical noncommutative spacetime. We emphasize the role that the UV
scale of SUSY restoration plays in the IR sector of the model, and we
also provide some more general remarks on the IR/UV mixing. This
analysis will provide material for one of the points we raise in the
later part of the paper, which concerns the nature of the bounds that
can be set on the noncommutativity parameters using low-energy data.

#### 4.2.1 A model with SUSY restoration in the UV

For definiteness, we present our observations, which have rather wide
applicability, in the specific context of a mass deformed Wess-Zumino
model, with action

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
     @xmath               (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath and @xmath are bosonic/scalar degrees of freedom, while @xmath
denotes fermionic spin- @xmath degrees of freedom. @xmath and @xmath are
auxiliary fields. The model is exactly supersymmetric (SUSY) if @xmath .
We consider the case @xmath in which supersymmetry is only “restored” in
the ultraviolet (UV), where both @xmath and @xmath are negligible with
respect to the high momenta involved.

The free propagators are not modified by canonical noncommutativity:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The vertices acquire the familiar @xmath -dependent phases:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

[Notice that, taking into account momentum conservation at vertices, the
momenta @xmath and @xmath can be attributed equivalently to any of the
three particles involved in each of the vertices.]

#### 4.2.2 Self-energies and IR singularities

Self-energies will play a key role in our observations. Using the NC
Feynman rules the self-energies for fermions and scalars can be
evaluated straightforwardly. The one loop self-energy of the scalar
field receives contributions from five Feynman diagrams, leading to the
result

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
              @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This expression can be seen as the sum of three terms, and each of these
terms is the sum of a planar and of a nonplanar part: @xmath with

@xmath

@xmath

@xmath

The planar terms involve integrations which are already done ordinarily
in field theory in commutative spacetime. Their contributions lead, as
in the commutative case, to logarithmic mass and wavefunction
renormalization. We are here mainly interested in @xmath , the sum of
the nonplanar contributions, which we study in the euclidean region. One
easily finds ¹ ¹ 1 @xmath and @xmath are modified Bessel functions of
the second kind.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of exact SUSY, @xmath , the contributions @xmath and @xmath
cancel each other, so that @xmath and there are no IR divergencies [ 36
, 35 ] .

In the general case, @xmath , IR divergencies are present. Their
structure depends on the relative magnitude of the SUSY-restoration
scale @xmath and the noncommutativity scale @xmath (where @xmath denotes
generically a characteristic size of the elements of the matrix @xmath
).

If @xmath and @xmath the non-planar part of the self energy is well
approximated by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

[This approximation is also valid for all @xmath if @xmath , but we are
mainly interested here in the case @xmath which allows us to explore the
implications for low-energy phenomena of SUSY restoration above @xmath
.]

If @xmath and @xmath the non-planar part of the self energy is well
approximated by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As a result of contributions coming from the UV portion of loop
integrals, we are finding that (for @xmath ) the model is affected by
logarithmic IR singularities ( 4.13 ) if @xmath , but as soon as momenta
are greater than @xmath the dependence of the self-energy on momentum
turns into an inverse-square law ( 4.14 ). In the limit @xmath , the
case in which there is absolutely no SUSY (not even in the UV), the
inverse-square law takes over immediately and the theory is affected by
quadratic IR singularities. The case of exact SUSY @xmath is free from
IR singularities, but of no interest for physics (Nature clearly does
not enjoy exact SUSY).

The IR/UV mixing manifests in two (obviously connected) ways which is
worth distinguishing: (1) The UV portion of loop integrals is
responsible for some IR singularities of the self-energies, (2) the
low-energy structure of the model can depend on @xmath even when @xmath
is much higher than the energy scales being probed. There is no IR/UV
decoupling.

#### 4.2.3 Further effects on the low-energy sector from UV physics

The implications of supersymmetry for the IR sector of canonical
noncommutative spacetimes are very profound. In our illustrative model
one finds that exact SUSY leads to absence of IR divergences, if SUSY is
only present in the UV (UV restoration of SUSY) one finds soft,
logarithmic, IR divergences, and total absence of SUSY ( @xmath ) leads
to quadratic IR divergences. While the presence of SUSY in the UV is
clearly an example of UV physics with particularly significant
implications for the IR sector of canonical noncommutative spacetimes,
from this example we must deduce that in general the loss of decoupling
between UV and IR sectors can be very severe. Other features of the UV
sector, which perhaps have not even yet been contemplated in the
literature, might have similarly pervasive implications for the IR
sector.

A particularly interesting scenario is the one in which supersymmetry is
restored at some high scale (which in our illustrative model is @xmath )
and then at some even higher scale, possibly identified with the
so-called “quantum-gravity scale”, the theory predicts additional
structures, which in turn, again, would affect the infrared. The example
of quantum gravity is particularly significant since we have no robust
(experimentally supported) information on this realm of physics, so it
represents an example of UV physics for which our intuition might easily
fail, and as a consequence our intuition for its implications for the IR
sector of a field theory in canonical noncommutative spacetime might
also easily fail.

As a way to emphasize the sensitivity of the IR sector to such unknown
UV physics, it is worth noting here some formulas that describe features
of our illustrative model from the perspective of a theory with fixed
cutoff scale @xmath . For renormalizable field theories in commutative
spacetime the presence of such a cutoff would be basically irrelevant:
if the cutoff is much higher than all scales of interest it will
negligibly affect all predictions and it can be uneventfully removed
through the limit @xmath . Importantly, in a renormalizable field theory
in commutative spacetime the limit @xmath is uneventful independently of
whether or not we have introduced in the theory all the correct UV
degrees of freedom hosted by Nature: the low-energy physics is anyway
independent of (decoupled from) the UV sector.

For field theories in canonical noncommutative spacetime the limit
@xmath is not at all trivial, meaning that the structures/degrees of
freedom encountered along the limiting procedure can in principle affect
significantly the low-energy physics. One can take the @xmath limit in a
physically meaningful way only under the assumption that one has
complete knowledge of the full theory of Nature (something which of
course we cannot even contemplate).

The sensitivity of the IR sector to unknown UV physics is well
characterized by considering, for fixed cutoff scale @xmath , the
nonplanar contributions to the two point functions. For the two-point
function we already considered previously one finds:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that nonplanar diagrams are cutoff by @xmath . The self-energy is
insensitive to the value of @xmath as long as the condition @xmath is
satisfied. But for @xmath there is an explicit dependence ² ² 2 It is
worth noticing that for fixed cutoff @xmath and @xmath the self-energy
is essentially independent of the noncommutativity parameters. This is
due to the fact that under those conditions the nonplanar contributions
are completely negligible. This might encourage one to contemplate the
possibility of a physical cutoff scale @xmath , but it is important to
notice that such a scale would be observer dependent since ordinary
Lorentz transformations still govern the transformations between
inertial observers in canonical noncommutative spacetime [ 117 ] . (In
other noncommutative spacetimes, where the action of boosts is deformed,
a cutoff scale can be introduced in an observer-independent way [ 58 ,
117 ] , but this is not the case of canonical noncommutative
spacetimes.) We shall disregard this possibility; however, in theories
that already identify a preferred class of inertial observers, such as
theories in canonical noncommutative spacetimes, the possibility of an
observer-dependent cutoff scale cannot [ 117 ] be automatically
dismissed. on @xmath signaling that the infrared sector is sensitive to
new physics in the UV.

### 4.3 Conditional bounds on noncommutativity parameters from
low-energy data

The main point of our work is that the observations made in the previous
Section have significant implications for the comparison of low-energy
experimental data with a theory in canonical noncommutative spacetime.

It is useful to note here a brief description of the conventional
technique that allows to use low-energy data to set absolute
(unconditional!) limits on the parameters of theories in commutative
spacetime:

-    1C. Data are taken in experiments involving particles with
    energies/momenta from some lower (IR) limit, @xmath (we of course do
    not have available probes with wavelength, e.g. , larger than the
    size of the Universe) up to an upper limit, @xmath , which naturally
    coincides with the highest energy scales attainable in our
    laboratory experiments (and, in appropriate cases, the energy scales
    involved in certain observations in astrophysics).

-    2C. We then compare these experimental results obtained at
    energy/momentum scales within the range @xmath to the corresponding
    predictions of the theory of interest. In deriving these predictions
    we sometimes formally appear to use the whole structure of the
    theory, all the way to infinite energy/momentum; however, in
    reality, because of the IR/UV decoupling that holds in
    (renormalizable) theories in commutative Minkowski spacetime, the
    theoretical prediction only depends on the IR structure of the
    theory, up to energy/momentum scales which are not much bigger than
    @xmath . (For example, degrees of freedom with masses of order, say,
    @xmath would anyway not affect the relevant predictions).

-    3C. If the theoretical predictions obtained in this way do not
    agree with the observations performed in the range @xmath we then
    conclude that the theory in question is to be abandoned.

-    4C. If the theoretical predictions obtained in this way agree with
    the observations performed in the range @xmath we then conclude that
    the theory in question provides a valid description of phenomena up
    to energy/momentum scales of order @xmath . Typically the
    predictions of the theory will depend on some free parameters and
    this parameter space will be constrained by the requirement of
    agreeing with the observations. Values of the parameters that do not
    belong to this allowed portion of the parameter space are definitely
    (unconditionally) excluded, since nothing that we could introduce in
    the ultraviolet could modify the low-energy predictions. In light of
    the fact that the structure of the theory above @xmath did not play
    any true role in the derivation of the predictions, the successful
    comparison with @xmath experiments provides no particular
    encouragement for what concerns the validity of the theory at scales
    much above @xmath .

-    5C. With precision measurements in the range @xmath we can
    sometimes put limits on features of the theory also slightly (up to
    a few orders of magnitude) above @xmath . For example, one of the
    parameters of the theory could be the mass of a certain particle and
    the contributions to low-energy processes due to that particle,
    while suppressed by its mass, can be tested in high-precision
    measurements.

For theories in canonical noncommutative spacetime the situation is
quite different, as one infers from the analysis reported in the
previous Section. The comparison between the theory and data taken in
the range @xmath is much more delicate:

-    2NC. From the observations made in the previous Section it follows
    that in a canonical noncommutative spacetime a truly reliable
    derivation of the predictions for the energy/momentum range @xmath
    requires full knowledge of the theory at all energy/mo- mentum
    scales up to @xmath (and of course, if @xmath , the scale @xmath can
    be much higher than both @xmath and @xmath ). In particular, the
    IR/UV mixing is such that degrees of freedom with masses that are
    much above @xmath still affect significantly the predictions of the
    theory in the range @xmath .

-    3NC. So the theory can only be taken as a full description of
    Nature. It cannot be intended to give the right predictions only in
    some low-energy limit. If the predictions of such a theory are found
    to be in conflict with observations, it might still well be that the
    theory contains the right low-energy degrees of freedom, and that
    the disagreement is due to having adopted the wrong UV sector. So,
    from our more conventional perspective (in which we try to identify
    theories that contain the right degrees of freedom up to a certain
    scale) disagreement with observations does not force us to abandon
    the theory: it only invites us to introduce appropriate new physics
    in the UV sector.

-    4NC. Similarly, if the theoretical predictions are found to agree
    with the observations performed in the range @xmath when some free
    parameters fall within a certain allowed portion of parameter space,
    values of the parameters that do not belong to that region of the
    parameter space cannot be conclusively excluded. They are excluded
    only conditionally , in the sense that their exclusion is only
    tentative, pending further exploration of the UV sector. Think for
    example of the illustrative model we considered in the preceding
    Section. The @xmath of that model is a model without any SUSY (not
    even in the UV sector). One could propose such a non-SUSY model and
    compare it to data obtained in the range @xmath . Clearly the need
    to agree with observations would then impose a severe (lower) bound
    on the noncommutativity scale, a key parameter of the theory, in
    order to suppress the IR divergences ( e.g. effectively relegating
    those divergences at scales below @xmath ). However, this bound on
    the noncommutativity scale would be only conditional, in the sense
    that modifying the theory only in the ultraviolet ( i.e. where we
    would say it has not been tested with our data in the range @xmath )
    may be sufficient to lift the bound. In fact, SUSY in the
    ultraviolet sector ( @xmath large but finite) significantly softens
    the divergences used to set the bound. Whereas in commutative
    spacetime the bounds on parameter space apply directly to the
    structure of the theory in the range of energy/momentum scales that
    have been probed experimentally, in canonical noncommutative
    spacetime the information gained experimentally in the range @xmath
    leaves open two possibilities: it may still, as in the case of
    theories in commutative spacetime, constrain the parameters of the
    theory in that same range of energy/momentum scales, but one cannot
    exclude the possibility that our low-energy observations are instead
    primarily a manifestation of some features of the UV sector
    (transferred to the low-energy sector via the IR/UV mixing) and
    therefore cannot be used to constrain the low-energy structure of
    the theory. If there is disagreement between theory and experiments
    in the range @xmath one would normally assume that some aspects (
    e.g. the field content) of the theory must be changed in that same
    range of energy/momentum scales, instead in canonical noncommutative
    spacetime that same disagreement could be solved not only by
    introducing new features in the @xmath region but also by
    introducing new features in the UV sector of the theory.

-    5NC. Since data taken in the range @xmath do not even give
    definitive information on the structure of the theory in that same
    range, it is of course true that measurements in the range @xmath
    cannot be used to put limits on features of the theory even just
    slightly above @xmath , no matter how precise those measurements
    are. However, just because features of the UV sector affect the
    low-energy physics, under the assumption that the spacetime is
    indeed canonically noncommutative, one can gain insight of the UV
    structure of the theory, even just using low-energy data. For
    example, some of the observations made in the previous Section
    provide an opportunity to discover UV SUSY even just using
    low-energy data: if data allowed us to identify an energy/momentum
    scale at which the self-energy changed its qualitative dependence on
    momentum in the way described by comparison of Eqs. ( 4.13 ) and (
    4.14 ), we could then infer rather robustly the presence of SUSY at
    high energies and (if the value of the noncommutativity scale was
    deduced from some other observations) we could even deduce the scale
    of SUSY restoration.

In summary we found that the predictions of a canonical noncommutative
theory in the low-energy (i.e. experimentally accessible) sector of
theory depend strongly not only on the low-energy structure of the
theory but also on its high-energy structure. This is different from the
case of commutative theories, where low-energy predictions are
independent of the high-energy degrees of freedom. The phenomenological
implications of this lack of energy-scale decoupling are of course very
striking. To reliably falsify or accept a theory with low energy data it
is not enough to specify the low-energy sector of the theory one is
considering, but one must also fully specify the high-energy sector. Two
theories with the same low-energy sector but different high energy
sectors may require different parameter values to fit the data.

### 4.4 Futility of approaches based on expansion in powers of @xmath

The observations reported in the preceding section indicate that some of
the standard techniques used in phenomenology require a prudent
implementation in the context of theories in canonical noncommutative
spacetimes. We want to emphasize in this section that for one of the
techniques which served us well in the analysis of theories in
commutative spacetime there are even more severe limitations to the
applicability in the context of theories in canonical noncommutative
spacetimes. This is the technique that relies on the truncation of a
power series in one of the parameters of the theory: we argue that, at
the quantum-field-theory level, the results obtained by truncating a
power series in @xmath do not provide a reliable approximation of the
full theory. This type of truncation, which has been widely used in the
literature [ 85 , 118 , 119 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 ] ), is based on the
inclusion of only a few terms in the @xmath -expansion of the Moyal
@xmath -product. For example up to the second order in @xmath one could
write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The resulting action constructed with the truncated @xmath -product (
4.18 ) depends only on a finite number of derivatives so it is local,
unlike the full theory. Moreover, since @xmath has negative mass
dimensions, the action will also certainly be power-counting
nonrenormalizable, whereas the full theory might be renormalizable [ 80
, 34 , 36 , 108 , 124 ] .

Even more serious concerns emerge from the realization that the
expansion one is performing is (of course) not truly based on a power
series in the dimensionful quantity @xmath : it is rather an expansion
in dimensionless quantities of the type @xmath . Therefore already at
tree level the truncated @xmath -expanded theory can only give a good
approximation of the full theory at scales @xmath such that @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath .

But actually even in that range of momenta the expansion cannot be used
reliably. Its reliability is spoiled by quantum corrections. The quantum
corrections involve the Moyal @xmath -product inserted in loop diagrams,
and the truncation will reliably describe these loop corrections only
for loop momenta such that @xmath . In fact, in loop integrals involving
factors of the type @xmath , with @xmath playing the role of external
momentum and @xmath playing the role of integration/loop momentum, one
would like a reliable truncation that is valid over the whole
loop-integration range, which extends at least up to a cutoff @xmath .
In order to have @xmath even for @xmath as large as @xmath it is
necessary to assume that indeed @xmath . This can also be inferred
straightforwardly in the illustrative example of the “ @xmath ”
scalar-boson field theory: there one finds that the full theory predicts
nonplanar terms giving a leading contribution of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

whereas the truncated @xmath -expansion of the @xmath -product would
replace this prediction with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly the two expressions are equivalent only if @xmath , which indeed
corresponds to @xmath .

Therefore, when one includes quantum/loop effects, the truncated @xmath
-expansion could be a good approximation of the full theory only in the
range of momenta @xmath . But as we have discussed in the preceding
section this is just the range of momenta in which the theory is
maximally sensitive to ultraviolet physics, which we must assume to be
unknown. In other words the truncated @xmath -expansion reliably
approximates the full theory only in a regime where the full theory is
itself void of predictive power,

because of its sensitivity to unknown physics that might be present in
the ultraviolet. It therefore appears that these truncated @xmath
-expansions cannot be used for a meaningful comparison between data and
theories in canonical noncommutative spacetime. In other contexts
expansions in powers of @xmath versus some characteristic momentum scale
have been proven to give a reliable low-energy effective-theory
description of the full theory one intends to study, but in this case of
field theories in canonical noncommutative spacetime the IR/UV mixing
provides a powerful obstruction for any attempt to obtain a meaningful
low-energy effective-theory description.

## Chapter 5 CJT formalism for phase transition on CNC spacetime ⁰ ⁰
footnotetext: * In this Chapter we discuss in detail the analysis
reported more briefly in Ref. [ 48 ] .

*  We have discussed how the IR/UV mixing, which significantly affects
canonical noncommutative theories, causes strong IR problems. We have
also emphasized that one manifestation of these IR problems (after the
removal of the cut-off) is through zero-momentum poles in certain Green
functions. IR problems of different origin but similar form, are known
to plague also Thermal-Quantum-Field theories and have been successfully
treated using a nonperturbative technique developed by
Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis (CJT). We apply the CJT formalism to the
scalar @xmath theory focusing in the so-called “bubble approximation”.
Assuming translational invariance of the vacuum we construct the gap
equation and the CJT effective potential. We discuss the
renormalizability of the CJT effective potential both in ordered and in
the disordered phase for general values of the non-commutativity
parameter @xmath . We comment in particular on the commutativity limit (
@xmath ) and on the strong non-commutativity limit ( @xmath ). We
observe that while in the disordered phase the hypothesis of
translational invariance leads to a renormalizable effective potential,
in the translational-invariant ordered phase, differently from the
commutative case, the effective potential and the gap equation do not
renormalize. We argue that our result, essentially based on a selective
all-order resummation, appears to confirm the other (perturbative,
one-loop) results, we reported in Chapter 3, that indicate the
incompatibility of a translational-invariant ordered phase with the
infrared structure of the canonical-noncommutative theories.

### 5.1 CJT formalism

In this section we briefly review the CJT formalism for the scalar
theory in the commutative case [ 42 , 43 , 44 ] . The starting point is
the definition of the partition function in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in which two sources @xmath and @xmath are present.

One defines also @xmath and @xmath by the relations @xmath and @xmath
Then one considers the double Legendre transformation of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which satisfies the relation

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The physical point corresponds to vanishing sources @xmath @xmath , so
that @xmath and @xmath are solutions of the stationarity equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It can be shown [ 42 ] that @xmath so defined is the generating
functional for the two-particle irreducible(2PI) Green’s functions, with
propagator given by @xmath and vertices given by @xmath , where @xmath
is obtained from @xmath by retaining only cubic and higher @xmath -terms
in the expression of @xmath .

One can expand ( 5.1 ) to obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and @xmath is the sum of vacuum diagrams(Fig. 5.1 ) with vertices given
by @xmath and propagators given by @xmath

Example of two particle reducible graphs which do not contribute to
@xmath are in Fig. 5.2

Using ( 5.4 ) the gap equation ( 5.3 ) may be rewritten in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can also recover the usual 1PI-effective action @xmath simply
evaluating @xmath for vanishing @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is solution of the gap equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

This 2PI formalism which at a first sight might appear more involved
than the standard 1PI formalism turns out to be very useful in certain
calculations. This is the case for example of the so-called “bubble
resummation”, which means taking into account for all the diagrams
generate by the vacuum to vacuum diagrams of the type of Fig.( 5.3 ). In
the case of the standard 1PI formalism the bubble resummation requires
the evaluation of an infinite number of diagrams. In the 2PI-CJT
formalism one obtains the whole “bubble resummation”( [ 43 ] ) simply
considering the “eight”-diagram (A in Fig. 5.1 ) contribution to @xmath
and the corresponding gap equation. This ‘‘bubble resummation’’ turns
out to be useful in theories in which the insertion of a tadpole is not
effectively suppressed by the coupling constant as in the thermal field
theories or canonical-noncommutative theories ¹ ¹ 1 In Thermal Field
Theories the insertion of a tadpole which for example distingushes
diagrams Fig.5.1 A and Fig.5.2 A costs a factor @xmath which for large
temperatures can be even large than 1. In noncommutative Thermal Field
Theories the same insertion roughly comes with a factor @xmath which,
depending on the momentum entering the inserted tadpole, can be large. .

We will use this approximation in the following sections .

### 5.2 CJT formalism in canonical-noncommutative spacetime

We recall that once the Moyal @xmath -product ( 3.16 ) is introduced the
scalar @xmath -theory in canonical noncommutative spacetime takes the
form of a commutative theory with a deformed interaction given by
substituting the products of fields with the @xmath -products. This
implies that the CJT formalism should be applicable; in fact no specific
assumptions are made in the CJT procedure about the form of the
interaction. In particular Eq.( 5.4 ) is still valid in our
noncommutative context.

It is easy to see that @xmath -theory in canonical noncommutative
spacetime

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

As expected @xmath is not modified by noncommutativity since the
integrals of terms quadratic in the fields are not modified by the
@xmath -product ( 3.16 ), while @xmath acquires the @xmath -dependence.
One can easily calculate the @xmath -products which appear in ( 5.8 )
obtaining, in the momentum space,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now we have to calculate the @xmath action of the 2PI formalism. One can
proceed in two steps. The first step is the translation of the action
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The second step is the one of retaining from ( 5.10 ) only cubic, and
higher, terms in @xmath So doing one obtains that the interaction
vertices are given by the action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the cyclitity of the @xmath -product ( 3.16 ) under integration
has been used.

To proceed further we now need to adopt ansatz for the form of @xmath
Here we want to consider only transitionally invariant configurations so
that the more general ansatz we can consider takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is to be determined. Once the ansatz ( 5.11 ) has been done
we can start calculating the various terms in the left-hand-side of (
5.4 ). The first term is trivial. The second term is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The third term is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath

Therefore we have that ( 5.4 ) with the ansatz ( 5.11 ) takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.12)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Now we must evaluate @xmath with vertices given by @xmath and propagator
given by @xmath

As in the commutative case the CJT effective action can be used to
obtain the 1PI effective action. In particular the one-loop 1PI
effective action is obtained setting @xmath In this case the gap
equation ( 5.5 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this expression one can easily compute the one-loop 1PI effective
action in the 2PI CJT formalism. One has only to calculate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then from the usual expansion

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and from ( 5.14 ) follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is the 1PI-effective action up to the one-loop corrected quadratic
terms.

### 5.3 The effective potential

While neglecting @xmath completely simply gives us back the one-loop 1PI
effective action, a more interesting results is obtained by
approximating @xmath including only the “eight” diagram (A in Fig. 5.1
). In this approximation one has that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that differently from the commutative case, where the momenta
circulating in each of the two loops do not mix, in the noncommutative
case this mixing occurs.

From the effective action( 5.12 ) and ( 5.16 ), assuming that, as
consequence of the translational invariance of the vacuum, @xmath one
can extract the potential @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.17)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The stationarity conditions ( 5.2 ) and ( 5.3 ) in this case read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first equation has the solutions @xmath and @xmath which correspond
respectively to the symmetric phase and to the broken-symmetric phase.
Substituting the gap equation ( 5.19 ) in the expression of the
potential ( 5.17 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The term in the second row of the above expression is generated by the
“bubble summation”. The terms appearing in the first row are already
present at the tree level and at one loop but what is different here is
that they now must be evaluated for @xmath solution of the gap equation
( 5.19 ), which under the hypothesis of translational invariance, takes
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both ( 5.20 ) and ( 5.21 ) are ultraviolet divergent and they both are
considered to be regularized with a cutoff @xmath on the loop-momenta.
In the next section we will deal with the problem of their
renormalization.

#### 5.3.1 Commutativity limit

In this section we want discuss the commutativity limit ( @xmath ) and
the strong noncommutativity limit ( @xmath ). In the commutativity limit
eqs.( 5.19 ) and ( 5.20 ) become respectively

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the well known result of [ 44 ] . We recall the procedure that
one can use to renormalize ( 5.22 ) and ( 5.23 ) since we will use it
widely in the rest of the chapter. The gap equation ( 5.23 ) can be
renormalized in the following way [ 44 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the finite part of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
Introducing the renormalized parameters

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

one gets the renormalized gap equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One would like obtain a renormalized effective potential written in
terms of M @xmath . Using ( 5.23 ) one can write ( 5.22 ) as the sum of
the three contributions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and one finds that up to a @xmath -independent term which of course can
we ignored in effective potential analyses

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the finite part of the expansion of @xmath (which of
course does not play an important role in renormalization).

We observe that ( 5.29 ) is finite if written in terms of the
renormalized parameters defined by ( 5.24 ) and ( 5.25 ). In particular
it is worth noticing the exact cancellation of the divergent terms in
@xmath which appear with opposite signs in the tree-level contribution
@xmath and in the loop correction @xmath

#### 5.3.2 Strong noncommutativity limit

Now we analyze the limit of strong noncommutativity ( @xmath ). In this
limit the strong oscillations in the phases, which are present in the
integrands of ( 5.20 ) and ( 5.21 ), induce the vanishing of the
corresponding integrals. The effective potential and the gap equation in
this case become respectively

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that these expressions are formally similar to the ones of
the commutative case ( 5.22 ), ( 5.23 ). The only differences are in the
terms in front of the eight-diagram contribution: the nonplanar the
eight-diagram contribution in fact becomes negligible in the @xmath
limit and only contributions of the planar diagrams survive. It is also
important to notice that the dressed mass @xmath become in this limit
momentum independent and one can follow exactly the same procedure as in
the commutative case. One obtains for the gap equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where now

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The effective potential is obtained again as the sum of the terms

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We observe that in the case of strong noncommutativity the cancellation
between the @xmath terms in ( 5.34 ) and ( 5.36 ) does not occur and the
resulting potential does not renormalize.

#### 5.3.3 Effective potential in the general case

We have so far discussed the limits of commutativity ( @xmath ) and
strong noncommutativity ( @xmath ). We have seen that in both of these
cases the unknown function @xmath , that appears in the denominator of
@xmath is momentum independent, although it satisfies different gap
equations in the two different cases. Now we want to address the problem
of calculating the effective potential for general values of the
noncommutativity parameter @xmath We start by defining @xmath so that
the gap equation ( 5.21 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last equation must hold for every value of @xmath and @xmath Thus we
must have that separately

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where C is @xmath and @xmath independent.

We observe that we can always choose C=0, modulo the redefinitions
@xmath C, @xmath @xmath C. In this way we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which determines @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

which determines @xmath

We see from ( 5.40 ) that @xmath for @xmath and for @xmath and that
@xmath for @xmath and for @xmath Equation ( 5.39 ) can be renormalized
by the following procedure, similar to the one we have discussed
previously

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the finite part of the divergent expression in ( 5.39 ).
We can now introduce the renormalized parameters in the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and we get the renormalized gap equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We come now to the important issue of the renormalization of the
effective potential. We have seen that the way in which the gap equation
renormalizes fixes uniquely the renormalization of the bare mass and the
renormalization of the coupling. We must check if the same
renormalization conditions provide us with a finite effective potential.
We can use ( 5.39 ) and ( 5.40 ) in the expression ( 5.20 ) to obtain
for the effective potential

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we used

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and we defined

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that in ( 5.43 ) all the field-dependent terms, with the
exception of @xmath , are finite thanks to the fact that @xmath vanishes
exponentially in the limit @xmath . As in the case of strong
noncommutativity limit, the presence of the divergent term @xmath is due
to the fact that the corresponding contributions from @xmath and @xmath
do not cancel each other. The cancellation occurs only in the
commutative limit.

### 5.4 Remarks on the structure of the CJT effective potential in
canonical noncommutative spacetime

Whereas in commutative spacetime the CJT effective potential can be
renormalized and gives a satisfactory description of the vacua of a
given field theory, in our canonical-noncommutativity analysis the CJT
effective potential (in the bubble-resummation approximation) was found
not to be renormalizable. From a conservative standpoint we should then
assume that in this type of theories the CJT effective potential cannot
provide reliable nonperturbative insight on the phase structure. This
negative conclusion is also supported by the realization that canonical
noncommutativity affects strongly the structure of the UV divergences of
a field theory, and this might be particularly significant for those
techniques that effectively rely on resummations of contributions from
all orders in the coupling constant. When we establish that a field
theory is renormalizable, we actually verify that it is “perturbatively
renormalizable”: the divergences at any given order in
coupling-expansion perturbation theory can be reabsorbed in
redefinitions of the parameters of the Lagrangian density. The fact that
the CJT technique gives rise to a renormalizable effective potential in
the commutative-spacetime case is highly nontrivial, since we are not
consistently summing all contributions up to a given order in the
coupling constant (a calculation which would be “protected” by
peturbative renormalizability), we are instead selectively summing a
certain subset of the contributions at each order in the coupling
constant. It is therefore plausible that the fact that our CJT effective
potential cannot be renormalized is simply a sign of an inadequacy of
this technique to the canonical-noncommutativity context. On the other
hand it appears reasonable to explore an alternative, more optimistic,
perspective, which is based on the observation that the only
contribution to the CJT potential that ends up not being expressed in
terms of renormalized quantities does not is the term @xmath . This term
however vanishes in the disordered phase @xmath . In a certain sense we
have a renormalizable effective potential in the disordered phase, and
our results of nonrenormalizability in the translationally-invariant
ordered phase @xmath could be interpreted as a manifestation of the fact
that this phase is not admissable for these theories in canonical
noncommutative spacetime. This hypothesis finds some support in the
arguments presented in Ref. [ 115 ] , which also concluded that the only
admissable phases for these theories are the disordered phase and a
(non-translationally-invariant) stripe phase with @xmath (where @xmath
is the Fourier transform of @xmath ) and @xmath is a characteristic
momentum scale of the stipe phase). This argument of inadmissability of
the translationally-invariant ordered phase might be related with the
delicate IR structure of these theories: @xmath means @xmath , so the
concept of a translationally-invariant ordered phase is closely
connected with the zero-momentum structure of the theory of interest. To
explore these issues it would be necessary to consider the CJT effective
action, which explores the more general class of candidate vacua @xmath
, rather than stopping, as we did here, at the level of the CJT
effective potential (which assumes from the beginning a
translationally-invariant vacuum). With the CJT effective action one
could investigate the renormalizability of the stripe phase (which is
not translationally invariant, and therefore cannot be studied with the
effective potential). Moreover, while the effective potential is the
generating functional of Green functions at zero external momentum,
could be particularly sensitive the effective action is the generating
functional of generic Green functions and might be less sensitive to the
troublesome IR sector of these theories. The analysis of the CJT
effective action is postponed to a future study. Even in
commutative-spacetime theories the evaluation of the CJT effective
action turns out to be very complex, basically intractable analytically,
and a troublesome calculation even numerically. It is likely that in the
canonical-noncommutativity context the evaluation of the CJT effective
action may prove even more troublesome, but from the indications that
emerged from our analysis of the CJT effective potential it appears that
such an analysis is well motivated, as it could provide insight for the
understanding of some key physical predictions of these theories.

## Chapter 6 Conclusions

It this thesis, we have explored the hypothesis that nonclassical
effects of spacetime may manifest through the noncommutativity of
spacetime at short distances. We focused on the two most popular
examples of noncommutative spacetimes: canonical spacetimes, which have
been at the center of an intense scientific debate over the last few
years (mostly because of their relevance for the description of string
theory in certain backgrounds) and @xmath -Minkowski spacetime, which,
being the only fully-worked-out example of spacetime requiring a
Planck-scale “deformation” of Poincaré symmetries, is also being
investigated by a large number of research groups.

We focused on some issues that provide key physical characterizations of
these spacetimes. In the light of the fact that plans for experimental
searches of a possible dependence of the group velocity on the Planck
scale are already at an advanced stage [ 25 , 73 , 72 ] , we analyzed
wave propagation both in canonical and in @xmath -Minkowski spacetime.
The idea that the Planck-scale (quantum) structure of spacetime might
affect the group-velocity/wavelength relation is plausible (and in some
cases inevitable) in most quantum-gravity approaches, including
phenomenological models of spacetime foam [ 17 ] , loop quantum gravity
(see, e.g. , Ref. [ 125 ] ), superstring theory (see, e.g. , Ref. [ 35 ]
), and noncommutative geometry. While a detailed careful description of
wave propagation is beyond the reach of the present technical
understanding of most quantum-gravity scenarios, we showed here that
wave propagation in certain noncommutative spacetimes can be rigorously
analyzed. We have shown that the features of the propagating waves
strongly depend on the type of noncommutative spacetime one is
considering. In the case of waves in canonical spacetime we found no
observable departure from the classical picture of propagating wave.
Instead, in the case of waves in @xmath -Minkowski spacetime, our
analysis showed that the group velocity is affected by noncommutativity.
We found that the formula @xmath , where @xmath is fixed by the @xmath
-Poincaré dispersion relation, still holds in @xmath -Minkowski
spacetime (just like @xmath holds in the Galilei/Minkowski classical
spacetimes and in the canonical noncommutative spacetime) but it
actually sets a new type of relation between group velocity and momentum
as a result of the fact that in @xmath -Minkowski the dispersion
relation @xmath is fixed by the @xmath -Poincaré mass Casimir, which
differs from the familiar Poincaré mass Casimir at the level of
Planck-scale-suppressed effects.

The validity of @xmath in @xmath -Minkowski had been largely expected in
the literature, even before our direct analysis, but such a direct
analysis had become more urgent after the appearance of some recent
articles [ 27 , 28 ] which had argued in favor of alternatives to @xmath
for @xmath -Minkowski. We have shown that these recent claims were
incorrect: the analysis reported in Ref. [ 28 ] was based on erroneous
implementation of the @xmath -Minkowski differential calculus, while the
analysis in Ref. [ 27 ] interpreted as momenta some quantities which
cannot be properly described in terms of translation generators.

Of course, one is interested in going much beyond the description of
wave propagation: a key objective for this research field is the
construction and analysis of quantum field theories in these
noncommutative spacetimes. As discussed in Chapter 3, the path toward
the construction of a sensible quantum field theory in @xmath -Minkowski
spacetime appears to be still confronted with a large number of delicate
obstacles. Our analysis of wave propagation in @xmath -Minkowski is
therefore the (very limited) “state of the art” in the analysis of the
physical predictions of this noncommutative spacetime. Since a key
ingredient of a quantum field theory is essentially an expansion of
fields in plane waves, perhaps the results that emerged from our
rigorous analysis of wave propagation in @xmath -Minkowski spacetime
could prove useful for an improved formulation of QFT in this spacetime
but at present we do not see an obvious way to approach this project.

For canonical noncommutative spacetimes there is instead a much studied
approach to the construction of quantum field theories, based on the
@xmath -product technique. In this framework it appears that several
important issues are entangled with the peculiar failure of Wilson
decoupling between infrared and ultraviolet degrees of freedom. In
particular, as we showed in Chapter 4, the IR/UV mixing has wide
implications for the strategies that should be adopted in order to
falsify/verify these theories. Theories that (according to our
conventional perspective) differ only in an experimentally unaccessible
range of momenta may give rise to different predictions in the
low-energy regime. In fact we found that predictions for the low-energy
(i.e. experimentally accessible) physics depend strongly not only on the
low-energy structure of the theory but also on its high-energy
structure. Therefore the bounds on parameter space that one usually is
able to set using low-energy data are here only “conditional”. A
comparison between low-energy data and the low-energy sector of theory
can be reliably done only after having fully specified the high-energy
sector.

While in Chapter 4 we explored the consequences of the IR/UV mixing
using a standard perturbative Feynman-diagrammatic approach, in Chapter
5 we used the Cornwall-Jackiw-Tomboulis formalism, a nonperturbative
technique (effectively resumming infinite series of 1PI Feynman
diagrams) which is usually very fruitful in contexts in which the
infrared sector is problematic (as in Thermal Quantum Field Theories [
42 , 43 , 44 ] ). We studied the CJT effective potential in the
canonical-noncommutative “ @xmath ” theory, adopting the so-called
“bubble-resummation approximation”, which includes all contributions
from daisy and super-daisy diagrams. We found that the effective
potential is in general nonrenormalizable, but the left-over UV
divergences disappear in the disordered phase @xmath . We argued that
the nonrenormalizability of the effective potential might be another
manifestation of the IR/UV mixing, and that the problems with the
translationally-invariant ordered phase @xmath C might also be due to
the delicate IR structure. Probably the infrared structure of these
theories prohibits the condensation of the zero-momentum modes which is
necessary requirement for a transition to a transitionally-invariant
vacuum. A characteristic prediction of these theories might therefore be
the presence of energetically-favored transitionally-invariant phases,
such as the stripe phases mentioned in Sec. 5.4.

Among the investigations that could find motivation in the results here
reported we emphasize the study of the CJT effective action in theories
in canonical noncommutative spacetime, which could bring key insight on
the phase structure of these theories.

It would also be interesting to explore new strategies for setting
limits on the canonical-noncommutativity parameters, since, as shown in
Chapter 4, the standard strategy is unreliable. Perhaps the only
possibility is the one of “building a case” in favor or against
consistency with observations (whereas in commutative spacetime a single
experiment can give conclusive unconditional indications). The case
would be built by considering a variety of data, and observing that they
are all consistent with the characteristic structure of theories in
canonical noncommutative spacetime. Because of the nature of these
characteristic features of canonical noncommutativity, it might be
useful to rely on data that concern a wide range of energy scales. The
astrophysical studies analyzed, for what concerns canonical
noncommutativity, in Ref. [ 26 ] could play an important role in this
programme.

## Appendix A Hopf algebras

In this appendix we report the basic definitions and the basic
properties of the Hopf algebras that have been used in this thesis.

###### Definition 1

An algebra @xmath is a vector space (over the field @xmath ) in which
two linear applications m: @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath are defined
such that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath indicates the composition of applications and @xmath is the
identity application.

The property ( A.1 ) is the associativity of the product @xmath . The
property ( A.2 ) is the neutrality of the identity with respect to the
product @xmath .

###### Definition 2

A coalgebra @xmath is a vector space (over the field @xmath ) in which
two linear maps @xmath (the ‘coproduct’) and @xmath (the ‘counit’) are
defined such that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The property ( A.3 ) is the (co-)associativity of the coproduct @xmath .
The property ( A.4 ) is the (co-)neutrality of the identity with respect
to the coproduct @xmath .

It is worth noticing that a coalgebra ( @xmath ) can always be
constructed from an algebra ( @xmath ) by duality (i.e. using a
nondegenerate map @xmath @xmath ) in the following way.

1.  First, one renders @xmath a vector space by the definitions

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

2.  Secondly, one defines the coproduct @xmath and the counit @xmath by
    the relations

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath extends to tensor products pairwise (i.e. @xmath ).

It is easy to verify that @xmath and @xmath defined by ( A.7 , A.8 )
satisfy ( A.3 , A.4 ), so that @xmath is a coalgebra.

###### Definition 3

( @xmath is a bialgebra if

1.  @xmath is an algebra with respect to @xmath

2.  @xmath is a coalgebra with respect to @xmath

3.  @xmath and @xmath obey the following relations:

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath               (A.9)
         @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

    where the tensor product @xmath is defined @xmath .

The property ( A.9 ) means that the coproduct ( @xmath ) furnishes a
representation of the product ( @xmath ) over @xmath . The property (
A.10 ) means that the counit ( @xmath ) furnishes a representation of
the product ( @xmath ) over @xmath .

###### Definition 4

An Hopf algebra is a bialgebra @xmath with a map @xmath (the ‘antipode’)
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

From ( A.11 ) it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The property ( A.12 ) says that the antipode ( @xmath ) furnishes a
representation of the product ( @xmath ) over @xmath . The property (
A.13 ) says that the antipode ( @xmath ) furnishes an
(anti-)representation of the coproduct ( @xmath ) over @xmath .

###### Definition 5

An Hopf algebra is commutative if it is commutative as an algebra. It is
‘cocommutative’ if it is cocommutative as a coalgebra (i.e. if @xmath
where @xmath is the ‘flip operator’ defined by @xmath

It is also easy to verify that

###### Corollary 6

If @xmath is a commutative or cocommutative Hopf algebra, then @xmath

We notice that the key difference between a “classical” group and a
truly “quantum” group regards the coalgebra sector: while the former is
cocommutative, the latter is noncocommutative.

###### Definition 7

Two Hopf algebras @xmath and @xmath ’ are ‘dually paired’ by a map
@xmath @xmath ’ @xmath if

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
     @xmath               (A.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath ’ and @xmath . Here @xmath extends pairwise to tensor
products.

This definition implies that the product of @xmath and the coproduct of
@xmath are adjoint to each other under @xmath , and vice-versa.
Likewise, the units and counits are mutually adjoint, and the antipodes
are adjoint.

###### Definition 8

A bialgebra or Hopf algebra @xmath acts ¹ ¹ 1 Here we only consider left
actions. on an algebra @xmath if a linear map (the action ) is defined
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The notion of action is the generalization of the notion of linear
transformation to the Hopf algebras.

###### Definition 9

Given two Hopf algebras @xmath and @xmath an action @xmath of @xmath on
@xmath is called covariant if the conditions hold

1.  @xmath commutes with the product map @xmath (i.e. @xmath @xmath
    @xmath ),

2.  @xmath commutes with the unit map @xmath (i.e. @xmath @xmath ).

We observe that a covariant action involves the coalgebric sector of the
Hopf algebra @xmath Moreover a covariant action preserves both the
algebraic and the coalgebraic structure of the Hopf algebra. Two
examples of covariant actions are:

the canonical action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

the adjoint action ² ² 2 The adjoint action is defined in the case
@xmath = @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

One example of a noncovariant action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

that does not preserve the coalgebraic structure of the Hopf algebra.

This completes the review of the definitions and of the properties
regarding Hopf algebras which have been used in this thesis.
