##### Contents

-    1 Symmetry Breaking in Extra Dimensions
    -    1.1 Mechanisms of Symmetry Breaking
        -    1.1.1 Compactification
        -    1.1.2 The Scherk-Schwarz Mechanism
        -    1.1.3 Orbifold
        -    1.1.4 The Scherk-Schwarz Mechanism on Orbifold
        -    1.1.5 The Hosotani Mechanism
        -    1.1.6 Scherk-Schwarz vs Hosotani
    -    1.2 Phenomenological Implications
        -    1.2.1 Supersymmetry Breaking
        -    1.2.2 Gauge Symmetry Breaking
-    2 Generalized Scherk-Schwarz Mechanism
    -    2.1 Generalized Boundary Conditions for Fermions
        -    2.1.1 Boundary Conditions for Fermionic Fields on @xmath
        -    2.1.2 One Fermion Field
        -    2.1.3 Localized Mass Terms
    -    2.2 Generalized Boundary Conditions for Bosons
        -    2.2.1 Boundary Conditions for Bosonic Fields on @xmath
        -    2.2.2 One Scalar Field
        -    2.2.3 More Scalar Fields
        -    2.2.4 Brane Action for Bosonic System
    -    2.3 Equivalent Effective Lagrangians
        -    2.3.1 Generation of 5D Mass Terms for Periodic Fields
        -    2.3.2 Examples and Localization of 5D Mass Terms
    -    2.4 Application to Gauge Symmetry Breaking
    -    2.5 Application to Supersymmetry Breaking
-    3 Flavour Symmetry Breaking
    -    3.1 Flavour Physics in Four and More Dimensions
    -    3.2 A Toy Model for Two Generations
        -    3.2.1 Localized Fermions
        -    3.2.2 Masses and Mixing Angles
        -    3.2.3 Which Scale for Flavour Physics?
    -    3.3 Towards a Realistic Model
-    Conclusions
-    A @xmath Matrices in Five and Six Dimensions
-    B Path-Ordered Products

## Introduction

The introduction of extra dimensions in theoretical high energy physics
is mainly due to the quest for unification of particle interactions.
This duality -unification of forces on one side and introduction of new
coordinates on the other- was born already at the end of the @xmath
century, after the unification of electricity and magnetism carried out
by Maxwell. Indeed once the special relativistic invariance of Maxwell’s
theory was recognized, it became clear that a unified description of
electricity and magnetism implied a unified description of space and
time, which for the first time began to be considered as different
coordinates of a continuum space-time. Inspired by this idea, in the
following years many physicists attempted to unify gravitation and
electromagnetism starting from a theory defined on a five-dimensional
space-time, which was obtained from the usual one by adding a spatial
coordinate. The first was the Finnish physicist Gunnar Nordstrom who, in
1914, built a model starting from Maxwell equations for a
five-dimensional vector boson of an abelian group [ 1 ] . Then, after
the publication of Einstein’s general relativity, the mathematician
Theodor Kaluza proposed another, more complex, unified theory,
originating from a five-dimensional gravitational Einstein action [ 2 ]
. Some years later the same theory was independently rediscovered by
Oskar Klein [ 3 ] .

After these first attempts at unification [ 4 ] , extra dimensions were
forgotten for many years, obscured by the successes of four-dimensional
quantum field theory, which culminated in the discovery of the Standard
Model of electroweak interactions [ 5 ] . Following experimental
confirmation, most research was focused on building a unified theory of
strong and electroweak interactions, the so-called Grand Unified Theory,
still in four dimensions. However each time gravitation was
incorporated, extra dimensions naturally appeared. In particular string
theories [ 6 ] , which arguably offer the only consistent quantum
description of gravitation and other fundamental forces, are defined in
ten (heterotic, type I and type II strings) or in eleven (M-theory)
dimensions. Motivated by this observation, many physicists returned to
the original Kaluza-Klein theories and began to study quantum field
theory in higher dimensions. And a new world revealed to their eyes.
Indeed extra dimensions offer a new perspective for the interpretation
of data, for the description of physical phenomena, for overcoming
problems and, in particular, they offer new mechanisms for symmetry
breaking.

Symmetry breaking is one of the most important and interesting aspects
of theoretical particle physics, since symmetries provide the basis of
our current description of nature. In the usual four-dimensional
theories we know that symmetries can be broken explicitly or
spontaneously; in this latter case if the broken symmetry is global and
continuous the Goldstone theorem [ 7 ] applies, whereas if the symmetry
is local we have an Higgs mechanism [ 8 ] . In theories defined in extra
dimensions new ways of symmetry breaking appear, associated with the
different compactifications of the extra dimensions.

If we start from a scenario with infinite extra dimensions, the simplest
way to compactify is to impose a periodicity condition on each extra
coordinate, in such a way as to obtain a multi-dimensional torus.
Already at this stage we have one first symmetry breaking since the
higher-dimensional Lorentz invariance is spoiled. When we introduce
fields and write down a lagrangian, we require that physics depends only
on points of the compact space, so a kind of periodicity condition on
the extra-dimensional action must be imposed. Obviously if fields are
already periodic this condition is immediately satisfied and it does not
imply any new interesting features. However if the lagrangian is
invariant under the transformations of some symmetry group, we can use
this symmetry to say that fields are periodic up to such a
transformation. This is known as the Scherk-Schwarz mechanism [ 9 , 10 ]
and is used to break four-dimensional symmetries. In theories in extra
dimensions four-dimensional fields are recovered as the modes of a
Fourier expansion along the extra coordinates (Kaluza-Klein modes). For
every mode there is a corresponding four-dimensional mass (Kaluza-Klein
levels) and in general a higher-dimensional field possesses one zero
mode corresponding to a four-dimensional field of zero mass. If fields
are no longer periodic (if they are “twisted”) the conventional Fourier
expansion is modified and this leads to a constant shift of every
Kaluza-Klein level which also includes the zero mode that no longer
corresponds to a massless four-dimensional field. Now if we consider a
multiplet of some symmetry group and we assign different periodicity
conditions to different components of the multiplet, we discover that
from the four-dimensional perspective the symmetry is broken, since some
fields maintain the usual Kaluza-Klein levels while others are shifted.

In addition to the toroidal compactification, there exists an
alternative type of compactification which is called an orbifold [ 11 ]
. This is obtained by imposing a discrete symmetry on a compact space
that leads to fixed points invariant under the discrete symmetry
transformations. This “orbifolding” breaks translational invariance and,
as the Scherk-Schwarz mechanism, can be used to break other symmetries.
Also in this case we must require that the action only depends on the
points of the orbifold and this translates into particular
transformation properties for fields. In the simplest cases the orbifold
transformation corresponds to a parity operation where fields can be
even or odd assigned parity. The number of Kaluza-Klein modes for each
field of definite parity is now reduced and in particular odd fields
lose their zero modes. If once again we consider a multiplet of some
symmetry group and assign different parities to different components of
the multiplet, we find that the symmetry is broken from the
four-dimensional point of view.

Finally another symmetry breaking mechanism typical of extra-dimensional
frameworks exists for gauge theories, defined on non-simply connected
manifolds independently of the compactification considered. Indeed if
the extra-dimensional component of a gauge field acquires a constant
background or vev, the gauge symmetry can be broken by a Wilson loop.
This is known as the Hosotani mechanism [ 12 ] and it has been shown to
be equivalent to the Scherk-Schwarz mechanism. In fact it is possible to
perform a gauge transformation that reabsorbs the vev, but now leads to
non periodic boundary condition for the gauge field considered. Since
the Hosotani mechanism is a spontaneous symmetry breaking, we can
exploit this equivalence to state that Scherk-Schwarz breaking is also
spontaneous.

These novel mechanisms of symmetry breaking can be applied to various
types of symmetries, such as gauge symmetries, supersymmetry or flavour
symmetries. For every different symmetry considered, the
compactification scale must take a particular value. For example when
extra dimensions are introduced to explain the weakness of gravity with
respect to the other forces, they have to be very large, of order @xmath
[ 13 ] . In contrast if we want to break a Grand Unified symmetry the
radius of the extra dimension must be very small, of the order of the
inverse of the grand unification scale. In this thesis we are not
concerned with the size of the compactification radius as we investigate
the mechanisms of symmetry breaking on orbifolds, independently of the
compactification scale. However, since we apply them to gauge
symmetries, supersymmetry and flavour symmetry, it will become apparent
that we are always dealing with small extra dimensions.

The rest of the thesis is organized as follows.

In chapter 1 we describe in more detail the symmetry breaking mechanisms
typical of extra-dimensional frameworks that we have outlined above and
apply them to gauge symmetry and supersymmetry. To do this we choose to
describe in detail some realistic models which exploit these mechanisms
to break their symmetries. Of course the literature on the subject is
too large, so this chapter is far from being a complete phenomenological
review on models in extra dimensions. We simply choose some models as an
example to give an idea of the importance of these new methods for
symmetry breaking in model building.

Chapters 2 and 3 contain the original parts of this thesis. In chapter 2
we study the particular features the Scherk-Schwarz mechanism shows when
implemented on orbifolds. It is well known that when this mechanism is
applied to orbifolds, there are various consistency conditions that must
hold between the operators defining the twist and those defining the
orbifold itself. However there is also a more interesting feature. At
variance with manifolds where fields must be smooth everywhere, on
orbifolds they can have discontinuities at the fixed points, provided
the physical properties of the system remain well defined. So the most
general boundary conditions for fields are specified not only by parity
and periodicity, but also by possible jumps at the fixed points. In
sections 2.1 and 2.2 we discuss the most general boundary conditions
respectively for fermions and bosons on the orbifold @xmath and we
calculate the spectra and eigenfunctions in various cases, discussing
the relationship between these boundary conditions and the
Scherk-Schwarz mechanism.

We find that the most general boundary conditions for fields on
orbifolds are identical for fermions and bosons, but in the bosonic case
identical conditions are required also for the @xmath -derivative of
fields (where @xmath is the extra coordinate). This is due to the
requirement of self-adjointness for the differential operator which
determines the spectrum. These generalized boundary conditions include
twist and jumps at the fixed points and the matrices defining them are
required to be unitary and must satisfy certain consistency conditions.

Once we have assigned periodicity, parity and jumps to fields, we can
calculate the corresponding spectra and eigenfunctions by solving the
equations of motion. In this thesis this is done in the case of one
fermion field and one or more scalar fields. In every case we find that
the spectrum is a Scherk-Schwarz-like spectrum, since all the
Kaluza-Klein levels are always shifted by a universal amount. However
the shift is no longer determined by the twist parameter alone, as in
the conventional Scherk-Schwarz mechanism, but now also depends on
parameters that define the behaviour of fields at the fixed points. As
required from boundary conditions, eigenfunctions are either
discontinuous or have cusps at the fixed points and they can be periodic
or not, depending on the twist.

As the shift in the Kaluza-Klein levels corresponding to a given set of
generalized boundary conditions is similar to the shift induced by usual
twisted boundary conditions, we can try to relate the two systems. This
can be achieved by choosing an appropriate twist for the “smooth”
system, so that eigenfunctions associated to this twist are now
continuous, i. e. different from the previous ones, whereas the mass
spectra remain the same. We can move from one system to the other by
using a local field redefinition. As the physical properties of a
quantum mechanical system are invariant under a local field
redefinition, we can therefore state that the two systems - the one
characterized by generalized boundary conditions involving twist and
jumps and the other characterized only by twist - are equivalent.

Therefore we conclude that there is an entire class of different
boundary conditions that correspond to the same spectrum, i. e. to the
same physical properties, with eigenfunctions that are related by field
redefinitions. By performing this redefinition at the level of the
action, we observe, both for the fermionic and the bosonic cases, that
the generalized boundary conditions lead to @xmath -dependent
five-dimensional mass terms that can be even localized at the fixed
points. Although sometimes these terms are singular and an appropriate
regularization is required, they are necessary for the consistency of
the theory, as they encode the behaviour of the fields at the
boundaries.

We previously stated that different mass terms, corresponding to
different sets of boundary conditions, can give rise to the same
four-dimensional spectrum. Then it is useful to determine the most
general set of five-dimensional mass terms that correspond to a given
mass spectrum, i. e. to a given Scherk-Schwarz twist parameter. In
section 2.3 we discuss the conditions that a five-dimensional mass term
must satisfy in order to be associated to a Scherk-Schwarz twist and we
find a relationship between the twist parameter and the Wilson loop
obtained by integrating over the mass terms. We also discuss some
examples of equivalent mass terms.

The work done in this first part is quite formal. In sections 2.4 and
2.5 we discuss some phenomenological applications of our generalized
boundary conditions to gauge symmetry breaking and to supersymmetry
breaking respectively. In the first case we study the breaking of the
symmetry of a toy model based on the gauge group @xmath and then discuss
a realistic model based on @xmath . For the second example we consider
pure five-dimensional supergravity.

In chapter 3 we focus on the problem of flavour symmetry breaking and we
construct a six-dimensional toy model for flavour where the number of
generations arises dynamically as a consequence of the presence of extra
dimensions. It is already known in the literature that extra-dimensional
frameworks offer new mechanisms to obtain four-dimensional chiral
fermions. For instance they can originate as zero modes of
higher-dimensional fermions coupled to a solitonic background or,
alternatively, to a scalar field with non constant profile in orbifold
models, where the same scalar field forces the fermion to be localized.
This can be used to explain the fermion mass hierarchy, since Yukawa
constants are given by the overlap of fermionic and Higgs wave
functions. If the overlap among these functions is different due to
their position in the extra space, we obtain different values for the
Yukawa constants and thus large hierarchies can be generated. There are
several variants of this idea, such as the case of constant Higgs vev
and fermions localized in @xmath @xmath regions and also a scenario with
varying Higgs vev and fermion families localized in three different
places. Note that in all of these simple models the number of fermion
replica is introduced by hand. However it is known that it is possible
to obtain an arbitrary number of four-dimensional chiral fermions by
coupling the higher-dimensional fermions to a topological defect. This
fact has been exploited in six-dimensional models and, by requiring that
the winding number of the defect is three, the authors have built a
semi-realistic model for flavour in which three families dynamically
arise.

In our toy model we exploit another fact to simultaneously address both
the flavour problem and the question of fermion replica. It is well
known that a spinor in higher dimensions consists of many
four-dimensional spinors. For instance a six-dimensional Dirac spinor
contains two left-handed and two right-handed four-dimensional spinors.
After projecting out the unwanted chirality, for example by orbifolding,
we are left with two four-dimensional spinors with the same chirality
and the same quantum numbers, i. e. with two replica of the same
fermion. Although this is insufficient to build a realistic model of
flavour since in this scheme we can obtain only two families, we feel
that the study of such a toy model is essential and it has revealed
extremely interesting features that may also apply to a more realistic
theory.

In section 3.2.1 we illustrate the basis of our construction and
describe the localization of families in the extra dimensions. We work
on the orbifold @xmath and start from six vector-like fermions with the
Standard Model quantum numbers. With appropriate parity assignments,
after orbifolding we obtain two four-dimensional chiral zero modes for
every spinor, which we can identify with ( @xmath ) and ( @xmath ). In
the absence of other interactions these zero modes have a constant
profile along the extra dimensions, which would suggest that it is
impossible to reproduce the hierarchical fermion spectrum. However the
picture drastically changes if we localize the two families of fermions
in different regions of the extra space, in such a way that the
introduction of a non constant Higgs profile can reproduce the measured
fermion mass spectrum. We achieve this aim by adding a Dirac mass term
for every fermion to the lagrangian, where parity assignments to fields
require that the mass should have an odd profile. We thus choose a mass
proportional to the periodic sign function along one of the two extra
coordinates (and constant along the other), with the proportionality
constant different for each fermion. By solving the new equations of
motion we obtain the shape of zero modes that are now localized around
the lines where the six-dimensional mass changes sign, where the amount
of localization depends on the absolute value of this mass.

We have described how we obtain two sets of identical four-dimensional
fermions localized in two different regions of the extra space and if we
introduce a non constant Higgs vev we can attempt to derive the
fermionic mass spectrum. For the sake of simplicity we adopt a Higgs vev
that is completely localized on the brane around which the second
generation lives. In section 3.2.2 we compute the mass spectrum and we
observe that these masses are naturally hierarchical, or rather from
order one parameters of the fundamental theory we obtain a hierarchical
pattern of masses. Moreover, as Majorana masses are allowed in six
dimensions, the smallness of neutrino masses could be potentially
explained through a higher-dimensional see-saw mechanism. These results
are of course very interesting, but unfortunately our toy model contains
many parameters and therefore its predictability is weak.

In section 3.3 we discuss how to extend our toy model to a more
realistic scenario with three generations. As the most promising
framework, we suggest a ten-dimensional space-time, where Majorana
masses are allowed and fermions contains enough four-dimensional
components. We have just begun to investigate this proposal and a lot of
work is still required. However the toy model we present is certainly an
important step towards a realistic construction that simultaneously
addresses both the flavour and fermion replica problem.

## Chapter 1 Symmetry Breaking in Extra Dimensions

In this chapter we briefly review the main issues on symmetry breaking
in extra dimensions already present in the literature. In section 1.1 we
describe the main features of the Scherk-Schwarz (SS) mechanism, of the
Hosotani mechanism and of orbifold compactification and we discuss how
they can break symmetries. In particular in section 1.2.1 we consider
supersymmetry (SUSY), while in section 1.2.2 we analyze gauge symmetry,
discussing in details some examples. In these sections we also briefly
outline some realistic models that exploit these symmetry breaking
mechanisms. Of course this is far from being a complete phenomenological
review on theories in extra dimensions, but we simply discuss some
examples in order to give an idea of the importance of these new methods
for symmetry breaking.

Before analyzing in detail the problem of symmetry breaking, we would
like to discuss some general features of theories in extra dimensions.
We consider a @xmath -dimensional space-time ( @xmath ) of coordinates
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Alternatively we can use the
notation @xmath with @xmath . . The extra dimensions can be factorizable
or non-factorizable. If they are factorizable the space-time is given by
the product of the Minkowsky space @xmath times a compact space @xmath
and the line element is @xmath . On the contrary, if the space-time is
non-factorizable, the line element is @xmath and we cannot isolate
@xmath . From here on we forget this last case (for references see [ 14
] ) and we deal only with factorizable geometry. Before entering into
calculations we have to define the metric. As we shall see, we will
adopt different conventions about the metric in chapters 2 and 3 , but
the important thing is that all the spatial coordinates have the same
sign.

We suppose to work on the space-time @xmath , where @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional torus @xmath of radii @xmath . The action in @xmath
dimensions is defined by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the four-dimensional (4D) lagrangian is obtained after integration
of the compact coordinates @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The field @xmath represents a generic field depending on the whole set
of coordinates. Since the extra coordinates are compact we can develop
@xmath in Fourier series along @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Each @xmath is a 4D field called Kaluza-Klein (KK) mode. From a 4D point
of view it corresponds to a field of mass square

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can show this with a simple example, supposing @xmath to be a real
massless D-dimensional scalar field. The lagrangian reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the corresponding equation of motion ² ² 2 Here we choose to work
with the metric @xmath . is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting eq. ( 1.3 ) into eq. ( 1.6 ) we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
                 (1.7)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

which is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eq. ( 1.8 ) is precisely the equation of motion of a 4D massive scalar
field with mass given by eq. ( 1.4 ). Masses @xmath are called KK
levels.

After this brief reminder on field theory in extra dimensions we can
proceed with the analysis of symmetry breaking, following the lines of
ref. [ 15 ] .

### 1.1 Mechanisms of Symmetry Breaking

#### 1.1.1 Compactification

We consider the space-time @xmath , where @xmath is the usual Minkowsky
space while @xmath is a compact @xmath -dimensional space. In general we
can write @xmath , where @xmath is a (non-compact) manifold and @xmath
is a discrete group acting freely on @xmath by operators @xmath for
@xmath . @xmath is defined the covering space of @xmath . That @xmath is
acting freely on @xmath means that only @xmath has fixed points in
@xmath , where @xmath is the identity in @xmath . In our case we have
@xmath . The operators @xmath constitute a representation of @xmath ,
which means that @xmath . Finally @xmath is constructed by the
identification

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

To be more concrete we focus on a simple example with one extra
dimension. We take @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (the circle). The @xmath
-th element of the group @xmath can be represented by @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radius of the circle @xmath . The identification (
1.9 ) leads to the fundamental domain of length @xmath , the circle, as
@xmath or @xmath . The interval must be opened at one end because @xmath
and @xmath describe the same point in @xmath and should not be counted
twice. Any choice for @xmath leads to an equivalent fundamental domain
in the covering space @xmath . A convenient choice is @xmath which leads
to the fundamental domain @xmath .

After the identification ( 1.9 ) the physics should not depend on
individual points in @xmath but only on points in @xmath . This means:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

A sufficient condition to fulfill eq. ( 1.11 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is known as ordinary compactification. However condition ( 1.12 )
is sufficient but not necessary. In fact a more general condition to
satisfy eq. ( 1.11 ) is provided by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the elements of a symmetry group of the theory.
Condition ( 1.13 ) is known as SS compactification and and will be the
subject of the next section.

#### 1.1.2 The Scherk-Schwarz Mechanism

The Scherk-Schwarz mechanism was introduced in 1979 first for “external”
symmetries, i. e. that do not involve the space-time [ 9 ] , and then
for “internal” symmetries involving space-time transformations [ 10 ] .
It applies to theories which are invariant under the transformations of
some symmetry group and it occurs when the operator @xmath ( @xmath ) of
eq. ( 1.13 ) is different from the identity. We say that in this case we
have a twist. The operators @xmath are a representation of the group
@xmath acting on field space, i. e. they satisfy the property: @xmath .
The SS compactification reduces to ordinary compactification when @xmath
. Both for ordinary and SS compactifications fields are functions on the
covering space @xmath , but while for ordinary compactification fields
are also functions on the compact space @xmath , in the twisted case
fields are not single-valued on @xmath .

In order to give a simple explanation of how this mechanism works, we
consider the example of the previous section. We work on the circle
@xmath and we have @xmath . This group has infinitely many elements but
all of them can be obtained from just one generator, the translation
@xmath . Then only one independent twist can exist acting on the fields,
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

while twists corresponding to the other elements of @xmath are just
given by @xmath . For simplicity we consider one complex scalar field
@xmath and we assume that the theory is invariant under @xmath
transformations on this field. Then @xmath can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this twist @xmath is no more periodic and the development in
Fourier series becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we calculate the KK levels we observe that they are shifted by a
constant amount and precisely they are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

If instead of a single field we consider a multiplet of some symmetry
group @xmath and we assign different periodicity conditions to different
members of the multiplet, we will obtain a breaking of @xmath in 4D,
since after compactification some components of the multiplet will have
the usual KK levels, while others will have levels shifted by a constant
amount. In particular if we look at the zero modes, only periodic fields
maintain them and the symmetry @xmath , at the level of the zero modes,
is spoiled.

All what discussed above can be easily generalized to @xmath -extra
dimensions, with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the @xmath -torus. In
that case the torus periodicity is defined by a lattice vector @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath are the different radii of @xmath . Twisted
boundary conditions are defined by @xmath independent twists given by
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 1.1.3 Orbifold

Firstly introduced in string theory, orbifolding is a technique used to
obtain chiral fermions from a (higher-dimensional) vector-like theory [
11 ] . Orbifold compactification can be defined in a similar way to
ordinary or SS compactification. Let @xmath be a compact manifold and
@xmath a discrete group represented by operators @xmath for @xmath
acting non freely on @xmath . We mod out @xmath by @xmath by identifying
points in @xmath which differ by @xmath for some @xmath and require that
fields defined at these two points differ by some transformation @xmath
, a global or local symmetry of the theory:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The fact that @xmath acts non-freely on @xmath means that some
transformations @xmath have fixed points in @xmath . The resulting space
@xmath is not a smooth manifold but it has singularities at the fixed
points: it is called orbifold.

To illustrate this with a simple example we continue with the case
analyzed in the previous section with @xmath and @xmath . Now we can
take @xmath and the resulting orbifold is @xmath . The action of the
only non-trivial element of @xmath (the inversion) is represented by
@xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

that obviously satisfies the condition @xmath . For fields we can write
as in ( 1.1.3 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where using ( 1.20 ) and ( 1.21 ) one can easily prove that @xmath .
This means that in field space @xmath is a matrix that can be
diagonalized with eigenvalues @xmath . The orbifold @xmath is a manifold
with boundaries and the boundaries are the fixed points. Its fundamental
domain is a segment of length @xmath and can be chosen to be the
interval @xmath ; the fixed points are precisely @xmath and @xmath .
While all orbifolds possess fixed points, not all possess boundaries:
for example in @xmath , @xmath is a “pillow” with four fixed points and
no boundaries.

How this orbifold can break a symmetry? Suppose that @xmath is a
collection of @xmath fields which form a multiplet of some symmetry
group @xmath of the lagrangian and suppose that the matrix @xmath does
not coincide with the identity. We can choose @xmath with the first
@xmath entries equal to @xmath and the remaining ( @xmath ) equal to
@xmath . This means that the first @xmath fields are even, while the
others are odd. When we develop them in KK modes we obtain for the even
fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for odd fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that the @xmath -symmetry projects out half of the tower of
the KK modes of eq. ( 1.3 ). Moreover, after orbifolding, only even
fields maintain a zero mode. From the 4D point of view the symmetry
@xmath is broken down to a symmetry group @xmath .

#### 1.1.4 The Scherk-Schwarz Mechanism on Orbifold

In this section we analyze the behaviour of the SS mechanism on
orbifold. In order to discuss the conditions holding among the operators
defining the orbifold parity and those defining the twist, we begin by
remembering how these operators were introduced. We started from a
non-compact space @xmath with a discrete group @xmath acting freely on
the covering space @xmath by operators @xmath ( @xmath ) and defining
the compact space @xmath . The elements @xmath are represented on field
space by operators @xmath , eq. ( 1.13 ). Subsequently we introduced
another discrete group @xmath acting non-freely on @xmath by operators
@xmath ( @xmath ) and represented on field space by operators @xmath ,
eq. ( 1.1.3 ). We can always consider the group @xmath as acting on
elements @xmath and then considering both @xmath and @xmath as subgroups
of a larger discrete group @xmath . Since in general @xmath , this means
that @xmath so we can conclude that @xmath is not the direct product
@xmath . Furthermore the twists @xmath have to satisfy some consistency
conditions. In fact from eqs. ( 1.13 ) and ( 1.1.3 ) one can easily
deduce a set of identities as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are considered as elements in the larger group @xmath . The
conditions ( 1.1.4 ) impose compatibility constraints in particular
orbifold constructions with twisted boundary conditions as we will
explicitly illustrate in the following example.

We continue by analyzing the simple case of the orbifold @xmath with
twisted boundary conditions. In this case there is only one independent
group element for @xmath which is the translation @xmath while the
orbifold group @xmath contains only the inversion @xmath . First of all,
notice that the translation and the inversion do not commute to each
other. In fact @xmath while @xmath . It follows then that @xmath and
@xmath , which imply the consistency condition on the possible twist
operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

as can be easily deduced from eq. ( 1.1.4 ) [ 16 , 17 ] .

We now give an explicit example of how this condition constraints the
twist @xmath . We consider a theory invariant under @xmath
transformations and we choose @xmath to be a doublet of fields. Now both
the parity @xmath and the twist @xmath are @xmath matrices. There are
two possibilities for @xmath : @xmath or @xmath . If we require that
condition ( 1.25 ) is satisfied, we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are real parameters. In the case of @xmath , using a global
residual invariance, we can rotate @xmath and consider twists given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The twist ( 1.27 ) is a continuous function of @xmath and so it is
continuously connected with the identity that corresponds to the trivial
no-twist solution (i. e. @xmath ). In this way eq. ( 1.27 ) describes a
continuous family of solutions to the consistency condition ( 1.25 ). In
the case of @xmath eq. ( 1.25 ) implies that boundary conditions can be
either periodic or anti-periodic, i. e. @xmath .

#### 1.1.5 The Hosotani Mechanism

In this section we illustrate another symmetry breaking mechanism that
applies to local symmetries and it has been introduced by Hosotani in
1983 [ 12 ] . It is based on the fact that the extra-dimensional
components of a gauge field can acquire a vev, breaking the gauge
symmetry itself. We show the main features of this mechanism in a simple
example in 5D, without discussing the problem of the origin of the vev.

We consider the space-time @xmath and a gauge theory based on @xmath .
We write down the 5D lagrangian and we focus on the quadri-linear part
which contains the terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the @xmath indices. We now assume that the fifth
component of @xmath acquires a vev: @xmath . This may have a dynamical
origin, coming from the minimization of the 1-loop effective potential
in the presence of matter fields, as discussed in [ 12 ] . If we
substitute this into eq. ( 1.28 ) we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a mass term for fields @xmath . If we calculated the KK spectrum
for gauge fields, we would obtain the usual KK spectrum for @xmath ,
while the KK levels for @xmath would be shifted by a constant amount
proportional to @xmath . From a 4D point of view the symmetry @xmath is
broken down to @xmath . The vev @xmath is a continuous parameter so it
can be made as small as we want and we can move continuously from a
phase of broken symmetry to another in which it is restored.

#### 1.1.6 Scherk-Schwarz vs Hosotani

In this section we will show that if the symmetry exploited by the SS
mechanism is local, this symmetry breaking mechanism is equivalent to a
Hosotani breaking, where the extra-dimensional components of the
corresponding gauge fields acquire a vev.

For simplicity we consider the case studied before of a 5D gauge theory
based on @xmath . Now we do not postulate anything on the fifth
component of the gauge fields, but we assign the following twist to the
fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding spectrum is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also in this case we observe that from a 4D point of view @xmath is
broken down to @xmath . Moreover if we make the identification

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

the spectrum ( 1.31 ) is identical to the one calculated in the Hosotani
scheme. Are these two systems really equivalent? The answer is yes, and
it was given by Hosotani himself in one of his papers. He showed that by
performing a gauge transformation with non periodic parameters one can
switch from one picture to the other. In particular if we start from the
Hosotani scheme, in which fields are periodic and @xmath , and we
perform the gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

we observe that @xmath . But this is not the only effect of the gauge
transformation. Indeed now fields @xmath are twisted and the twist is
precisely the one of eq. ( 1.30 ) with @xmath given by ( 1.32 ).

In both pictures the symmetry is broken and we would like to have an
order parameter for symmetry breaking which is gauge independent. Such a
parameter exists and it is the Wilson line defined in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a path-ordered integral.

### 1.2 Phenomenological Implications

In this section we apply the methods described above to gauge symmetry
and SUSY. The literature offers many realistic models in which these
symmetries are broken by means of the previously discussed mechanisms.
Of course we cannot discuss here all the existing theories, thereby we
choose two models which we consider particularly suitable to our scopes.
The first one, which we adopt to describe SUSY breaking, was studied in
ref. [ 17 ] and developed in [ 18 ] . It uses the orbifold projection
and the SS compactification to obtain the 4D Standard Model (SM)
starting from a SUSY theory in 5D. The second one, which we adopt to
describe gauge symmetry breaking, was introduced in ref. [ 19 ] ,
extended to include fermions in ref. [ 20 ] and completed in a realistic
theory in refs. [ 21 , 22 ] . It is a 5D SUSY Grand Unified Theory (GUT)
based on the gauge group @xmath which reduces to the SM through orbifold
and SS compactification.

#### 1.2.1 Supersymmetry Breaking

The model we consider is a 5D theory defined on the space-time @xmath .
It possesses @xmath SUSY in 5D, which corresponds to @xmath in 4D.
Non-chiral matter, as the gauge and Higgs sectors of the theory, lives
in the bulk of the fifth dimension, while chiral matter, i. e. the three
generations of quarks and leptons and their superpartners, lives on the
4D boundary, i. e. at the fixed points of the orbifold.

In 5D, the vector supermultiplet @xmath of an @xmath gauge theory
consists of a vector boson @xmath ( @xmath ), a real scalar @xmath and
two bispinors @xmath ( @xmath ) (which are symplectic Majorana spinors),
all in the adjoint representation of @xmath . The 5D lagrangian is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 5D matter supermultiplet, ( @xmath ), consists of two scalar fields,
@xmath ( @xmath ), and a Dirac fermion @xmath . We consider two matter
supermultiplets, ( @xmath , @xmath ) ( @xmath ), associated with the two
Higgs doublets of the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM). The
lagrangian for the matter supermultiplet interacting with the vector
supermultiplet is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath are the Pauli matrices. The lagrangians of eqs. ( 1.36 )
and ( 1.37 ) have an @xmath global symmetry under which the fermionic
fields transform as doublets, @xmath ( 2 , 1 ), @xmath ( 1 , 2 ), while
Higgs bosons transform as bidoublets @xmath ( 2 , 2 ). The rest of the
fields in the vector multiplet are singlets.

The model based on the SM gauge group is constructed from the above
lagrangians. It contains 5D vector multiplets in the adjoint
representation of @xmath [( 8 , 1 ,0)+( 1 , 3 ,0)+( 1 , 1 ,0)] and two
Higgs hypermultiplets in the representation [( 1 , 2 ,1/2)+( 1 , 2
,-1/2)]; the chiral matter is located on the boundary and contains the
usual chiral @xmath 4D multiplets ³ ³ 3 For details on auxiliary fields,
SUSY transformations, etc. see ref. [ 15 ] . .

Since we work on an orbifold we have to impose consistent parity
assignments to fields. These are displayed in table 1.1, where we have
rearranged fields in components of @xmath @xmath SUSY multiplets that
are disposed along the same column.

We observe that, for @xmath , KK levels form massive @xmath 4D
multiplets. The @xmath field is eaten by the vector @xmath to become
massive while @xmath and @xmath become the components of a massive Dirac
fermion. These fields together with @xmath form an @xmath vector
multiplet. @xmath and @xmath form two @xmath hypermultiplets. These are
displayed in table 1.2.

On the contrary if we consider the zero modes we are left only with even
fields which form @xmath chiral multiplets, evidence that we still have
a SUSY theory. In particular we see that the massless spectrum of this
model coincide with the MSSM. Finally we observe that at the fixed
points odd fields vanish @xmath . This means that at boundaries we have
@xmath SUSY, while @xmath holds only in the bulk for massive modes.

Here we have shown how SUSY can be reduced by orbifold projection.
However we still have a residual @xmath SUSY which, in order to obtain
the SM, should be broken. To perform this further breaking we use the SS
mechanism and the symmetries we exploit for twisting fields are @xmath
and @xmath . We impose the following periodicity conditions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Other fields are periodic, since they are singlets under @xmath . After
the integration over the fifth dimension we obtain the following mass
spectrum for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have redefined the scalar fields as @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . Therefore the massive KK modes are now given by two Majorana
fermions @xmath with masses @xmath , two Dirac fermions, @xmath with
masses @xmath , and four scalars, @xmath and @xmath with masses @xmath
and @xmath respectively. The mass spectrum of the fields @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath is not modified by the SS compactification, since they are
periodic.

For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.41)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The massless spectrum now consists of only the @xmath mode of the vector
fields @xmath . Nevertheless a massless scalar Higgs can be obtained if
either @xmath or @xmath ( @xmath ) are satisfied. Therefore, after SS
compactification, the massless spectrum of the model can be reduced to
the SM, with one or two Higgs doublets. From eq. ( 1.41 ) we can see how
the SS mechanism breaks SUSY in the massless sector: it provides a mass
for gauginos @xmath and a mass for Higgsinos @xmath , providing an
extra-dimensional solution to the MSSM @xmath -problem.

As we said before, the fermionic sector is localized at @xmath . Since
the theory is SUSY there are scalar partners for all fermions (squarks
and sleptons) which are massless at tree level. How can we break this
SUSY? Sfermions (like fermions) are 4D, so we cannot break it through
compactification, since they are independent from the fifth coordinate.
But if we calculate the radiative correction [ 18 ] we find non
vanishing contributions to the sfermions masses both from the gauge and
the Higgs sectors at one loop. These contributions are finite and
transmit SUSY breaking from the bulk to the boundaries.

In the model just described, after compactification, we are left with
the SM, with its good qualities but also its defects. In particular we
have not improved our knowledge of electroweak symmetry breaking (ESB).
However this can be done with little modifications, as it is shown in
ref. [ 23 ] where a realistic and testable model have been built. At
variance with before, now also fermions live in the bulk and only one
Higgs field is introduced. The two SUSYs are broken with two orbifolds,
which is equivalent to the previous case with an appropriate twist
parameter. The novelty is that ESB is triggered by the interactions of
the top quark KK modes with the Higgs. These give rise to an effective
potential which contains a negative mass scale depending on the
compactification scale @xmath which induces spontaneous breaking. The
Fermi constant can thus be used to determine @xmath which results to be
@xmath ; consequently the Higgs mass turns out to be @xmath . This
predictions, and others which are discussed in the paper, make this
model testable at LHC.

#### 1.2.2 Gauge Symmetry Breaking

We begin with the model introduced by Kawamura in ref. [ 19 ] and then
extended in ref. [ 20 ] with the introduction of fermions. It is a 5D
SUSY theory defined on the orbifold @xmath based on the gauge group
@xmath . The bulk fields content is the following: there is a vector
multiplet @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath , which forms an adjoint
representation of @xmath , and two hypermultiplets @xmath and @xmath
equivalent to four chiral multiplets @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
which form two fundamental representations of @xmath . The gauge vector
bosons are the fields @xmath : @xmath with @xmath are the SM vector
bosons , while @xmath with @xmath are those of the coset @xmath . The
bulk lagrangian is given by eqs. ( 1.36 ) - ( 1.37 ).

Parity assignments, displayed in table 1.3, are given is such a way that
@xmath breaks one 4D SUSY, while @xmath breaks @xmath down to @xmath .
After orbifolding we thus obtain a massless spectrum which contains the
vector bosons of the SM, @xmath , their SUSY partners, @xmath , and two
Higgs doublets @xmath and @xmath which are precisely the fields of the
MSSM. These boundary conditions solve the doublet-triplet splitting
problem, since while the doublet is massless, the lightest triplet mode
has mass of order @xmath . Since the unification of gauge couplings is
achieved at the compactification scale, it is natural to identify @xmath
with @xmath . We observe that the compactification scale is here much
bigger then in the model of the previous section.

What about fermions? Although they are already present, localized on the
brane, in the model of ref. [ 19 ] , what follows is based on ref. [ 20
] which offers a more detailed description. Fermions cannot live in the
bulk, unless we double the number of matter fields. Moreover constant
Yukawa couplings respecting also @xmath lead to vanishing up-type quark
mass. Then matter fields and their SUSY partners are introduced as
multiplets of the SM gauge groups. Proton decay is analyzed and it is
shown it cannot proceed via tree-level Higgsino or gauge boson exchange
for any parity assignment compatible with non vanishing fermion masses.
Appropriate parity assignments can also forbid 4D and 5D B/L violating
operators, playing the rôle of @xmath -parity symmetry. The problem of
proton decay is thus solved and the good properties of traditional GUTs
are maintained. Indeed fermion mass relations are preserved, Dirac and
Majorana neutrino masses can be included and the see-saw mechanism can
be realized.

Although it solves two of the problems of 4D GUTs, the model described
above is far from being a realistic theory. First of all SUSY has still
to be broken and then we do not have yet a realistic fermion mass
spectrum. A first step in the direction of building a realistic model
have been done in ref. [ 21 ] , while a complete 5D GUT is constructed
in ref. [ 22 ] .

The model introduced by Hall and Nomura is an upgrade of previous
models, although it is based on the orbifold @xmath rather than on
@xmath . However we could demonstrate there is an equivalence between
the orbifold and the SS mechanism, so in this case the rôle of the
second parity is played by a twist. Moreover, at variance with parity,
the twist parameter can be continuous and we will see that on this fact
is based the breaking of the residual SUSY. The gauge and Higgs fields
content is identical to the one of previously described models, with
fields in the bulk and boundary conditions breaking @xmath and one SUSY.
The grand unified group is broken on the brane at @xmath , while
elsewhere it remains unbroken. This structure allows the introduction of
three types of fields: 4D @xmath superfields localized on the @xmath
brane in representations of @xmath , 4D @xmath superfields on the @xmath
brane in representations of the SM gauge group, and bulk fields forming
5D @xmath supermultiplets in representations of @xmath . In order to
preserve the understanding of matter quantum numbers given by @xmath ,
at variance with ref. [ 20 ] where they were introduced in
representation of the SM, here quarks and leptons are put either in the
bulk or on the brane at @xmath , in @xmath representations. In principle
one can choose where to put fermions for each @xmath representation in
each generation but in practice the choice is unique if we want a
realistic theory. In agreement with ref. [ 20 ] , the authors show that
Yukawa interactions are forbidden in the bulk by 5D SUSY, but they also
demonstrate that if all the matter fields were localized on the brane,
too rapid proton decay would be induced. In order to avoid this, and
considering also the size of the top Yukawa coupling and @xmath
unification, they find that the location of the @xmath of the first and
third generations and of the @xmath of the third is uniquely determined.
The location of other fermions is instead determined after the breaking
of the residual SUSY, which will be discussed in a while. The final
location of all the fields of the model is represented in fig. 1.1 .

SUSY is broken by a SS mechanism with twist parameter @xmath ,
analogously to what done in the previous section. Since the breaking
parameter is continuous, at variance with the twist that breaks @xmath
which is discrete, this SUSY breaking can be reinterpreted à la
Hosotani, that is we have spontaneous symmetry breaking.

After the introduction of all the fields, and after compactification
with appropriate boundary conditions, we are left with the SM fields.
Then it is possible to work out the predictions of the model. First of
all the fermion mass spectrum is calculated and, even if a part of the
hierarchy must be introduced by hands with appropriate Yukawa couplings,
it is interesting to observe that we have the typical @xmath mass
relation ( @xmath ) only for the third generation, while there is a
small mixing of the first two generations with the third. Neutrino
masses are generated via the see-saw mechanism and large mixing is found
in the neutrino sector. Also the superpartners spectrum is calculated.
In this model SUSY breaking effects depend only on one parameter. With a
particular choice of this parameter it is possible to give predictions
for @xmath and @xmath which are in good agreement with data. Moreover
they calculate branching ratios for flavour violation lepton decays
which are found to be close to the present experimental limits. A limit
on proton decay is estimated and it results to be of order of @xmath
years. The first possible direct experimental signal should be the
observation of scalar fermions. Thus we can say that also this model is
realistic and testable, although it depends on more parameters than the
model of ref. [ 23 ] .

## Chapter 2 Symmetry Breaking via Generalized Scherk-Schwarz Mechanism

In section 1.1 we have described in details the SS mechanism. We have
seen that on a circle @xmath one can twist the periodicity conditions on
the fields by a symmetry of the action. The result is a shift in the KK
levels of the spectrum and this can be used to break symmetries. In this
chapter we deal in more detail with the orbifold @xmath . Since an
orbifold contains fixed points, the boundary conditions are fully
specified not only by the periodicity of field variables, but also by
the possible jumps of the fields across the orbifold fixed points. These
jumps are forbidden on manifolds, where the fields are required to be
smooth everywhere, but are possible on orbifolds at the singular points,
provided the physical properties of the system remain well defined.

In section 2.1 , following the lines of ref. [ 24 ] , we study the
general boundary conditions for fermions and we calculate spectrum and
eigenfunctions. Along similar lines, in section 2.2 , based on ref. [ 25
] , we study the bosonic case. In both cases KK levels are shifted
precisely as in the SS mechanism and a field redefinition exists mapping
discontinuous fields into continuous, twisted ones. Since the spectra
are identical, generalized boundary conditions can be used to break
symmetries, as in the case of twisted boundary conditions. In section
2.4 we exploit them to break gauge invariance, as described in refs. [
25 , 26 ] , while in section 2.5 we apply our considerations to SUSY
breaking, as shown in refs. [ 27 , 28 ] . From the point of view of the
spectrum the two mechanisms are identical; which are the differences?
For free theories the difference is only in the explicit form of the 5D
mass terms. Generalized boundary conditions lead to @xmath -dependent
mass terms while twisted boundary conditions produce constant ones.
Different mass terms can give rise to the same 4D spectrum and it is
useful to determine the most general set of mass terms that correspond
to a given spectrum. All this is analyzed in section 2.3 , following the
lines of ref. [ 27 ] .

All along this chapter we will work in a 5D space-time with the extra
coordinate compactified on the orbifold @xmath . The metric @xmath and
the @xmath matrices we use are defined in the first part of appendix A .

### 2.1 Generalized Boundary Conditions for Fermions

#### 2.1.1 Boundary Conditions for Fermionic Fields on @xmath

We consider a generic 5D theory compactified on the orbifold @xmath and
we introduce a set of @xmath 5D fermionic fields @xmath , which we
classify in representations of the 4D Lorentz group. We define the
@xmath transformations of the fields by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are constant unitary matrices and @xmath has the
property @xmath . It is not restrictive for us to take a basis in which
@xmath is diagonal, with the first @xmath entries equal to @xmath and
the remaining @xmath equal to @xmath .

We look for boundary conditions on the fields @xmath in the general
class

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are constant @xmath matrices ¹ ¹ 1 In
fact to each fermion corresponds a @xmath matrix, since a 5D spinor is
composed by two 4D Weyl spinors. . We have defined @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . Here @xmath is a small positive parameter and @xmath
is a generic point of the @xmath -axis, for convenience chosen between
@xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the operator associated with the twist,
while @xmath define the possible discontinuities of fields at the fixed
points.

We will now constrain @xmath by imposing certain consistency
requirements on our theory. The spectrum of the theory is determined by
the eigenmodes of the momentum along @xmath , represented by the
differential operator @xmath . In order to deal with a good quantum
mechanical system, we demand that this operator is self-adjoint with
respect to the scalar product:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the limit @xmath is understood. If we consider the matrix element
@xmath and we perform a partial integration we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

A necessary condition for the self-adjointness of the operator @xmath is
that the square bracket vanishes. However this is not sufficient, in
general. To guarantee self-adjointness, the domain of the operator
@xmath should coincide with the domain of its adjoint. In other words,
we should impose conditions on @xmath in such a way that the vanishing
of the unwanted contribution implies precisely the same conditions on
@xmath . We observe that if @xmath are unitary all these requirements
are satisfied and the operator is self-adjoint.

Finally, we should take into account consistency conditions among the
twist, the jumps and the orbifold projection. If we combine a
translation @xmath with a reflection @xmath , we have seen that the
operators @xmath and @xmath must satisfy the relation ( 1.25 ): @xmath .
An analogous relation is also obtained if we combine a jump with a
reflection. Finally, each of the two possible jumps should commute with
the translation @xmath . We thus have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

If @xmath , then @xmath and twist and/or jumps have eigenvalues @xmath .
In particular, if also @xmath and @xmath commute, there is a basis where
they are all diagonal with elements @xmath : in this special case the
boundary conditions do not involve any continuous parameter. When @xmath
or when @xmath continuous parameters can appear in @xmath .

In summary the most general boundary conditions for a set of @xmath 5D
fermionic fields are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath satisfying conditions ( 2.1.1 ). Obviously, in order to
assign these generalized boundary conditions to fermions, @xmath must be
a symmetry of the theory.

#### 2.1.2 One Fermion Field

To illustrate how these general boundary conditions determine the
physics, we focus now on the case of a single 5D fermion. We start by
deriving the lagrangian and the equation of motion in terms of 4D
spinors and then we solve it with general boundary conditions.

A 5D spinor is composed by two 4D Weyl spinors and can be represented
with different notations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

With notations (A) we have @xmath while with notations (B) we have
@xmath . We remember that in this case @xmath is not the usual Dirac
@xmath , but it is defined by @xmath . Within formalism (A) we can write
the 5D lagrangian in the usual way:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

By substituting the explicit expression for @xmath and the @xmath
-matrices we obtain the lagrangian in terms of 4D Weyl spinors:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

For simplicity we can move to notation (B) and we rewrite the lagrangian
in the following way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here (and in the following) @xmath are Pauli matrices acting in the
space @xmath , while @xmath are the usual matrices rotating the
components of the Weyl spinors @xmath .

From eq. ( 2.10 ) we can derive the equation of motion for the fermion.
Varying with respect to @xmath we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting the 4D equation of motion for Weyl spinors @xmath into
eq. ( 2.11 ), we finally obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We solve this equation of motion first with the usual SS twisted
boundary conditions and then in a more general case including also
jumps.

With respect to the @xmath reflection that defines the orbifold, we
adopt the following parity assignment:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that @xmath is not only invariant under @xmath , as required
for the consistency of the orbifold construction, but also under

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a global @xmath transformation ² ² 2 Notation (B) is
useful to display this symmetry. . In this framework the field @xmath
does not need to be periodic and continuous, but conditions ( 2.6 ) can
be adopted with @xmath . The most general twist we can assign to the
fermion is the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath is a triplet of real parameters, @xmath is the
absolute value of the vector @xmath , @xmath , and it is not restrictive
to assume @xmath . The operators @xmath and @xmath acting on the fields
should satisfy consistency conditions ( 2.1.1 ) which, for @xmath ,
implies ³ ³ 3 The choice @xmath gives @xmath , as any other choice with
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 4D modes have a spectrum characterized by a universal shift of KK
levels, with respect to the mass eigenvalues @xmath of the periodic
case, controlled by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding eigenfunctions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is @xmath -independent 4D Weyl spinor satisfying the
equation @xmath , and, barring the trivial case @xmath in which the
rotation angle @xmath is arbitrary:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have reproduced the usual SS mechanism: starting from twisted
fields we obtained a shift in the KK spectrum proportional to the twist
parameter itself. In the following we will show that the same spectrum
can be obtained also by means of jumps or a combination of both.

For the sake of simplicity we do not consider the most general boundary
conditions but we focus on a simpler case with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The solution to eq. ( 2.12 ) with boundary conditions ( 2.1.2 ) is the
following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath , depicted in fig. 2.1 for some representative choices of
@xmath and @xmath , is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the periodic sign function defined on @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the staircase function that steps by two units every @xmath along
@xmath . The function @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the eigenfunctions have the correct twist.

The spectrum ( 2.22 ) is characterized by a uniform shift with respect
to the KK levels, as in the traditional SS picture (see eq. ( 2.17 )).
But while there the spectrum depends only on the twist @xmath , here it
depends also on jumps @xmath and @xmath . In particular it is possible
to have a vanishing shift for a non-vanishing twist. We observe that we
recover the usual SS spectrum in the limit @xmath . What about
eigenfunctions? They are discontinuous at the fixed points: the even
part has cusps while the odd one has jumps, as required by boundary
conditions (see fig. 2.2 ). If we take the limit @xmath in eq. ( 2.21 )
we recover precisely eq. ( 2.18 ) with @xmath .

For any @xmath the system is equivalent to a conventional SS
compactification with @xmath . We can move to the new continuous
eigenfunctions @xmath performing the following field redefinition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the exponential factor removes the discontinuities from @xmath and
add a twist @xmath to the wave function. Passing from one system to the
other we have only performed a local field redefinition. It is a general
statement that the physical properties of a quantum mechanical system
are invariant under a local field redefinition. We can therefore say
that the two systems are really physically equivalent. This is
interesting since it suggests that we can move from a description in
terms of discontinuous variables to another in terms of smooth fields.

#### 2.1.3 Localized Mass Terms

In the previous section we discussed the equivalence between systems
characterized by discontinuous fields and ‘smooth’ systems in which
fields are continuous but twisted, showing that a field redefinition
exists mapping the mass eigenfunctions of one description into those of
the other. Here we would like to further explore the relation between
smooth and discontinuous frameworks by showing that the field
discontinuities are strictly related to lagrangian terms localized at
the fixed points.

We start from the lagrangian @xmath of eq. ( 2.10 ) for the continuous
field @xmath and we perform the redefinition ( 2.26 ). We obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We observe that jumps are related to mass terms localized at the
orbifold fixed points. If we want to explore this relation more deeply
we should derive the equation of motion, integrate it around the fixed
points and eventually we will recover the discontinuities of fields. But
we must pay attention in deriving the equation of motion! Indeed the
lagrangian ( 2.1.3 ) involves singular terms and the naive use of the
variational principle, which is tailored on continuous functions and
smooth functionals, would lead to inconsistent results. In order to
avoid these problems we regularize @xmath by means of a smooth function
@xmath ( @xmath ) which reproduces @xmath in the limit @xmath . Now we
can derive the equation of motion which reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are working with regularized functions also @xmath is now
continuous, so we can divide eq. ( 2.29 ) by @xmath . Integrating the
result around the fixed points and then taking the limit @xmath we
obtain precisely the jumps of eqs. ( 2.6 )-( 2.1.2 ). If instead we take
this limit directly in eq. ( 2.29 ), we immediately see that this
equation in the bulk coincides with eq. ( 2.12 ), as expected.

To summarize, when going from a smooth to a discontinuous description of
the same physical system, singular terms encoding the informations on
the discontinuities of fields are generated in the lagrangian.
Conversely, when localized terms for bulk fields are present in the 5D
lagrangian, as for many phenomenological models currently discussed in
the literature, the field variables are affected by discontinuities.
These can be derived by analyzing the regularized equation of motion and
can be crucial to discuss important physical properties of the system,
such as its mass spectrum. In some case we can find a field redefinition
that eliminate the discontinuities and provide a smooth description of
the system. In section 2.3 we will explain in which cases it is possible
to find a field redefinition that completely reabsorbs the localized
mass term or, in other terms, which kind of masses can be ascribed to a
generalized SS mechanism.

### 2.2 Generalized Boundary Conditions for Bosons

#### 2.2.1 Boundary Conditions for Bosonic Fields on @xmath

In strict analogy with previous sections, we perform here the discussion
of the bosonic case, stressing its peculiarities with respect to the
fermionic case. As before, we begin by considering a generic 5D theory
compactified on the orbifold @xmath . We introduce a set of @xmath real
5D bosonic fields @xmath , which we classify in representations of the
4D Lorentz group. We define the @xmath transformations of the fields by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constant orthogonal matrices and @xmath has
the property @xmath . Also in this case we can choose a basis in which
@xmath is diagonal.

We look for boundary conditions on the fields @xmath and their
derivatives, in the general class

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are constant @xmath matrices and @xmath and @xmath are
defined in section 2.1.1 . We observe that eq. ( 2.2.1 ) imply a
specific form for the matrix @xmath in ( 2.31 ). For the time being we
keep a generic expression for @xmath , as well as for @xmath . The
reason for which we consider also the derivatives of @xmath will be
clear in a while.

We will now constrain the matrices @xmath by imposing certain
consistency requirements on our theory. The spectrum of the theory is
determined by the eigenmodes of the differential operator @xmath , which
we require to be self-adjoint with respect to the scalar product defined
in eq. ( 2.3 ), where now @xmath and @xmath are real scalar fields and
@xmath must be converted into @xmath . If we consider the matrix element
@xmath and we perform a partial integration we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath . Necessary and sufficient conditions for the
self-adjointness of the operator @xmath are that the three square
brackets vanish and the domain of the operator @xmath coincide with the
domain of its adjoint. In other words, we should impose conditions on
@xmath and its first derivative in such a way that the vanishing of the
unwanted contributions implies precisely the same conditions on @xmath
and its first derivative.

It is easy to show that, in the class of boundary conditions ( 2.31 ),
this happens when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the symplectic form in the space @xmath . Eq. ( 2.33 )
restricts @xmath in the symplectic group @xmath . The simplest
possibility is offered by @xmath , for @xmath . In this case @xmath ,
the fields are periodic and continuous across the orbifold fixed points.
When @xmath , the field variables are not periodic and we have a twist.
Such boundary conditions are characteristic of the conventional SS
mechanism. When @xmath or @xmath differs from unity, the fields or their
derivatives are not continuous across the fixed points and we have
jumps. Therefore, in close analogy with the fermionic case, we find that
the boundary conditions for bosons allow for both twist and jumps. At
variance with the fermionic case, twist and jumps can also affect the
first derivative of the field variables. Moreover, the self-adjointness
alone does not forbid boundary conditions that mix the fields and their
@xmath -derivatives. For instance, if we have a single real scalar field
@xmath , and we parametrize the generic @xmath matrix @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

the condition ( 2.33 ) reduces to @xmath , as expected since @xmath and
@xmath are isomorphic. If @xmath and @xmath are not both vanishing, the
boundary conditions will mix @xmath and @xmath .

While the field variables and their first derivatives may have twist and
jumps, we should require that physical quantities remain periodic and
continuous across the orbifold fixed points. This poses a further
restriction on the matrices @xmath . If the theory is invariant under
global transformations of a group G, we can satisfy this requirement by
asking that the matrices @xmath are in a @xmath -dimensional
representation of G. The choice of scalar product made in ( 2.3 ) does
not allow to consider symmetry transformations of the 5D theory that mix
fields and @xmath -derivatives. Moreover, it is not restrictive to
consider orthogonal representations of G on the space of real fields
@xmath . In this case, the solution to eq. ( 2.33 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is in an orthogonal @xmath -dimensional representation of
G.

Finally, we should take into account consistency conditions among the
twist, the jumps and the orbifold projection. These are identical to the
ones discussed for fermions and are reported here only for completeness:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Also in this case the parameters of @xmath can be discrete or
continuous, depending on the commutators @xmath and @xmath .

In summary, the allowed boundary conditions on @xmath are specified in
eq. ( 2.31 ), with the matrices @xmath satisfying the requirements (
2.35 )-( 2.2.1 ).

#### 2.2.2 One Scalar Field

It is instructive to analyze in detail the case of a single massless
scalar field @xmath , of definite parity, @xmath to begin with. We start
by writing the equation of motion for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

in each region @xmath of the real line, where @xmath and @xmath . We
have defined the mass @xmath through the 4D equation @xmath . The
solutions of these equations can be glued by exploiting the boundary
conditions @xmath and @xmath , imposed at @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Finally, the spectrum and the eigenfunctions are obtained
by requiring that the solutions have the twist described by @xmath .

The equation of motion remains invariant if we multiply @xmath by @xmath
, so that the group G of global symmetries is a parity (to be
distinguished from the orbifold symmetry @xmath that acts also on the
@xmath coordinate). We have @xmath . For instance, we are allowed to
consider either periodic or anti-periodic fields. We start by analyzing
the case of no jumps, @xmath . The solutions of the equations of motion,
up to an arbitrary @xmath -dependent factor, are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a non-negative integer. It is interesting to compare the
result for @xmath with that obtained by assuming a jump in @xmath :
@xmath . We find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the sign function on @xmath .

The eigenfunctions ( 2.38 ) and ( 2.39 ) for @xmath are compared in the
third row of fig. 2.3 . We observe that @xmath implies @xmath at @xmath
, that is Neumann boundary conditions. Instead, if we take @xmath , the
even field @xmath should vanish at @xmath as for a Dirichelet boundary
condition, and this produces a cusp at @xmath . Despite this difference,
the two eigenfunctions are closely related. If compared in the region
@xmath , they look the same, up to an exchange between the two walls at
@xmath and @xmath . They both vanish at one of the two walls and they
have the same non-vanishing value at the other wall, with the same
profile in between. Indeed, the two cases are related by a coordinate
transformation and a field redefinition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is even, continuous and anti-periodic, it is easy to see that
the function @xmath defined in ( 2.40 ) is even, periodic and has a cusp
in @xmath , where it vanishes. The equations of motion are not affected
by the translation @xmath , which simply exchanges the boundary
conditions at @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, the physical properties of a
quantum mechanical system are invariant under a local field
redefinition. Therefore the two systems related by eq. ( 2.40 ) are
equivalent.

In table 2.1 we collect spectrum and eigenvalues for all possible cases
that are allowed by an even or odd field @xmath . We have found it
useful to express the solutions in terms of the sign function, which
specifies the singularities of the system. Indeed, @xmath is singular in
@xmath , @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in all @xmath . The correct parity
of the solutions is guaranteed by the properties of @xmath . Also the
periodicity can be easily determined from the fact that @xmath is
periodic, whereas @xmath and @xmath are anti-periodic.

There are three types of spectra: first, the ordinary KK tower @xmath
that includes a zero mode; second, an identical spectrum with the
absence of the zero mode and, finally, the KK tower shifted by @xmath .
All systems that possess the same spectrum can be related by field
redefinitions that can be easily derived from table 2.1. The only
non-trivial transformation, applying only to the case of semi-integer
spectrum, is the one in ( 2.40 ). For semi-integer spectrum, all @xmath
@xmath are related. For integer and non-negative spectrum, we have maps
among @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . For strictly positive
integer spectrum, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are related.
Thanks to these relations, we can always go from a description in terms
of discontinuous field variables to a descriptions by the smooth fields
@xmath or @xmath . Also, as can be seen from figs. 2.3 and 2.4 , the
behavior in the vicinity of the fixed points is the same for all the
eigenfunctions representing the same type of spectrum, up to a possible
exchange between the two fixed points. In the presence of a single real
field @xmath the parity @xmath does not seem to have an absolute
physical meaning. We find that there are equivalent physical systems
with opposite @xmath parities for @xmath .

In conclusion, there are less physically inequivalent systems than
independent boundary conditions. There are different boundary conditions
that lead to the same spectrum and the corresponding systems are related
by field redefinitions. The parameter @xmath is equal in equivalent
systems. When @xmath , @xmath is integer whereas for @xmath , @xmath is
semi-integer.

#### 2.2.3 More Scalar Fields

Several scalar fields lead to the possibility of exploiting continuous
global symmetries to characterize boundary conditions. As an example, we
consider here the case of a 5D complex scalar field @xmath . Its
equation of motion:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

is invariant under global O(2) transformations, acting on @xmath .

We first discuss the case where @xmath in the basis @xmath . In this
case we can take:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a symmetry of the theory and satisfies ( 2.2.1 ). In general,
we can choose three independent angles @xmath for the twist and the two
jumps at @xmath respectively. The solution of the equation of motion
subjected to these boundary conditions can be obtained by the same
method used in section 2.2.2 . We find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the function introduced in section 2.1.2 . The presence of
this function explains why the shift of the spectrum with respect to the
KK levels is given by @xmath and not by @xmath as in the conventional SS
mechanism.

When @xmath , the masses are @xmath and we can order all massive modes
in pairs. Indeed each physical non-vanishing mass @xmath @xmath
corresponds to two independent eigenfunctions. For instance, when @xmath
, we have @xmath . This infinite series of degenerate 4D doublets can be
interpreted as a consequence of the @xmath symmetry, which is unbroken.
A non-vanishing shift of the KK levels induces an explicit breaking of
the @xmath symmetry. The order parameter is @xmath @xmath . When @xmath
is non-vanishing (and not a multiple of @xmath ) the eigenfunctions of
the massive modes are no longer paired, each of them corresponding now
to a different physical mass. As for the case of a single real field,
different boundary conditions may lead to the same spectrum. For
instance, it is possible that @xmath remains unbroken, despite the
existence of non-trivial boundary conditions, if twist and jumps are
such that the combination @xmath vanishes mod @xmath . Moreover,
starting from a generic system with both twist @xmath and jumps @xmath
different from zero, we can always move to an equivalent ‘smooth’ theory
where the jumps vanish and the twist @xmath of the new scalar field
@xmath is given by @xmath . The map between the two systems is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The multiplicative factor @xmath removes the discontinuities from @xmath
and add a twist @xmath to the wave function.

Another interesting case is that of @xmath proportional to the identity.
If we assign the same @xmath parity to the real components @xmath , then
@xmath commutes with @xmath and the condition ( 2.2.1 ) implies that its
eigenvalues are @xmath . If also @xmath , then it is not restrictive to
go to a field basis where all @xmath are diagonal, with elements @xmath
. This would lead to a discussion qualitatively close to that of section
2.2.2 , where twist and jumps were quantized. A new feature occurs if
@xmath . Consider as an example @xmath in the basis @xmath . A
consistent choice for @xmath and @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that the @xmath matrices @xmath and @xmath square to 1, as
required by the condition ( 2.2.1 ). The solutions of the equations of
motion are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in @xmath we have to set @xmath . It is interesting to note that
this choice of boundary conditions leads to a theory that is physically
equivalent to that studied at the beginning of this section, where the
fields @xmath and @xmath had opposite parity. We can go back to that
system and consider the case of periodic fields with a jump at @xmath :
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath as in ( 2.42 ) with @xmath . If we now
perform the field redefinition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

the new field variables are both even and periodic and their jumps are
those given in ( 2.46 ). It is easy to see that also the solutions (
2.43 ) are mapped into ( 2.2.3 ). Moreover, it will be now possible to
describe the theory defined by the jumps ( 2.46 ) in terms of smooth
field variables, characterized by a certain twist.

This correspondence provides another example of equivalent systems,
despite a different assignment of the orbifold parity. The presence of
discontinuous fields is a generic feature of field theories on
orbifolds. The present discussion suggests that at least in some cases
these discontinuities may not have any physical significance, being only
related to a particular and not compelling choice of field variables.

#### 2.2.4 Brane Action for Bosonic System

In the previous sections we showed the equivalence between bosonic
systems characterized by discontinuous fields and ‘smooth’ systems in
which fields are continuous but twisted. For each pair of systems
characterized by the same mass spectrum we were able to find a local
field redefinition, plus a possible discrete translation, mapping the
mass eigenfunctions of one system into those of the other system. Here
we would like to further explore the relation between smooth and
discontinuous systems by showing that the field discontinuities are
strictly related to lagrangian terms localized at the fixed points.

We begin by discussing the case of one real scalar field. To fix the
ideas we focus on the equivalence between the cases @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath of table 2.1. The other cases can be discussed along similar
lines. We denote by @xmath the continuous field @xmath with twist @xmath
and by @xmath the periodic field @xmath that has a jump @xmath . If we
start from the lagrangian @xmath for the boson @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we perform the field redefinition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain an expression in terms of discontinuous fields and their
derivatives, from which it is difficult to derive the correct equation
of motion for the system. Indeed the new lagrangian is highly singular
and the naive use of the variational principle would lead to
inconsistent results. In order to avoid these problems we regularize
@xmath by means of a smooth function @xmath ( @xmath ) which reproduces
@xmath in the limit @xmath . By performing the substitution:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the field @xmath is periodic, we can work in the interval @xmath .
In the limit @xmath , we find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action contains quadratic terms for the field @xmath that are
localized at @xmath . However these terms are quite singular and,
strictly speaking, are mathematically ill-defined even as distributions.
For this reason we derive the equation of motion for @xmath using the
regularized action, eq. ( 2.53 ), from which we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we identified @xmath with @xmath . The term in brackets should
vanish everywhere, since it is continuous and we can choose @xmath
different from zero everywhere except at one point between 0 and @xmath
. If we finally take the limit @xmath we obtain the equation of motion
for the discontinuous fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Away from the point @xmath this equation reduces to the equation of
motion for continuous fields: terms with delta functions disappear and
we can divide by @xmath . We obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, by integrating eq. ( 2.56 ) and its primitive around @xmath ,
we find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are just the expected jumps.

There is another possibility to derive the correct equation of motion
from a singular action, beyond that of adopting a convenient
regularization. We illustrate this procedure in the case of one complex
scalar field @xmath . The basic idea is to use a set of field variables
such that their infinitesimal variations, implied by the action
principle, are continuous functions of @xmath . The action principle
requires that the variation of the action @xmath , assumed to be a
smooth functional of @xmath and @xmath , vanishes for infinitesimal
variations of the fields from the classical trajectory:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the system is described by discontinuous fields, in general we cannot
demonstrate that @xmath vanishes at the singular points, since
multiplication/division by discontinuous functions like @xmath is known
to produce inequivalent equalities. An exception is the case of fields
whose generic variation @xmath is a continuous function, despite the
discontinuities of @xmath . In this case the action principle leads
directly to the usual equation of motion.

We consider as an example the case discussed at the beginning of section
2.2.3 . Real and imaginary components of @xmath are respectively even
and odd functions of @xmath and we have boundary conditions specified by
the matrices @xmath in eq. ( 2.42 ). In particular, the discontinuities
of @xmath @xmath and its @xmath -derivative across 0 and @xmath are
given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for @xmath or @xmath , @xmath denotes @xmath or
@xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this we see that a generic variation of @xmath is discontinuous.
The jump of @xmath across @xmath or @xmath is proportional to the value
of @xmath at that point, which in general is not zero. However we can
move to a new set of real fields @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose discontinuities from eq. ( 2.60 ) read:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The discontinuity of @xmath at each fixed point is a constant,
independent from the value of @xmath at that point. As a consequence,
the infinitesimal variation @xmath relevant to the action principle is
continuous everywhere, including the points @xmath and @xmath . We can
derive the action for @xmath , by starting from the lagrangian expressed
in terms of @xmath , where the function @xmath has been defined in eq. (
2.23 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of @xmath and @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The lagrangian now contains singular terms, localized at the fixed
points. The equations of motions, derived from the variational
principle, read:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the bulk @xmath is constant and drops from the previous equations,
which then become identical to the equations for the continuous field
@xmath , in polar coordinates. Moreover, by integrating eq. ( 2.66 )
around the fixed points and by recalling the properties of the function
@xmath , we reproduce precisely the jumps of eq. ( 2.63 ). The same
results can be obtained by introducing a regularization for @xmath .

To summarize, when going from a smooth to a discontinuous description of
the same physical system, singular terms are generated in the
lagrangian. In our examples we have quadratic terms localized at the
orbifold fixed point which, despite their highly singular behaviour, are
necessary for a consistent description of the system. Indeed they encode
the discontinuities of the adopted field variables which can be
reproduced via the classical equation of motion after appropriate
regularization or through a careful application of the standard
variational principle. Conversely, when localized terms for bulk fields
are present in the 5D lagrangian, as for many phenomenological models
currently discussed in the literature, the field variables are affected
by discontinuities. These can be derived by analyzing the regularized
equation of motion and can be crucial to discuss important physical
properties of the system, such as its mass spectrum. In some case we can
find a field redefinition that eliminate the discontinuities and provide
a smooth description of the system. It would be nice to know precisely
when we can perform the redefinition that completely eliminate the
localized terms and when they cannot be removed. In the next section we
will study this issue.

### 2.3 Equivalent Effective Lagrangians

In previous sections we showed that different effective lagrangians can
describe the same physical system. This is due to the equivalence
between the SS twist and the generalized boundary conditions described
in detail in sections 2.1.1 and 2.2.1 , which are associated to
localized mass terms. In this section we find out the class of
equivalence of the lagrangians associated to the same spectrum and we
classify the conditions the 5D mass terms should satisfy in order to be
ascribed to a SS twist. We illustrate this in detail only for fermions;
analogous considerations also apply to bosons.

#### 2.3.1 Generation of 5D Mass Terms for Periodic Fields

We consider the lagrangian of eq. ( 2.10 ) with twisted periodicity
conditions ( 2.15 )-( 2.16 ). The solution to the equation of motion
with these boundary conditions is displayed in eqs. ( 2.17 )-( 2.19 ).
We now move to a class of equivalent descriptions of this system
exploiting the fact that S-matrix elements do not change if we perform a
local and non-singular field redefinition. We replace the twisted fields
@xmath by periodic ones @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath must then be a @xmath matrix satisfying {subequations}

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

as can be immediately checked from eqs. ( 2.15 ) and ( 2.67 ). Besides
condition ( 2.68 ), we will impose for our convenience two additional
constraints on the matrix @xmath . One is {subequations}

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

which guarantees that the redefinition is non-singular, and that the
kinetic terms for @xmath remain canonical. We also require that the new
fields @xmath and @xmath have the same parities as the original ones
@xmath and @xmath : {subequations}

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that eq. ( 2.71 ) implies @xmath , with @xmath .

Before exploring the effects of the field redefinition of eq. ( 2.67 ),
we observe that the solution to the conditions ( 2.67 ) is by no means
unique. Starting from any given solution @xmath , a new set of solutions
@xmath can be generated via matrix multiplication:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

provided that the following conditions are satisfied: {subequations}

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are now ready to explore the effects of the field redefinition of
eq. ( 2.67 ). The lagrangian @xmath , expressed in terms of the periodic
field @xmath , describes exactly the same physics as before, but its
form is now different:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.76)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the mass terms @xmath @xmath are the coefficients of the
Maurer-Cartan form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

and satisfy: {subequations}

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Properties ( 2.78 )-( 2.80 ) are in one-to-one correspondence with
conditions ( 2.68 )-( 2.71 ) on @xmath . Eq. ( 2.81 ) is related with
eq. ( 2.68 ), and prescribes how the information on the twist of the
original fields @xmath is encoded in the new lagrangian. The symbols
@xmath and @xmath denote inequivalent definitions of path-ordering,
specified in appendix B with some useful properties and the proof of
eq. ( 2.81 ). Notice that, by taking the trace of both members in eq. (
2.81 ), we obtain a relation between the Wilson loop and the twist
parameter @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.82)
  -- -- -- --------

Notice also that, because of the freedom of performing global @xmath
transformations with the constant matrix @xmath , which are invariances
of the lagrangian, different values of the twist @xmath with the same
value of @xmath correspond to physically equivalent descriptions.

The mass terms in eq. ( 2.76 ) are of three different types, associated
with the three possible bilinears @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Because
of eqs. ( 2.77 ), they do not correspond to the most general set of
@xmath -dependent mass terms allowed by 4D Lorentz invariance, which
would be characterized by three independent complex functions. The rôle
of the conditions ( 2.77 ) is to guarantee the equivalence between the
descriptions on the two sides of eq. ( 2.76 ).

Also the converse is true. Given a lagrangian such as the one on the
right-hand side of eq. ( 2.76 ), expressed in terms of periodic fields
@xmath @xmath and with mass terms satisfying eqs. ( 2.77 ), we can move
to the equivalent lagrangian of eq. ( 2.10 ), where all mass terms have
been removed and the fields satisfy the periodicity conditions of eq. (
2.15 ), by performing the field redefinition of eq. ( 2.67 ). As shown
in appendix B , @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

For any @xmath ( @xmath ), conditions ( 2.67 ) are satisfied with @xmath
given by eq. ( 2.81 ). The arbitrariness in @xmath reflects the fact
that physically distinct theories are characterized by @xmath , not by
@xmath .

Up to now we have considered only free theories. What happens if we turn
on interactions in the lagrangian ( 2.10 )? First of all we ask that the
interaction terms are invariant under @xmath . If these terms do not
contains @xmath -derivatives, they remain unchanged after the
redefinition ( 2.67 ), so eq. ( 2.76 ) still holds true. If instead
terms involving @xmath are present, they will generate, after the field
redefinition, additional but controllable contributions to the right
hand side of eq. ( 2.76 ). Anyway, since the equivalence between two
lagrangians related by a local field redefinition holds irrespectively
of the explicit form assumed by the interaction terms, the two
descriptions of the system will still be equivalent.

#### 2.3.2 Examples and Localization of 5D Mass Terms

From the discussion of the previous section, it is clear that mass
‘profiles’ @xmath for periodic fields, of the type specified in eq. (
2.77 ), do not have an absolute physical meaning. They can be eliminated
from the lagrangian and replaced by a twist, the two descriptions being
completely equivalent. Moreover, all lagrangians with the same
interaction terms and mass profiles corresponding to the same twist
@xmath , as computed from eq. ( 2.81 ), are just different equivalent
descriptions of the same physics. Indeed, suppose that @xmath and @xmath
are two such lagrangians, and call @xmath @xmath the local redefinitions
mapping @xmath into the lagrangian @xmath for the twisted, massless 5D
fields @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are related by the local
non-singular field redefinition @xmath . This shows that, in the class
of interacting models under consideration, what matters is the twist
@xmath and not the specific form of the mass terms @xmath enjoying the
properties ( 2.77 ) ⁴ ⁴ 4 Actually, in view of the observations after
eqs. ( 2.82 ) and ( 2.83 ), what really matters is @xmath . . We can
make use of this freedom to show that @xmath can be localized at the
fixed points @xmath and/or @xmath , without affecting the physical
properties of the theory.

As an example, we consider the simple case in which the twist parameter
is just

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then a frequently used solution to eq. ( 2.67 ), for the twist specified
by eq. ( 2.84 ), is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

the symbol ‘ @xmath ’ standing for ‘ordinary’ . Starting from the
lagrangian @xmath for the periodic fields @xmath , defined by @xmath via
the redefinition of eq. ( 2.67 ), and performing the standard Fourier
decomposition of the 5D fields into 4D modes, we can immediately check
that the 4D mass eigenvalues and eigenfunctions are indeed given by
eqs. ( 2.17 )-( 2.19 ), with @xmath . Applying eq. ( 2.77 ) to @xmath ,
we find the constant mass profile:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we can check that, in agreement with eq. ( 2.82 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now move to a more general solution of eqs. ( 2.67 ) and ( 2.84 ),
where, in a basis of periodic fields, the system is described by a
different lagrangian @xmath (the symbol ‘ @xmath ’ stands for
‘generalized’ ). @xmath is still of the general form of eq. ( 2.76 ),
including interaction terms, but now:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is an otherwise arbitrary real, periodic, even function of
@xmath , with the property that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

As long as the above properties are satisfied, the two lagrangians
@xmath and @xmath are physically equivalent. Two representative and
equivalent choices of @xmath are illustrated in fig. 2.5 :

the dashed line shows a mild (gaussian) localization around the orbifold
fixed points, the solid line a strong localization. The interactions
between @xmath and other fields are not determined by the shapes of the
fermion eigenmodes and, indirectly, by the profile of @xmath . Neither
the mass spectrum, nor the interactions depend on shapes, which are an
artifact of the choice of field variables. As long as the twist is kept
fixed, shapes can be arbitrarily deformed along @xmath , without
changing the physics.

A possible special choice for @xmath is the singular limit:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

where what we actually mean is a suitably regularized version of the
distribution in eq. ( 2.90 ). This description is apparently quite
remote from the ‘ordinary’ one. The mass terms vanish everywhere but at
the orbifold fixed points, where there are localized contributions to
@xmath . The redefinitions bringing from the massive periodic fields of
@xmath and @xmath to the corresponding massless twisted 5D fields are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given by eq. ( 2.85 ) and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the step function introduced in section 2.1.2 . The local
field redefinition that relates the two lagrangians @xmath and @xmath
is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that the periodic fields @xmath are not smooth but only piecewise
smooth. This can be checked either by integrating the equations of
motion for @xmath , derived from @xmath , in a small region around the
fixed points, or by making use of the field redefinition in eq. ( 2.93
), recalling that @xmath and @xmath are smooth while @xmath is not. We
find that the fields @xmath have cusps and discontinuities described by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the jumps of the field variables are parametrized by @xmath .

Another simple but instructive example corresponds to a lagrangian for
periodic fields of the form in eq. ( 2.76 ), where now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is an otherwise arbitrary real, odd, periodic function of
@xmath , as prescribed by eqs. ( 2.78 )-( 2.80 ). Notice that, for any
such function, eq. ( 2.82 ) gives always @xmath , since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, real, periodic, odd mass profiles can be completely
removed by a field redefinition without introducing a non-trivial twist.
Such a field redefinition corresponds to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

Some representative profiles for @xmath are exhibited in fig. 2.6 .
Notice that no constant @xmath is allowed by eqs. ( 2.78 )-( 2.80 ), and
also a @xmath completely localized at @xmath and/or @xmath is forbidden.
An allowed possibility is a piecewise constant @xmath , for example:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the periodic sign function and @xmath a real constant
with the dimension of a mass.

### 2.4 Application to Gauge Symmetry Breaking

The generalized boundary conditions discussed in previous sections can
be exploited to spontaneously break the gauge invariance of a 5D system.
This is well-known as far as the twist is concerned, as described in
section 1.2.2 . A non-trivial twist induces a shift in the KK levels
which lifts the zero modes of the gauge vector bosons: from a 4D point
of view the gauge symmetry is thus broken. As we have seen in section
2.2 , also the discontinuities of the fields and their first derivatives
have a similar effect on the spectrum and we may expect that, in the
context of a gauge theory, they lead to spontaneous breaking of the 4D
gauge invariance. To analyze these aspects, we focus on a 5D gauge
theory defined on our orbifold and based on the gauge group SU(2).

Not all @xmath parity assignments for the gauge fields @xmath @xmath ,
@xmath are now possible. The gauge invariance imposes several
restrictions. First of all, the action of @xmath on the 4D vector bosons
@xmath should be compatible with the algebra of gauge group. In other
words, we should embed @xmath into the automorphism algebra of the gauge
group [ 29 ] . For SU(2) this leaves two possibilities: either all
@xmath are even, or two of them are odd and one is even. Furthermore, a
well-defined parity for the field strength implies that the parity of
@xmath should be opposite to that of @xmath . In the basis @xmath , up
to a re-labeling of the three gauge fields, we can consider:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The boundary conditions on the @xmath are specified by @xmath matrices
@xmath that satisfy the consistency relation ( 2.2.1 ) and leave the
SU(2) algebra invariant. This last requirement can be fulfilled by
requiring that @xmath is an SU(2) global transformation that acts on
@xmath in the adjoint representation. Finally, to preserve gauge
invariance, the boundary conditions on the scalar fields @xmath should
be the same as those on the corresponding 4D vector bosons. This can be
seen by asking that the various components of the field strength @xmath
possess well-defined boundary conditions.

For instance, in the case (A) where all fields @xmath have even @xmath
parity, a consistent assignment is:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the gauge @xmath , the 5D equations of motion read:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The solutions with the appropriate boundary conditions are:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are non-negative integers. The only zero mode of the system
is @xmath and, from a 4D point of view the original gauge symmetry is
broken down to the U(1) associated to this massless gauge vector boson.
The breaking of the 5D SU(2) gauge symmetry is spontaneous and each mode
in ( 2.102 ), but @xmath , becomes massive via a Higgs mechanism. The
unphysical Goldstone bosons are the modes of the fields @xmath , which
are all absorbed by the corresponding massive vector bosons. On the wall
at @xmath all the gauge fields and the parameters of the gauge
transformations are non-vanishing. Here all the constraints coming from
the full 5D gauge invariance are effective. On the contrary on the wall
at @xmath , only @xmath and the corresponding gauge parameter are
different from zero. Therefore the effective symmetry at the fixed point
@xmath is the U(1) related to the 4D gauge boson @xmath . This kind of
setup where the gauge symmetry is broken by twisted orbifold boundary
conditions and the two fixed points are characterized by two different
effective 4D symmetries has recently received lot of attention, for its
successful application in the context of GUTs (see sections 1.2.2 ).

We have just shown how a gauge symmetry can be broken by means of
twisted fields. It is interesting to note that the same physical system
can be described by using periodic field variables, with discontinuities
at the fixed points. This is achieved, for instance, by means of the
boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The solutions to the equations of motion ( 2.101 ) are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are non-negative integers. The new solutions @xmath have
cusps at @xmath (mod @xmath ), as the profiles denoted by @xmath in fig.
2.3 . The two descriptions are related by the field redefinition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is a local transformation. As already stressed, this assures that
the description in terms of smooth twisted fields is physically
equivalent to the one with periodic and discontinuous fields.

In the previous example the boundary conditions @xmath commute among
themselves and with the parity @xmath . As a consequence the rank of the
gauge group SU(2) is conserved in the symmetry breaking. We can lower
the rank by assuming @xmath . As an example, we consider the parity (B)
of eq. ( 2.4 ) and boundary conditions described by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the basis @xmath . We allow, at the same time, for a twist @xmath and
two jumps @xmath . The matrices @xmath are block diagonal and do not mix
the index 2 with the indices (1,3). Thus the boundary conditions are
trivial for the odd field @xmath and its derivative. Non-trivial
boundary conditions involve the fields @xmath and @xmath . By solving
the equations ( 2.101 ), we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.107)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath is a positive integer and the function @xmath has
been defined in section 2.1.2 . If @xmath (mod @xmath ), we have a zero
mode @xmath and the gauge symmetry is spontaneously broken down to U(1),
as in the previously discussed examples. When @xmath (mod @xmath ),
there are no zero modes and SU(2) is completely broken. We can go
continuously from this phase to the phase where a U(1) survives, by
changing the twist and/or the jump parameters. We may thus have a
situation where U(1) is broken by a very small amount, compared to the
scale @xmath that characterizes the SU(2) breaking. The U(1) breaking
order parameter is the combination @xmath . The same physical system is
described by a double infinity of boundary conditions, those that
reproduce the same order parameter. All these descriptions are
equivalent and are related by field redefinitions. In the class of all
equivalent theories one of them is described by continuous fields @xmath
. We go from the generic theory described in terms of @xmath to that
characterized by @xmath , via the field transformation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In section 2.2.4 we learned that discontinuous fields are associated to
localized lagrangian terms. We would like to derive these terms also in
this case with gauge fields. The main difference with respect to the
free theory examples discussed in section 2.2.4 is that now the
lagrangian contains derivative interactions among the gauge bosons. In
principle these could lead to localized interaction terms, that would
provide a non-trivial extension of the framework considered up to now.
To investigate this point we start from the 5D SU(2) Yang-Mills theory
defined by the parity (A) of eq. ( 2.4 ) and by the boundary conditions
of eq. ( 2.100 ). No jumps are present and the overall lagrangian is
given only by the ‘bulk’ term:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is particularly convenient to discuss the physics in the unitary
gauge, where all the would-be Goldstone bosons, eaten up by the massive
KK modes, vanish:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this gauge @xmath and the lagrangian ( 2.109 ) reads:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To discuss the case of discontinuous gauge vector bosons, such as those
associated to boundary conditions ( 2.103 ), we can simply perform the
field redefinition:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the function @xmath represents a regularized version of @xmath .
Such redefinition maps the twisted, smooth fields obeying ( 2.100 ) into
periodic variables, discontinuous at @xmath , as specified in ( 2.103 ).
Notice that this redefinition does not change the gauge condition (
2.110 ). If we plug the transformation ( 2.112 ) into the lagrangian (
2.111 ), we obtain the lagrangian for the system characterized by
discontinuous fields. We stress that, since this field redefinition is
local, the physics remains the same: the two systems are completely
equivalent. The S-matrix elements computed with the two lagrangians are
identical and, of course, this equivalence includes the non-trivial
non-abelian interactions. Our aim here is only to understand how the
physics, in particular the non-abelian interactions, are described by
the new, discontinuous variables. From eq. ( 2.111 ) we can already
conclude that no localized non-abelian interaction terms arise from the
field redefinition ( 2.112 ), in the unitary gauge. Indeed, the only
term containing a @xmath derivative is quadratic, and, after the
substitution ( 2.112 ), we will obtain terms analogous to those
discussed in ( 2.53 ) for the case of a single scalar field. We find:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.113)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath are the structure constants of SU(2) and the
indices @xmath run over 1,2. In the limit @xmath , the non-abelian
interactions are formally unchanged, whereas the last line represents a
set of localized quadratic terms. As discussed in the case of a real
scalar field, such terms guarantee, via the equations of motion, that
the fields obey the new boundary conditions ( 2.103 ). In a general
gauge, interaction terms localized at @xmath are present, but they
involve non-physical would-be Goldstone bosons.

After having studied the case of @xmath , we now briefly apply our
considerations to a realistic model. We consider the GUT proposed by
Kawamura in ref. [ 19 ] and described in section 1.2.2 and we
re-interpret this model with generalized boundary conditions. We choose
parity assignments identical to the original ones, but, instead of a
twist, we require that some fields jump in @xmath . Among gauge fields
only the vector bosons of the coset @xmath jump. In table 2.2 boundary
conditions, eigenfunctions and eigenvalues for both the original model
and for our framework are shown. We can observe that the spectra are the
same for all fields in both cases, while eigenfunctions are identical
for continuous fields but different for jumping fields. The relation
between the two sets of eigenfunctions is analogous to the one between
eq. ( 2.102 ) and eq. ( 2.4 ) and they are related by a local field
redefinition analogous to eq. ( 2.105 ).

Also in this case we can perform the field redefinition at the level of
the lagrangian in order to find the localized terms related to jumps in
this model. For simplicity we consider only the Yang-Mills term of the
lagrangian, neglecting both the supersymmetric part and the Higgs terms:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applying the usual field redefinition and choosing the unitary gauge,
this becomes:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.115)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath . Also in this example we obtain mass terms that are
localized where the fields have discontinuities.

### 2.5 Application to Supersymmetry Breaking

In this section we exploit the demonstrated equivalence between “twist
and jumps” to show how brane-induced SUSY breaking in 5D, which
reproduces the main features of gaugino condensation in M-theory, is
equivalent to SS SUSY breaking.

We consider pure 5D Poincaré supergravity in its on-shell formulation [
30 ] . The supergravity multiplet contains the fünfbein @xmath , the
gravitino @xmath and the graviphoton @xmath . The 5D bulk Lagrangian is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.116)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Here @xmath is the inverse reduced 5D Planck mass ( @xmath is the
compactification radius), @xmath is the 5D scalar curvature, @xmath ,
@xmath (where the latter are the components of the fünfbein with 4D
indices), @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This lagrangian is invariant
under appropriate SUSY transformations (see eq. (2.2) of ref. [ 28 ] ).

We work on the orbifold @xmath and we assume that our fields are
fluctuations of the background

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and all other background fields are assumed to vanish. We
define the action of the orbifold symmetry in such a way that the
action, the transformation laws and the background are all invariant.
Writing the spinors in the notation (A) of eq. ( 2.7 ), we assign even
@xmath -parity to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and odd @xmath -parity to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From a 4D point of view, the physical spectrum contains one massless
@xmath gravitational multiplet, with spins @xmath , built from the zero
modes of @xmath and @xmath ; one massless @xmath chiral multiplet, with
spins @xmath , composed of the zero modes of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
; and an infinite series of massive multiplets of @xmath supergravity,
with spins @xmath and squared masses

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The KK tower gains mass through an infinite series of Higgs and
super-Higgs effects, each occurring at its own mass level. The KK
gravitons and graviphotons gain mass by eating the Fourier modes of the
fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , while the massive gravitinos eat the
Fourier modes of the field @xmath . This is consistent with the fact
that the parameter of 5D SUSY, @xmath , has an infinite number of
Fourier modes. Each of the modes generates a SUSY; in the absence of
matter, all but one are spontaneously broken. The broken SUSYs implement
an infinite series of super-Higgs effects for the massive gravitinos.
The remaining SUSY is the @xmath of the 4D low-energy effective action.

We now introduce the brane action. Since we are not interested in the
brane dynamics, we imagine that the brane fields are integrated out,
leaving a constant superpotential vev on each brane. The action is:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.121)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are complex constants with the dimension of
@xmath which parametrize the vevs of the superpotentials. With a simple
modification of the bulk SUSY transformations the whole action @xmath is
invariant (for details see ref. [ 28 ] ).

The presence of these superpotential vevs induces SUSY breaking. In
section 4 of ref. [ 28 ] the symmetry breaking mechanism as well as the
super-Higgs effect are studied in details. Here we report only the
fundamental results. When @xmath SUSY is broken spontaneously: the
fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath is the KK index) are the
goldstinos absorbed by the gravitinos @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If we
move to the unitary gauge the goldstinos are eliminated from the
lagrangian. On the contrary, when @xmath SUSY is preserved and we are
left with a massless gravitino that indicates that @xmath SUSY is left
unbroken. The gravitino mass spectrum is the following:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can directly observe that when @xmath the gravitino masses are
shifted with respect to their SUSY partners and the lightest gravitino
has a non-vanishing mass. These facts show that SUSY is indeed
spontaneously broken.

In previous paragraphs we showed that localized superpotential vevs can
induce SUSY breaking. Here we would like to reproduce the same results
by means of a SS twist, working in the opposite direction with respect
to what done in section 2.4 for the Kawamura model.

We start from the lagrangian ( 2.116 ) for smooth fields @xmath . Since
it is invariant under the transformations of a global @xmath symmetry,
we can twist the periodicity conditions for the gravitino (now written
as in notation (B) of eq. ( 2.7 )):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The spectrum corresponding to these boundary conditions turns out to be:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that is the classical SS spectrum. We observe that if we choose @xmath
it coincides with the gravitino spectrum of eq. ( 2.122 ). Are the two
descriptions really equivalent? To prove this we perform the following
field redefinition:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the step function defined in eq. ( 2.23 ). It is
possible to check that the fields @xmath obey the following jump
conditions at orbifold fixed points:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

They also have a twist @xmath . If we choose once again @xmath they
become periodic, as in the framework of brane-induced SUSY breaking.

We perform now the field redefinition ( 2.126 ) in the bulk action and
we obtain:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath coincides with eq. ( 2.121 ). Starting from a bulk action
for continuous and twisted fields we arrived, simply performing a local
field redefinition, to a bulk-plus-brane action for periodic fields. The
localized terms can be interpreted as superpotential vevs, remnants of
some brane dynamics, which are responsible of SUSY breaking. Since the
two systems are equivalent, we can assert that brane-induced SUSY
breaking is equivalent to SS SUSY breaking.

In the previous discussion we have performed a particular field
redefinition, in order to prove the equivalence of the SS
compactification to the mechanism of ref. [ 28 ] . In section 2.3 we
showed that there is an infinity of equivalent lagrangians,
corresponding to the general field redefinition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are periodic fields and @xmath satisfies the conditions of
eqs. ( 2.67 ). If we perform this field redefinition in the bulk
lagrangian of eq. ( 2.116 ) we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath defined in section 2.3 . These infinite lagrangians describe
all the same physics of the brane-induced SUSY breaking scheme of ref. [
28 ] .

## Chapter 3 Flavour Symmetry Breaking

### 3.1 Flavour Physics in Four and More Dimensions

Since its foundation in the 1960’s, the SM had passed all experimental
tests and had been confirmed even in precision measurements, first in
the sector of gauge interactions and more recently in the quark sector.
Recent experiments on neutrino physics have clarified the picture in the
lepton sector, suggesting that neutrinos should be massive and that a
mixing should exist also for leptons. In spite of its success, also
guided form hints coming from neutrino physics, many physicists believe
that the SM does not represent the final theory, but rather that it has
to be considered as an effective theory originating from a more
fundamental one. For instance there is a little understanding, within
the SM, about the intrinsic physics of ESB, the hierarchy of charged
fermion mass spectra, the smallness of neutrino masses and the origin of
flavour mixing and CP violation. Moreover fermion replica are introduced
on the base of the experience, but the theory is not able to explain why
there are precisely three families.

The investigation of fermion masses and flavour mixing problems can be
traced back to the early 1970’s. Since then many approaches have been
developed, but our understanding of flavour physics still remains
unsatisfactory: in many cases the problem seems to be transferred from
one place to another, instead of being solved. The main idea developed
in most of the models is that of a flavour symmetry holding at some
energy scale. Certainly at our energies this symmetry must be broken,
but we do not know at which scale it is restored. If at this scale a
conventional 4D picture still holds, we can analyze the flavour problem
in the context of a local quantum field theory in four space-time
dimensions. Here the most powerful tool that we have to decipher the
observed hierarchy among the different masses and mixing angles is that
of spontaneously broken flavour symmetries [ 31 ] . In the idealized
limit of exact symmetry, only the heaviest fermions are massive: the top
quark and, maybe, the whole third family. The lightest fermions and the
small mixing angles originate from breaking effects. This beautiful idea
has been widely explored in many possible versions, with discrete or
continuous symmetries, global or local ones. A realistic description of
fermion masses in this framework typically requires either a large
number of parameters or a high degree of complexity and we are probably
unable to select the best model among the many existing ones. Moreover,
in 4D we have little hopes to understand why there are exactly three
generations.

It might be the case that at the energy scale characterizing flavour
physics a 4D description breaks down. For instance this happens in
superstring theories where the space-time is ten or eleven-dimensional.
In the 10D heterotic string six dimensions can be compactified on a
Calabi-Yau manifold [ 32 ] or on orbifolds and the flavour properties
are strictly related to the features of the compact space. In Calabi-Yau
compactifications the number of chiral generations is proportional to
the Euler characteristics of the manifold. In orbifold
compactifications, matter in the twisted sector is localized around the
orbifold fixed points and the Yukawa couplings, arising from world-sheet
instantons, have a natural geometrical interpretation [ 33 ] . Recently
string realizations where the light matter fields of the SM arises from
intersecting branes have been proposed. Also in this context the flavour
dynamics is controlled by topological properties of the geometrical
construction [ 34 ] , having no counterpart in 4D field theories.

Perhaps in the future the flavour mystery will be unraveled by string
theory, but in the meantime it would be interesting to explore, in a
pure field theoretical construction, the new possibilities offered by
extra space-like dimensions. For instance in orbifold compactifications
light 4D fermions may be either localized at the orbifold fixed points
or they may arise as zero modes of higher-dimensional spinors, with a
wave function suppressed by the square root of the volume of the compact
space. This led to several interesting proposals. It has been suggested
that the smallness of neutrino masses could be reproduced if the
left-handed active neutrinos sit at a fixed point and the right-handed
sterile partners live in the bulk of a large fifth dimension [ 35 ] . In
5D GUTs the heaviness of the third generation can be explained by
localizing the corresponding fields on a fixed point, whereas the
relative lightness of the first two generations as well as the breaking
of the unwanted mass relations can be obtained by using bulk fields [ 22
, 36 ] . Unfortunately in most models fermions are put “by hands” in the
bulk or on the branes, while we would like to have a criterion
suggesting their location.

A dynamical localization of chiral fermions is possible when a
higher-dimensional spinor interacts with a non-trivial background of
solitonic type. It has been known for a long time that this provides a
mechanism to obtain massless 4D chiral fermions [ 37 ] . As an example
we can consider a theory with one infinite extra dimension and we can
couple the fermion field @xmath to a scalar background @xmath . The
lagrangian of the system is:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , with @xmath 4D chiral fermions depending also on @xmath ,
@xmath is an @xmath -dependent scalar field and @xmath . The 4D zero
modes are the solution of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and they are precisely:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We immediately observe that @xmath cannot be a constant since in a non
compact space @xmath would not be normalizable. On the contrary if
@xmath is soliton-like we can obtain one normalizable chiral zero mode.
For example if @xmath , where @xmath is the sign function, and @xmath ,
only the left(right) mode will survive and moreover it will be localized
around @xmath that is the core of the topological defect:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Coupling a higher-dimensional spinor to a solitonic background is then a
method to get chiral fermions without introducing any orbifold
compactification. Moreover fermions are localized and we can decide the
localization point simply by adding a mass term to the lagrangian: if we
add @xmath the fermion will be concentrated around the point where
@xmath .

The dynamical localization of zero modes can be used to explain the
observed hierarchy in the fermion spectrum and the intergenerational
mixing. This has been suggested first in ref. [ 38 ] and then has been
extensively used in many following proposals [ 39 , 40 , 41 ] . In this
kind of models mass terms arise from the overlap among fermion and Higgs
wave functions. If we consider the simplest case of constant Higgs vev,
an ad hoc localization of fermions in the extra dimensions such as the
one proposed in ref. [ 39 ] (see fig. 3.1 ) can lead to the observed
mass spectrum.

In fact we see that the left and right wave functions of heavy quarks
have a greater overlap than the ones of light quarks, the latter being
located farer from each others in the extra dimension. If we relax the
hypothesis of constant Higgs we can also obtain the correct mass
spectrum with only three localization points, one per generation. For
instance this can be achieved with an exponentially decaying Higgs (see
fig. 3.2 ) [ 40 ] . In both cases there is an exponential mapping
between the parameters of the higher-dimensional theory and the 4D
masses and mixing angles, so that even with parameters of order one
large hierarchies are created. The number of parameters we need is not
lowered, but now they are all of the same magnitude.

In orbifold compactifications, solitons are simulated by scalar fields
with a non-trivial parity assignment that forbids constant non-vanishing
vevs. Under certain conditions, the energy is minimized by field
configurations with a non-trivial dependence upon the compact
coordinates [ 42 ] . As an example we consider the orbifold @xmath and
we choose @xmath even(odd) under @xmath and @xmath odd, from which it
follows that @xmath is even. If then we calculate the zero modes we see
from eq. ( 3.3 ) that only @xmath is acceptable: @xmath would be even,
contrary to the initial assignment. In particular if we choose @xmath ,
where @xmath is now the periodic sign function, we obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is localized at @xmath or at @xmath depending on the sign of
@xmath . Also in this case we have obtained a chiral localized zero
mode, but while with an infinite extra dimension it was the
normalization making the theory chiral, here it is a consequence of
orbifold projection.

In models like the ones described above, from one higher-dimensional
spinor we get one 4D chiral zero mode. Is it possible to obtain as many
chiral fermions as we want starting from one single higher-dimensional
spinor? The answer to this question was given already in the 80’s (see
refs. [ 37 ] ) when it had been shown that coupling a fermion to a
topologically non-trivial background could produce a number of zero
modes related to the topology of the background itself. Recently these
results have been re-derived in a more phenomenological context. For
instance, in the model studied in ref. [ 43 ] , the authors consider a
topological defect in two infinite extra dimensions whose core
corresponds to our 4D world. Chiral fermion zero modes are trapped in
the core by specific interactions with the vortex of winding number
@xmath which builds up the defect. In this case an index theorem
guarantees that the number of chiral zero modes is equal to the
topological charge @xmath . Starting from one single 6D spinor and
choosing @xmath they obtain three 4D fermion species with identical
gauge and global quantum number, which differ among themselves only in
the dependence on the extra coordinates. If we trap in the core the
Higgs field by coupling it to the vortex, his overlap with different
fermion functions generates the observed hierarchy of masses. To obtain
the correct mixing angles the model has to be complicated a little by
introducing another scalar field which, combined with the first one,
builds up a new defect. Although this model is not very simple, it gives
an answer both to the flavour problem and to the question of the number
of families. Recently it has been extended to the case of two extra
dimensions compactified on a sphere [ 44 ] . A compact extra space has
the advantage of localizing the gauge fields in a finite region.

Among the previously discussed models only the latter try to give an
explanation of the origin of fermion replica. Then one may think that
only with the introduction of a topological defect it is possible to
address both the issues. This is not true. It is well known in fact that
a spinor in @xmath dimensions have @xmath complex components, that means
it can contain many 4D replica. In 5D a fermion contains two 4D
components with opposite chirality; after projecting out the wrong
chirality, for example with an orbifold projection, we are left with a
single generation. One extra dimension is then not enough to our
purpose. In 6D fermions can be chiral and a 6D chiral fermion has the
same content of a 5D fermion. If we consider a 6D vector-like fermion
and we project out through orbifolding the unwanted chirality we are
left with two replica with the same chirality and the same quantum
numbers. In order to have a realistic model we need three families, so
also two extra dimensions are not enough. But in order to understand if
this kind of models can account both for the mass hierarchy and the
flavour mixing and how this can work, we can begin to explore this
simplified case. This has been done in ref. [ 45 ] where the authors
proposed a 6D toy model that we describe in the following section.

### 3.2 A Toy Model for Two Generations

#### 3.2.1 Localized Fermions

We consider two extra spatial dimensions compactified on the orbifold
@xmath , where @xmath is the torus defined by @xmath @xmath and @xmath
is the parity symmetry @xmath . As fundamental region of the orbifold we
can take, for instance, the rectangle @xmath , @xmath (see fig. 3.3 ).

There are four inequivalent fixed points under @xmath . In the chosen
fundamental region they can be identified with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath .

Since we want to reproduce the SM, we ask invariance under the gauge
group SU(3) @xmath SU(2) @xmath U(1). As discussed in the previous
section, we want to end with two fermion replica, so that we need to
start with vector-like fermions. To justify this choice we also ask
invariance under 6D parity. As a consequence, the lagrangian has 6D
vector-like fermions @xmath @xmath , one for each irreducible
representation of the SM, as summarized in table 3.1 . With this set of
fermion fields, our model is automatically free from 6D gauge anomalies.
As we will see later on, requiring exact 6D parity symmetry is too
strong an assumption to obtain a ‘realistic’ fermion spectrum. Although
eventually we will relax this assumption, for the time being we carry on
our construction by enforcing 6D parity invariance.

We have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath stands for the 6D kinetic term for the gauge vector bosons
@xmath @xmath of SU(3) @xmath SU(2) @xmath U(1), @xmath are the 6D gamma
matrices and @xmath denotes the appropriate fermion covariant
derivative. We recall that, up to the @xmath dependence, a 6D
vector-like spinor is equivalent to a pair of 4D Dirac spinors: @xmath .
Moreover each 6D fermion can be split into two chiralities @xmath ,
eigenstates of @xmath : @xmath . We choose a representation for the
Dirac matrices in 6D where @xmath (see appendix A ), where @xmath is the
third Pauli matrix, so that in terms of 4D chiralities we have: @xmath
and @xmath . Each component @xmath , @xmath transforms in the same way
under the gauge group. All fields are assumed to be periodic in @xmath
and @xmath . By inspecting the kinetic terms, we see that consistency
with the orbifold projection requires a non-trivial assignment of the
@xmath parity. We take @xmath even under @xmath and @xmath @xmath -odd.
In the fermion sector, @xmath and @xmath should have the same @xmath
parity, which should be opposite for @xmath and @xmath . We choose
@xmath equal to @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath . At this
level the zero modes are the gauge vector bosons of the SM and two
independent chiral fermions for each irreducible representation of the
SM, describing two massless generations. There are no gauge anomalies in
our model. Bulk anomalies are absent because the 6D fermions are
vector-like. There could be gauge 4D anomalies localized at the four
orbifold fixed points [ 46 , 47 ] . In our model based on @xmath , the
anomalies are the same at each fixed point and they actually vanish with
the quantum number assignments of table 3.1 ¹ ¹ 1 We have explicitly
checked this by adapting the analysis described in ref. [ 47 ] . .
Indeed they are proportional to the anomalies of the 4D zero modes,
which form two complete fermion generations, thus providing full 4D
anomaly cancellation. Fermion masses in 6D and Yukawa couplings do not
modify this conclusion.

In the absence of additional interactions, each zero mode is constant
with respect to @xmath and @xmath . Even by introducing a 6D (parity
invariant) Yukawa interaction between fermions and a Higgs electroweak
doublet, we do not break the 4D flavor symmetry, which is maximal. The
first step to distinguish the two fermion generations is to localize
them in different regions of the compact space. In our model this can be
done in a very simple way, by introducing a 6D fermion mass term

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where 6D parity requires @xmath to be real. This term is gauge invariant
and relates left and right 4D chiralities. Therefore the mass parameters
@xmath are required to be @xmath -odd and cannot be constant in the
whole @xmath plane. The simplest possible choice for @xmath is a
constant in the orbifold fundamental region ² ² 2 Of course there is not
a unique way of choosing the fundamental region and this leads to
several possible choices for @xmath . Although we are now regarding
@xmath as real parameters, in the next section we will also need results
for complex @xmath . For this reason we carry out our analysis directly
in the complex case. :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the (periodic) sign function. This function can be
regarded as a background field. In a more fundamental theory it could
arise dynamically from the vev of a gauge singlet scalar field, periodic
and @xmath -odd [ 42 ] . Then the parameters @xmath would essentially
represent Yukawa couplings. In our toy model we regard @xmath as an
external fixed background and neglect its dynamics.

The properties of the 4D light fermions are now described by the zero
modes of the 4D Dirac operator in the background proportional to @xmath
. These zero modes are the normalized solutions to the differential
equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with periodic boundary conditions for all fields and with the @xmath
parities defined above. Combining eqs. ( 3.9 ) together we obtain the
following second order partial differential equations, holding in the
whole @xmath plane:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an integer, @xmath and the sum over @xmath is
understood. The advantage of working with eqs. ( 3.10 ) is that in the
bulk these equations are decoupled and identical for all fields. Away
from the lines @xmath , @xmath , they read:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

with appropriate boundary conditions. Here @xmath stands for @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . In each strip @xmath , the general solution
to this equation can be written in the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . These solutions can be glued together by imposing
periodicity along @xmath , @xmath parity and the appropriate
discontinuity across the lines @xmath . This last requirement can be
directly derived from eqs. ( 3.9 ) and eqs. ( 3.10 ). The fields @xmath
should be continuous everywhere, whereas their first derivatives have
discontinuities @xmath given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

These requirements have a non-trivial solution only for @xmath , that
means the zero modes are independent of @xmath . We obtain:

-   @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

-   @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are 4D chiral spinors:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

whereas @xmath are functions describing the localization of the zero
modes in the compact space:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the above equations @xmath denotes a periodic function, coinciding
with the ordinary @xmath in the interval @xmath . As in the case @xmath
, for each 6D spinor we have two independent chiral zero modes, whose 4D
dependence is described by @xmath . They are still constant in @xmath ,
but not in @xmath .

Indeed, the zero mode proportional to @xmath is localized at @xmath (mod
@xmath ), whereas that proportional to @xmath is peaked around @xmath
(mod @xmath ) (see fig. 3.4 ). The two zero modes with well-defined
localization properties in the compact space have non-trivial components
both along @xmath and along @xmath and they are orthogonal to each
other. The constant factors in eqs. ( 3.17 ) normalize the zero modes to
1. In our toy model, the number of zero modes is not related to a
non-trivial topological property of the background @xmath . The two zero
modes are determined by the orbifold projection. The presence of the
background only induces a separation of the corresponding wave functions
in the compact space. Actually we can go smoothly from localized to
constant wave functions, by turning off the constants @xmath , as
apparent from eqs. ( 3.17 ).

With the introduction of the background, we now have two fermion
generations, one sat at @xmath and the other at @xmath . From the point
of view of the 4D observer, who cannot resolve distances in the extra
space, there is still a maximal flavour symmetry and, indeed, all
fermions are still massless at this level. Fermions can acquire masses
in the usual way, by breaking the electroweak symmetry via the
non-vanishing vev of a Higgs doublet @xmath . If such a vev were a
constant in @xmath , then we would obtain equal masses for the two
fermion generations. Thus, to break the 4D flavour symmetry we need a
non-trivial dependence of the Higgs vev upon @xmath . There are several
ways to achieve this. For instance, we might assume that @xmath is a
bulk field. Under certain conditions it may happen that the minimum of
the energy is no longer @xmath -constant. Examples of this kind are
well-known in the literature [ 48 ] . If @xmath interacts with a
suitable @xmath -dependent background, there is a competition between
the kinetic energy term, which prefers constant configurations, and the
potential energy term, which may favour a @xmath -varying vev. In
non-vanishing portions of the parameter space the minimum of the energy
can depend non-trivially on @xmath . In the minimal version of our toy
model we will simulate this dependence in the simplest possible way, by
introducing a Higgs doublet @xmath with hypercharge +1/2 localized along
the line @xmath ³ ³ 3 Alternatively, we could assume that @xmath is
localized at the orbifold fix point @xmath . From the point of view of
fermion masses and mixing angles, the two choices are equivalent. To
avoid singular terms in the action, we could also consider a mild
localization, described by some smooth limit of the Dirac delta
functions involved in the present treatment. Our results would not be
qualitatively affected. . The most general Yukawa interaction term
invariant under @xmath , 6D parity and SU(3) @xmath SU(2) @xmath U(1)
reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Notice that @xmath has dimension +3/2 and @xmath has
dimension -3/2, in mass units. In the next section we will see how a
realistic pattern of masses and mixing angles arises from these Yukawa
interactions.

Summarizing, our model is described by the lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are given in eqs. ( 3.6 ), ( 3.7 ) and (
3.18 ), respectively, while @xmath , localized at @xmath , contains the
kinetic term for the Higgs doublet and the scalar potential that breaks
spontaneously SU(2) @xmath U(1). The complex phases in @xmath can be
completely eliminated via field redefinitions: in the limit of exact 6D
parity symmetry all parameters are real.

#### 3.2.2 Masses and Mixing Angles

The fermion mass terms arise from @xmath after ESB, here described by
@xmath . To evaluate the fermion mass matrices we should expand the 6D
fermion fields in 4D modes and then perform the @xmath and @xmath
integrations. In practice, if we focus on the lightest sector, we can
keep only the zero modes in the expansion. We obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

These mass matrices, here given in the convention @xmath , are not
hermitian. It is interesting to see that, for generic order-one values
of the dimensionless combinations @xmath and @xmath , the mass matrices
display a clear hierarchical pattern. Fermion masses of the first
generation are suppressed by @xmath compared to those of the second
generation and mixing angles are of order @xmath or @xmath . This is
quite similar to what obtained in 4D models with a spontaneously broken
flavour symmetry. Here the rôle of small expansion parameters is played
by the quantities @xmath . However in our parity invariant model, the
parameters @xmath are real and the coefficients @xmath are ‘quantized’.
Either @xmath or @xmath should vanish and this implies no mixing. Indeed
when 6D parity is conserved, we have only two possible orientations of
the fermion zero modes in the @xmath space: either @xmath or @xmath , as
apparent from eqs. ( 3.15 ) and ( 3.16 ). Thus the scalar product
between two zero modes in the @xmath space is either maximal or zero.
Modulo a relabeling among first and second generations, this gives rise
to a perfect alignment of mass matrices and a vanishing overall mixing.
To overcome this problem, we should relax the assumption of exact 6D
parity symmetry ⁴ ⁴ 4 There are other possibilities that lead to a
non-vanishing mixing. For instance we could introduce several
independent backgrounds and couple them selectively to the different
fermion fields. In our view, the solution discussed in the text is the
simplest one. . We will assume that 6D parity is broken ‘softly’, by the
fermion-background interaction described by @xmath . This can be
achieved by taking complex values for the mass coefficients @xmath ⁵ ⁵ 5
All previous equations remain unchanged, but the first equality in eq. (
3.7 ). Only the second one is correct. . In a fundamental theory such a
breaking could be spontaneous: if @xmath were complex fields, then the
lagrangian would still be invariant under 6D parity acting as @xmath .
It might occur that the dynamics of the fields @xmath led to complex
vevs for @xmath , thus spontaneously breaking parity. In our toy model
we will simply assume the existence of such a complex background. All
the relations that we have derived hold true for the complex case as
well and we have now hierarchical mass matrices with a non-trivial
intergenerational mixing. By expanding the results at leading order in
@xmath we find:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

Finally, after absorbing residual phases in the definition of the @xmath
and @xmath 4D fields, the matrices @xmath and @xmath are diagonalized by
orthogonal transformations characterized by mixing angles @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

still at leading order in @xmath . Therefore the Cabibbo angle is given
by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Barring accidental cancellations in the relevant combinations of the
coefficients @xmath , the Cabibbo angle is of order @xmath . Then, by
assuming @xmath and @xmath we reproduce the correct order of magnitude
of mass ratios in the quark sector. These are small numbers in the 4D
theory, but can be obtained quite naturally from the 6D point of view:
@xmath and @xmath . Similarly, by taking @xmath we can naturally fit the
lepton mass ratio.

It can be useful to comment about the way flavour symmetry is broken in
this toy model. Before the introduction of the Yukawa interactions and
modulo U(1) anomalies, the flavour symmetry group is U(2) @xmath . After
turning the Yukawa couplings on, we can consider several limits. When
@xmath , the quantities @xmath vanish and the flavour symmetry is broken
down to U(1) @xmath , acting non-trivially on the lightest sector. If
@xmath is finite and non-vanishing, U(1) @xmath is in turn completely
broken down by @xmath . Nevertheless, contrary to what happens in models
with abelian flavour symmetries, the coefficients of order one that
multiply the symmetry breaking parameters @xmath are now related one to
each other. This can be appreciated by taking the limit @xmath . We have
@xmath and the residual flavour symmetry is a permutation symmetry,
separately for the lepton and the quark sectors: @xmath .

Let us now briefly comment about neutrino masses and mixings in this
set-up. The most straightforward way to produce neutrino masses is to
add a gauge singlet 6D fermion field, @xmath , with @xmath assignments
@xmath . As for the case of charged fermions, by introducing a mass term
for @xmath as in eq. ( 3.7 ) and a Yukawa interaction with @xmath and
@xmath as in eq. ( 3.18 ), we obtain a Dirac neutrino mass term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

A large mixing angle in the lepton sector, @xmath , is obtained for
@xmath , in which case the neutrino mass hierarchy,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

is controlled by @xmath . At leading order, the left mixings in @xmath
and @xmath correspond to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath is naturally large. As in 4D, the smallness of these
Dirac neutrino masses with respect to the electroweak scale has to be
imposed by an ad hoc suppression of the Yukawa coupling @xmath . A
natural suppression could be achieved by considering also Majorana
masses. A Majorana mass term for right-handed neutrinos can be
introduced in 6D as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the 6D charge conjugation matrix defined in the second
part of appendix A . If we substitute the expression for @xmath in terms
of 4D spinors we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

At this point we could work out the spectrum in the neutrino sector.
However we cannot proceed exactly as in the case of charged fermions.
There we calculated the spectrum in two steps: firstly we considered
only the lagrangian @xmath and calculated the zero modes and secondly we
introduced the Higgs sector and the Yukawa couplings and we calculated
the new masses as little perturbations of KK levels. This was possible
since the Higgs vev is assumed to be small compared to the KK scale
@xmath ( @xmath ). If we now introduce Majorana masses for neutrinos in
order to realize a see-saw mechanism, @xmath could be of the same order
of magnitude of @xmath or even larger. This implies that our two steps
method is no more justified, since we cannot neglect the Majorana mass
term in the first step of our calculation. How can we proceed? One way
could be to integrate out right-handed neutrinos, leading to
higher-dimensional operators in the lagrangian. Starting from this new
lagrangian we could now proceed in two steps as before, finding again
the mass spectrum for all fermions. These calculations have not yet been
performed and they will be a subject for future investigation.

#### 3.2.3 Which Scale for Flavour Physics?

Our 6D toy model is non renormalizable. It is characterized by some
typical mass scale @xmath . At energies larger than this typical scale,
the description offered by the model is not accurate enough and some
other theory should replace it. Up to now we have not specified @xmath .
We could have in mind a traditional picture where @xmath is very large,
perhaps close to the 4D Planck scale, where presumably all particle
interactions, including the gravitational one, are unified in a
fundamental theory. In this scenario we have the usual hierarchy
problem. Clearly our simple model cannot explain why @xmath and we
should rely on some additional mechanism to render the ESB scale much
smaller compared to @xmath . A SUSY or warped version of our toy model
could alleviate the technical aspect of the hierarchy problem.
Alternatively, we could ask how small could @xmath be without producing
a conflict with experimental data. For simplicity we assume that the two
radii @xmath , @xmath are approximately of the same order @xmath . Due
to the different dimension between 6D and 4D fields, coupling constants
of the effective 4D theory are suppressed by volume factors and we
require @xmath to work in a weakly coupled regime. Therefore, lower
bounds on @xmath are also lower bounds for @xmath . Lower bounds on
@xmath come from the search of the first KK modes at the existing
colliders or from indirect effects induced by the additional heavy
modes. These last effects lead to departures from the SM predictions in
electroweak observables. From the precision tests of the electroweak
sector, we get a lower bound on @xmath in the @xmath range (for a brief
review on constraints on extra dimensions see [ 49 ] and references
therein). However, the most dangerous indirect effects are those leading
to violations of universality in gauge interactions and those
contributing to flavour changing processes. Indeed, whenever we have a
source of flavour symmetry breaking, we expect a violation of
universality at some level. In the SM such violation comes through loop
effects from the Yukawa couplings and it is tiny. In our model, as we
will see, such effects can already arise at tree level and, to respect
the experimental bounds, a sufficiently large scale @xmath is needed.

Since in each fermion sector the two generations are described by two
copies of the same wave function, differing only in their localization
along @xmath , the universality of the gauge interactions will be
guaranteed if the gauge vector bosons have a wave function perfectly
constant in @xmath . This is the case only for massless gauge vector
bosons, such as the photon, but, as we will see now, not necessarily for
the massive gauge vector bosons like @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, also
the higher KK modes of all gauge bosons have non-constant wave functions
and their interactions with split fermions are in general non-universal.

We start by discussing the interactions between the lightest fermion
generations and the observed @xmath and @xmath vector bosons. Consider,
for simplicity, the limit of vanishing gauge coupling @xmath for @xmath
. Then the free equation of motion for the gauge bosons @xmath of @xmath
reads:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the @xmath -dependent vev of the Higgs doublet
@xmath . To avoid problems in dealing with singular, ill-defined
functions, here @xmath is a smooth function, vev of a 6D bulk field.
From the eq. ( 3.31 ) we will see that, if @xmath is not constant, then
the lightest mode for the gauge vector bosons is no longer described by
a constant wave function. Therefore the 4D gauge interactions, resulting
from the overlap of fermion and vector bosons wave functions, can be
different for the two generations.

In general we are not able to solve the above equation exactly, but we
can do this by a perturbative expansion in @xmath , which we could
justify a posteriori. At zeroth order the @xmath mass and the
corresponding wave function are given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

At first order we find:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

modulo an arbitrary additive constant in @xmath , that can be adjusted
by normalization. We see that when @xmath is constant, the usual result
is reproduced: @xmath and the corresponding wave function does not
depend on @xmath . Eq. ( 3.33 ) allows us to compute the fractional
difference @xmath between the SU(2) couplings to the first and second
fermion generation, respectively. Focusing on @xmath , we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . As expected, if @xmath is @xmath -constant, then the
gauge couplings are universal. From the precision tests of the SM
performed in the last decade at LEP and SLC we expect that such a
difference should not exceed, say, the per-mill level. We have analyzed
numerically eq. ( 3.34 ) for several choices of the parameters and for
several possible profiles of the vev @xmath . We found that universality
is respected at the per-mill level for @xmath or @xmath .

We now consider the interactions of the higher modes arising from the KK
decomposition of the gauge vector bosons:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the generators of the gauge group factor, @xmath the
corresponding 4D vector bosons and @xmath the periodic, @xmath -even
wave functions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

In eq. ( 3.35 )-( 3.36 ) @xmath and @xmath are integers: @xmath runs
from @xmath to @xmath for positive @xmath and from @xmath to @xmath for
@xmath . From eq. ( 3.6 ) we obtain the 4D interaction term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the gauge coupling constant of the relevant group
factor and the scale @xmath has been included to make @xmath
dimensionless; @xmath are generation indices. The coefficients @xmath
@xmath , resulting from the integration over @xmath and @xmath ,
describe the overlap among the fermion and gauge-boson wave functions.
We obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For odd @xmath , the interactions mediated by @xmath are non-universal.
By asking that universality holds within the experimental limits, we get
a lower bound on @xmath similar to that discussed before, of the order
of some @xmath .

Until now we have considered only bounds from violation of universality,
while stronger limits are obtained by flavour changing processes.
Starting from eqs. ( 3.37 ) and ( 3.38 ), after ESB, we should account
for the unitary transformations bringing fermions from the interaction
basis to the mass eigenstate basis. The terms involving @xmath are not
invariant under such transformations and flavour changing interactions
are produced. To show how this works in detail we focus on the term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

When we move to the interaction basis it becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

For even @xmath @xmath commutes with the matrix @xmath and the
interactions remain diagonal; but for odd @xmath these matrices do not
commute and flavour changing interactions are induced by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we can integrate out the heavy modes @xmath and we will obtain an
effective, low-energy description of flavour violation in terms of
four-fermion operators, suppressed by @xmath . The most relevant effects
of these operators have been discussed by Delgado, Pomarol and Quiros in
ref. [ 50 ] in a 5D framework with split fermions. Starting from the
effective @xmath lagrangian for down-type quarks, they calculated @xmath
and @xmath as function of @xmath and they derived a lower bound on
@xmath of @xmath and of @xmath , respectively, which at least as an
order of magnitude applies also to our model.

### 3.3 Towards a Realistic Model

The model introduced in the previous section is simply a toy model but
can be considered as a first step towards the construction of a
realistic theory of flavour in which the fermion families are
dynamically generated. In this section we briefly discuss vices and
virtues of this toy model and we suggest how we can overcome its
problems, first of all the one of the number of generations.

One of the most interesting features of our toy model is that, starting
from a single 6D spinor for every representation of the SM, we obtain
two fermion families simply through compactification. Then masses and
mixings are obtained in two steps, firstly with the localization of the
two generations in two different regions in the extra dimensions and
then through the introduction of a localized Higgs vev. Here the
parameters we introduce are all of order one and the hierarchy is
generated thanks to the different overlap of the fermionic wave
functions with the Higgs.

At a first sight, from the above description, it seems that this model
solves the hierarchy problem and explains why there are more fermion
replica. But this is not completely true. First of all in our toy model
we are able to obtain only two generations and, within this framework,
it is impossible to get more families since a 6D vector-like spinor
contains only two left(right)-handed 4D spinors. Moreover, even if we
obtained the hierarchy dynamically, we have anyway a large number of
parameters so that our theory is not predictive. These are essentially
the main problems related with our toy model. Then of course there are
other less important defects: for example we do not have analyzed yet
the problem of neutrino masses, even if the possibility of writing
Majorana mass terms lets us suppose that probably a see-saw mechanism
will be possible.

In what follows we try to suggest how to build a realistic and
predictive model for flavour. First of all we would like to have a model
with three generations and to reach this scope there are two
possibilities. Either we adopt a topologically non trivial background
which changes the number of zero modes or we increase the number of
extra dimensions. Since the first direction has already been explored [
43 , 44 ] and the model proposed is quite complicated ⁶ ⁶ 6 Moreover in
these models the number of families is still imposed by hands since it
coincides with the winding number of the topological defect which is
required to be three. , we explore the other possibility, i. e. we
decide to work in @xmath extra dimensions, with @xmath . How many extra
dimensions are necessary to build a realistic model? As mentioned before
such a theory should be able to explain, among other issues, the
smallness of neutrino masses and the simplest way is through the see-saw
mechanism. Then an analysis of Majorana masses in extra dimensions is in
order.

The Majorana mass term is defined as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the charge conjugation matrix @xmath in D dimensions is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In even dimensions both @xmath and @xmath exist, while in odd dimensions
only one is possible [ 51 ] . To form Majorana masses the matrix @xmath
must be antisymmetric [ 52 ] and this condition is verified for
D=2,3,4,5,6 mod 8. It follows that, with @xmath , the minimum number of
extra dimensions we have to consider in order to have Majorana masses is
six.

The analysis of Majorana masses suggests us to work in 10D. How are
fermions in this scheme? Are they suitable to obtain three generations?
In 10D we can have Dirac, Majorana, Weyl and Majorana-Weyl spinors [ 51
] . A 10D Dirac spinor is composed by 32 complex components, so it
contains eight 4D Dirac spinors. Majorana and Weyl conditions halve the
number of components. If we start with a Weyl spinor it contains eight
4D Weyl spinors, four with left chirality and four with right. Of course
this is enough for our scopes and we can assert that 10D is the right
framework in which investigate.

Unfortunately the 10D Majorana mass term mixes the two 10D chiralities,
so we cannot start from a Weyl spinor. The simplest way to proceed, in
strict analogy with what done in the toy model, is to start with
vector-like fermions. Obviously the number of independent 4D spinor is
doubled and now we have to find a way to obtain three left(right)-handed
fermions starting from eight left-handed and eight right-handed spinors.
To reduce the number of 4D spinors, i. e. to obtain only a few fermions
with zero mode, there are essentially two ways: orbifolding and/or
twisting. With six extra dimension a lot of possibilities are in
principle allowed, with different orbifolds such as @xmath and @xmath
and maybe with twist. Although a large amount of work has still to be
done in order to obtain a realistic and predictive theory, our toy model
can be considered a good step in this direction.

## Conclusions

In this thesis we have analyzed the problem of symmetry breaking in
theories with extra spatial dimensions compactified on orbifolds.
Orbifold compactifications can be exploited to break gauge symmetries,
supersymmetry and flavour symmetries with features that have no
counterpart in four-dimensional theories. In particular in chapter 2 we
considered scenarios where gauge symmetry and supersymmetry breaking is
induced by the generalized boundary conditions. In contrast, in chapter
3 we concentrated on the flavour problem and proposed a six-dimensional
toy model.

In chapter 2 we studied the new features of the Scherk-Schwarz mechanism
when applied to an orbifold compactification. As explained in section
1.1.2 , in a compact space one can twist the periodicity conditions on
the fields by a symmetry of the action. This results in a shift of the
Kaluza-Klein levels and, in particular, yields a massive zero mode and
therefore can be used to break four-dimensional symmetries. When the
Scherk-Schwarz mechanism is implemented on orbifolds we find that
certain consistency conditions between the operators defining the twist
and those defining the orbifold parity must hold (see section 1.1.4 ).
However at variance with theories defined on manifolds where fields must
be smooth everywhere, in orbifold theory fields can have discontinuities
at the fixed points, provided the physical properties of the system
remain well defined. So the most general boundary conditions on fields
are specified not only by parity and periodicity, but also by possible
jumps at the fixed points. In sections 2.1.1 and 2.2.1 we have discussed
the most general boundary conditions respectively for fermions and
bosons on the orbifold @xmath . We found that these boundary conditions
are identical, except that in the case of bosons they must be imposed on
the @xmath -derivative of fields as well. The most general boundary
conditions include parity, periodicity and jumps at the two fixed points
and are represented by unitary matrices satisfying some consistency
requirements.

After the assignment of the boundary conditions, we calculated the
corresponding spectra and eigenfunctions in the case of one fermion
field (section 2.1.2 ), one scalar field (section 2.2.2 ) and more
scalar fields (section 2.2.3 ). In each case we found that the spectrum
has the typical Scherk-Schwarz-like form, where the Kaluza-Klein levels
are shifted by a constant amount which now depends on both the twist and
jump parameters. The corresponding eigenfunctions can be discontinuous
or have cusps at the fixed points and may be periodic or not, depending
on the twist.

As the spectrum we found is like the one corresponding to usual twisted
boundary conditions, we realized that it is possible to recover our
spectrum through a Scherk-Schwarz mechanism with appropriate twist. The
eigenfunctions associated to this twist are now continuous and the
different systems are related by a local field redefinition. We know
that physics is invariant under such a local field redefinition and thus
we concluded that these two systems are physically equivalent.

Therefore we could state there is an entire class of different boundary
conditions corresponding to the same spectrum, i. e. to the same
physical properties, with eigenfunctions related by local field
redefinitions. In sections 2.1.3 and 2.2.4 we performed this
redefinition in the action and observed that, both for fermions and
bosons, generalized boundary conditions correspond to @xmath -dependent
five-dimensional mass terms that can be localized at the orbifold fixed
points. Although these terms can be singular, which requires appropriate
regularization, we conclude that they are essential for the consistency
of the theory, since they encode the behaviour of fields at boundaries.

We have stated that the same four-dimensional spectrum can correspond to
different mass terms. Thus we would like to classify the most general
set of five-dimensional mass terms that leads to a given mass spectrum.
We discussed this in section 2.3.1 , where we gave the conditions that a
five-dimensional mass term should satisfy in order to be ascribed to a
Scherk-Schwarz twist. Moreover we found a relationship between the
Scherk-Schwarz twist parameter and the Wilson loop obtained by
integrating the mass terms around the extra-dimension. In section 2.3.2
we discussed some examples of equivalent mass terms.

In sections 2.4 and 2.5 we studied some phenomenological applications of
our generalized boundary conditions specifically for gauge symmetry
breaking and supersymmetry breaking. We studied the breaking of an
@xmath gauge symmetry in a toy model before moving on to a realistic
@xmath model and then we considered supersymmetry breaking in a pure
five-dimensional supergravity model.

In chapter 3 we focused on flavour symmetry and we constructed a
six-dimensional toy model for flavour where the number of generations
dynamically arises as a consequence of the presence of extra dimensions.
In section 3.1 we briefly reviewed the literature on the subject, in
particular showing that methods for localizing four-dimensional chiral
fermions along the extra dimensions exist and have already been proposed
to solve the flavour problem. However we observed that earlier models
are far from being realistic and moreover require that the number of
fermion replica is introduced by hand. Indeed the only models that
attempt to simultaneously explain both the flavour problem and the
number of generations require a non-trivial topological background and
are quite complicated. In contrast, for our toy model we exploited the
fact that a higher-dimensional spinor can be decomposed into many
four-dimensional spinors to address the flavour @xmath fermion replica
problem simultaneously.

In section 3.2.1 we illustrated the main features of our toy model. Note
that although our construction is insufficient to obtain automatically
three generations, we decided it was worthwhile to study a
six-dimensional two-family model since it exhibits interesting new
features that should also arise in a more realistic three-family setup.
Indeed a six-dimensional Dirac spinor contains two left-handed and two
right-handed four-dimensional spinors. Moreover using a Dirac spinor has
the advantage that gauge and gravitational anomalies are absent. We
compactified the extra dimensions on the orbifold @xmath and, with
appropriate parity assignments, we showed that it is possible to project
out the unwanted chirality states to obtain two four-dimensional spinors
with the same chirality and the same quantum numbers, i. e. two replica
of the same fermion. We started from six vector-like fermions with the
quantum numbers of the standard model and, after orbifolding, we got two
four-dimensional chiral zero modes for every spinor, which we identified
with ( @xmath ) and ( @xmath ). We showed that, in the absence of other
interactions, these zero modes have constant profiles along the extra
dimensions, but the introduction of a six-dimensional Dirac mass term
for every fermion can localize the two zero modes in two different
regions of the extra space where the level of localization depends on
the absolute value of this Dirac mass. The @xmath -symmetry implies that
the Dirac masses must have odd parity and so we chose them proportional
to the periodic sign function along one of the two extra coordinates
(and constant along the other), with the proportionality constant
different for each fermion.

After localizing the two families in two different regions of the
compact space, we introduced a Higgs vev confined on the brane around
which the second generation lives and calculated the subsequent
fermionic mass spectrum (section 3.2.2 ). We discovered that the masses
are naturally hierarchical, i. e. from order one parameters of the
fundamental theory we obtained a four-dimensional hierarchy. Moreover
the mixing appeared to be related to a soft breaking of the
six-dimensional parity. Exploiting the fact that Majorana masses are
allowed in six dimensions, we proposed that the smallness of neutrino
masses could be explained through an extra-dimensional see-saw
mechanism. In section 3.2.3 we put a lower limit on the scale of extra
dimensions by calculating the order of magnitude of flavour changing
neutral currents processes in our model.

Although we found very interesting results, our toy model contains too
many parameters and so its predictability is weak. Moreover it contains
only two fermion replica and in six dimensions it is not possible to
obtain three generations without introducing a topologically non-trivial
background. In section 3.3 we discussed how to extend our toy model to a
more realistic case with three generations. We suggested that the most
promising framework is realized within a ten-dimensional space-time,
where Majorana masses are allowed and fermions contain a sufficient
number of four-dimensional components. Although our model is not
completely realistic and requires further development, we think that
this toy model is an important step towards the construction of a
realistic model that explains both the flavour and the fermion replica
problems within the same framework.

## Acknowledgements

First of all I warmly thank Ferruccio Feruglio for having been the
advisor everyone would like to have, for his precise and clear
explanations, for his enthusiasm in doing physics and for the enjoyable
and fruitful collaboration over these years.

Then I would like to thank my other collaborators, Isabella Masina,
Manuel Pérez-Victoria, Andrea Wulzer and Fabio Zwirner, for interesting
discussions and pleasant collaborations.

I also would like to thank David Rayner for having put my English in a
“more English” form.

I also thank the other Ph.D. students, in particular Alessandro
Torrielli for interesting @xmath - @xmath discussions and wonderful
explanations and my friends Sandra Moretto and Francesca Della Vedova
for their enjoyable company and support.

Finally I thank my family and everyone that from afar believed in me and
supported me during these difficult but wonderful years.

## Appendix A @xmath Matrices in Five and Six Dimensions

#### Five Dimensions

In 5D we work with the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The representation of 5D @xmath -matrices we use in the
text is the following:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the Pauli matrices.

#### Six Dimensions

In order to have a greater overlap with the literature and an easier
comparison of our results with the existing ones, in 6D we change our
notations and we work with the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The representation of 6D @xmath -matrices we adopt is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath , @xmath are 4D @xmath -matrices given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the Pauli matrices.

In 6D the analogous of @xmath , @xmath , is defined by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The 6D charge conjugation matrix, defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Appendix B Path-Ordered Products

We collect here some useful formulae and results concerning path-ordered
products and show how they can be used to prove eq. ( 2.83 ) and eq. (
2.81 ). First, we distinguish the two inequivalent definitions of
path-ordering, introducing the symbols:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a @xmath -dependent matrix and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the Heaviside step function. From the above definitions, and assuming
@xmath , the following properties follow:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the @xmath -dependent matrix @xmath satisfies the differential
equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

then it is immediate to prove that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Correspondingly, if @xmath is hermitian, then @xmath obeys the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is solved by

  -- -- -- -------
           (B.9)
  -- -- -- -------

Showing that eq. ( 2.77 ) implies eq. ( 2.83 ) is now a simple
application of eqs. ( B.6 ) and ( B.7 ). To show instead that eqs. (
2.68 ) and ( 2.77 ) imply eq. ( 2.81 ), it is sufficient to solve eq. (
2.68 ) for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and to insert the explicit form of the solutions of eq. ( 2.77 ), namely
eqs. ( B.7 ) and ( B.9 ). It is also easy to show that the second member
of eq. ( 2.81 ) is indeed @xmath -independent.