##### Contents

-    Abstract
-    1 Kaluza-Klein and Brane Models
    -    1.1 Kaluza-Klein Theories
    -    1.2 Localized Wave Functions
        -    1.2.1 The Domain Wall
        -    1.2.2 Fermion Zero Modes
        -    1.2.3 Gauge Field Localization
    -    1.3 Large Extra Dimensions
        -    1.3.1 General Idea of ADD
        -    1.3.2 Phenomenological Implications
    -    1.4 Randall-Sundrum Models
    -    1.5 Addressing the Cosmological Constant Problem
    -    1.6 Codimension 2 Branes
-    2 Higher Dimensional Scalar Models.
    -    2.1 A Simple 4D Theory
    -    2.2 A More General Case
        -    2.2.1 The Effective Theory Method
        -    2.2.2 D-dimensional analysis
    -    2.3 A Domain Wall Example
        -    2.3.1 The Model
        -    2.3.2 The 4D Effective Theory for the Light Modes
-    3 6D Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar Model.
    -    3.1 Definition of the Model and 6D Equations of Motion
    -    3.2 4D Electroweak Symmetry Breaking
        -    3.2.1 The @xmath Background Solution
        -    3.2.2 The 4D @xmath Effective Lagrangian and the Higgs
            Mechanism
    -    3.3 6D Electroweak Symmetry Breaking
        -    3.3.1 Spin-1 Spectrum
        -    3.3.2 Spin-0 Spectrum
        -    3.3.3 Spin-1/2 Spectrum
    -    3.4 Conclusions and Outlook of Part I
-    4 General Features
    -    4.1 Supergravity in Diverse Dimensions
    -    4.2 The 6D Case
        -    4.2.1 The @xmath Gauged Supergravity
        -    4.2.2 Salam-Sezgin Model and Anomaly-Free Versions
    -    4.3 Supersymmetric Large Extra Dimensions
    -    4.4 Brane Solutions
        -    4.4.1 General Axisymmetric Solutions
        -    4.4.2 Conical Singularities
-    5 Fluctuations around Brane Solutions
    -    5.1 The Set Up
    -    5.2 Gauge Fields
        -    5.2.1 Kaluza-Klein Modes
        -    5.2.2 4D Effective Gauge Coupling
    -    5.3 Fermions
        -    5.3.1 Zero Modes
        -    5.3.2 Massive Modes
        -    5.3.3 4D Effective Fermion Charges
    -    5.4 Large Volume Compactifications with a Large Mass Gap
    -    5.5 Conclusions and Outlook of Part II
-    A Conventions and Notations
-    B Spectrum from 6D Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar Model
    -    B.1 Spin-1 Mass Terms from @xmath and @xmath
        -    B.1.1 @xmath Contribution
        -    B.1.2 @xmath Contribution
        -    B.1.3 The Case of @xmath background
        -    B.1.4 The Case of @xmath Background
    -    B.2 Explicit Calculation of Spin-0 Spectrum
    -    B.3 Explicit Calculation of Spin-1/2 Spectrum
-    C Spectrum from 6D Gauged Minimal Supergravity
    -    C.1 Stability Analysis for Sphere Compactification
        -    C.1.1 The Light Cone Gauge
        -    C.1.2 Stability Analysis
    -    C.2 Delta-Function Singularities
    -    C.3 Imposing Boundary Conditions
    -    C.4 Complete Fermionic Mass Spectrum

## Introduction

The Standard Model (SM) of the electroweak and strong interactions,
including neutrino masses, and the Einstein’s theory of gravity
successfully predict most of the physical quantities that we are able to
measure. The former is the theoretical framework in which we usually
study elementary particles physics and it consistently includes the
principles of quantum mechanics and special relativity. The latter
describes large scale structures such as the expanding universe and its
history.

One of the main attractive features of the SM is the formulation of the
non gravitational interactions as a consequence of a local invariance
principle, generalizing the gauge invariance of electrodynamics. This
leads to two additional fine structure constants associated to the weak
and strong nuclear forces. In a similar way the Einstein’s theory, or
General Relativity (GR), includes gravitational interactions by
requiring invariance under general space-time coordinate
transformations.

Despite this similarity so far we do not have a complete and well
understood quantum theory of gravity, which is valid at every energy
scale. The most promising attempt to quantize GR is the Superstring
Theory, which includes a graviton state in its physical spectrum.
Moreover, Superstrings, having just one independent parameter, give hope
to solve the theoretical problem of explaining the ad hoc structure of
the gauge group and the quantum numbers of the SM. A consistent
formulation of such theory requires a space-time dimensionality equal to
10 (or 11 in the case of M-Theory), necessarily leading to extra
dimensions. The idea that we can live in a world with more than 4
dimensions was proposed by Kaluza and Klein before Superstring theory in
order to unify gravitational and electromagnetic interactions. Indeed
they analyzed a 5D Einstein’s theory of gravity and proved that in the
low energy limit this theory gives the 4D Einstein’s theory and the
Maxwell’s theory of electrodynamics, if the extra dimension is
compactified .

Now it is known that, remarkably, the presence of extra dimensions can
help us to solve two longstanding problems of theoretical physics, which
are related to the structure of the underlying quantum theory of
gravity: the hierarchy problem and the cosmological constant problem.
They both are fine-tuning problems because the former is related to the
huge difference between the Planck scale and the electroweak scale, and
the latter to the very small value of the observed vacuum’s energy
compared to the other energy scales (apart from neutrino masses).

Since we observe only 4 dimensions in our world, higher dimensional
theories require a mechanism to hide extra dimensions. In the standard
Kaluza-Klein (KK) theories the extra dimensions are invisible because
they describe a smooth compact manifold with very small size, naturally
of the order of the Planck length. More recently it has been proved that
this is not actually necessary because SM fields can be localized on a
(1+3)-dimensional sub-manifold, called 3-brane. However, every higher
dimensional theory leads to an infinite number of particles from the 4D
point of view. It is of course interesting to know whether or not it is
possible to construct a 4D effective theory for the lightest particles,
and, when this is possible, to study the role of the heavy particles in
the low energy dynamics.

In the standard KK theories a higher dimensional field can be decomposed
as an infinite but discrete sequence of 4D modes (KK modes), due to the
compactness of the internal space. This sequence is called KK tower and
the difference between two consecutive masses is of the order of the
inverse proper radius of the internal space. However, in some cases a
finite mass gap between the zero (or lightest) modes and the heavy KK
modes can emerges even if the internal manifold is not compact. If this
happens it seems clear that a low energy theory for the zero modes can
be constructed by using the effective theory approach, namely
integrating out the heavy degrees of freedom.

In an original part of the present thesis we will study if the heavy KK
modes can actually give a measurable contribution to the SM particles
dynamics by assuming a finite mass gap. In particular we shall analyze
the broken phase of the 4D effective theory, when the light modes
acquire a vacuum expectation value (VEV), and the corresponding low
energy mass spectrum. We will call this method the effective theory
approach to spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB). In order to study the
heavy mode contribution to these observable quantities we shall also
perform an alternative approach to SSB, in which we go directly to the
broken phase by means of a solution of the higher dimensional EOM. We
shall call the latter approach the geometrical approach to SSB. The
final result will prove that in general the heavy mode contribution to
the 4D effective theory is not negligible, because this is actually
needed to reproduce the geometrical approach. Remarkably we will be able
to prove that this is true even if the heavy modes are as massive as the
Planck mass, contrary to the standard lore for which the physics at the
Planck scale is not relevant for the dynamics at a lower scale, for
instance at the electroweak scale.

In a second original part of the present thesis we will consider a
higher dimensional (in this case 6D) supergravity compactified on a
manifold with singularities, which are not usually introduced in
original KK theories. The specific model that we consider has
interesting features in relation with both the hierarchy and the
cosmological constant problem. Indeed recently Supersymmetric Large
Extra Dimensions have been proposed as a possible scenario in which the
cosmological constant can be self-tuned to the observed value if the
dimension of the internal space is equal to 2. This is essentially due
to a numerical coincidence between the inverse invariant radius of the
internal space and the observed vacuum energy if the fundamental 6D
Planck scale is at the electroweak scale. However, in order to implement
this mechanism supersymmetry must be broken to allow a small but non
vanishing cosmological constant. The class of solutions that we will
consider are particularly interesting in this contest because they break
supersymmetry completely. Such configurations present a warp factor and
an internal manifold with 2 conical singularities and with the sphere
topology. We shall study exactly and in great detail the KK towers for
fermion and gauge field sectors that can contain SM fields. Moreover we
will study the effect of conical singularities on such towers, finding
that the mass gap is not necessarily equal to the inverse proper radius
as in ordinary KK theories, with interesting application to Large Extra
Dimensions.

The present thesis is organized as follows.

In Chapter 1 we will review standard KK theories and brane models by
focusing on the details that are useful to understand the original work.
In particular we will construct the 4D effective theory starting with
the original 5D KK theory, we shall introduce the brane world idea by
discussing the simple kink domain wall and finally we will summarize the
main features of Large Extra Dimensions and Randall-Sundrum scenarios,
which are both motivated by the hierarchy problem.

Afterwards we will present Part I of the thesis, which contains the
original results on the heavy mode contribution to the low energy
dynamics. This part is divided in Chapters 2 and 3 . In the former we
will study the heavy mode contribution to the 4D effective theory in a
simple scalar set up. This will allow us to explain in a rigorous way
what we have proved and our steps. In Chapter 3 we will address the same
problem but in a physically interesting contest. We will start with a 6D
Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar model and consider the compactification over the
sphere with a monopole background. This will lead to a chiral @xmath
effective theory with an Higgs field triggering SSB from @xmath to
@xmath . In this framework, which is similar to the electroweak part of
the SM, we will show that the heavy KK modes, with masses of the order
of the Planck scale, actually have effects on some measurable quantities
of the low energy physics.

Part II is divided in Chapters 4 and 5 . In the former we will review 6D
supergravity focusing on the case in which we have the minimal number of
supersymetries (minimal supergravity) and part of the R-symmetry group
is gauged (gauged supergravity). Moreover we will review the
Supersymmetric Large Extra Dimensions scenario and some singular
solutions, which break completely supersymmetry. In Chapter 5 we will
present our original contribution in this scenario studying gauge field
and fermion fluctuations around non-smooth solutions. We will emphasize
that these sectors can contain SM fields and we shall study the effect
of (conical) singularities on the mass gap. Moreover we will analyze the
particular case in which both the internal proper radius and the mass
gap are large and the effect of this set up on the fundamental (6D)
constants.

There are also three appendices. In Appendix A we give our conventions
and notations, including recurrent abbreviations. In Appendix B we give
the explicit computation of the 4D spectrum coming from the 6D
Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar model. In Appendix C we provide some extra
calculations concerning the 6D minimal gauged supergravity and we
perform a stability analysis, considering all the present known anomaly
free models of this type.

## Chapter 1 Kaluza-Klein and Brane Models

In this chapter we review KK theories and brane models by focusing on
the aspects that are relevant for the original contribution of this
thesis presented in Chapters 2 , 3 , and 5 . The composition is as
follows. In Section 1.1 we introduce KK theories by studying the simple
example of 5D Einstein gravity compactified over @xmath . In Section 1.2
we discuss the kink domain wall configuration that localizes matter
fields on a 3-brane . We will devote Section 1.3 to models with large
extra dimensions, discussing in particular their relation with the
hierarchy problem and their phenomenological implications. In Section
1.4 we will discuss 5D warped brane world models and the possibility of
creating mass hierarchy in this contest. Furthermore, in Section 1.5 we
review attempts that aim at a solution of the cosmological constant
problem in theories with extra dimensions. Finally we will specifically
consider 6D models in Section 1.6 , where we will study codimension 2
branes and their conical nature.

### 1.1 Kaluza-Klein Theories

The original motivation for studying field theories in space-time with
more than 4 dimensions is to obtain a geometrical interpretation of
internal quantum numbers such as the electric charge, that is to place
them in the same context as energy and momentum [ 1 , 2 ] . The latter
observable quantities are associated with translational symmetry in
@xmath , the 4D Minkowski space-time, whereas the internal observable
quantities would be associated with symmetry motions in the extra
dimensions.

In theories of the standard KK type ¹ ¹ 1 For a review on this topic see
[ 3 ] . one assumes a @xmath -dimensional ( @xmath ) generally covariant
field theory and, by some dynamical mechanism, obtains a partially
compactified and factorizable background geometry,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a 4D pseudo euclidean manifold, and @xmath is a @xmath
-dimensional euclidean smooth compact manifold. The proper volume @xmath
of @xmath must be sufficiently small to render the extra dimensions
invisible. For instance for @xmath , we expect the effects of @xmath to
be invisible up to energies of the order ² ² 2 We use the following
conversion relation: @xmath . of @xmath . However, in order to support
such compactification, extra matter fields in general are needed and
therefore a completely geometrical explanation of the fundamental forces
can be lost in this process. An interesting exception could be the
anomaly free higher dimensional supergravities, in which supersymmetry
and anomaly freedom can motivate the presence of additional matter
fields.

The original works by Kaluza and Klein analysed a particular example of
such a framework: the standard 5D Einstein-Hilbert theory compactified
on @xmath . The action of this model is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a 5D Planck scale and other conventions are given in
Appendix A . Compactification on @xmath means the physical equivalence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the fifth coordinate and @xmath is the circumference of
@xmath . The five-dimensional metric separates into @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath . From the 4D point of view these are a metric, a vector, and
a scalar. We can parametrize the metric as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath depend on both @xmath and @xmath , (
1.1.4 ) is the most general 5D metric, but henceforth we will assume
they depend only on the noncompact coordinates @xmath and, in this case,
( 1.1.4 ) is the most general metric invariant under @xmath -dependent
translations of @xmath . That is, this form still allows the following
reparametrizations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and under the latter

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So gauge transformations arise as part of the higher-dimensional
coordinate group. This is the KK mechanism.

To see the effect of y-dependence, consider a massless complex scalar
@xmath in 5D. Relation ( 1.1.3 ) can be implemented by requiring @xmath
to be periodic with respect to @xmath . Expanding the y-dependence of
@xmath in a complete set we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an integer. The momentum in the periodic dimension is
quantized @xmath . The action for such a scalar is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By using ( 1.1.7 ), and @xmath , where @xmath is the determinant of
@xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the dots represent interaction terms. Therefore @xmath contains an
infinite tower (KK tower) of 4D fields with squared mass

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath represents the invariant volume of the internal space
@xmath . We observe that the gap between two consecutive KK masses is
fixed by the volume of the internal space. This is a general property of
standard KK theories. Therefore, it seems that at energies small
compared to @xmath only the zero modes ( @xmath ) can be physically
relevant. However, integrating out the heavy modes in general gives a
non-trivial contribution to the low energy dynamics. We will clarify
this point in Chapters 2 and 3 , which contains part of the original
work [ 4 ] .

The charge corresponding to the KK gauge invariance ( 1.1.6 ) is the
@xmath -momentum. In this simple example, all fields carrying the KK
charge are massive. More generally there can be massless charged fields.
We will provide an example in Chapter 3 , where we will discuss a 6D
Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar model compactified on @xmath with a non
vanishing gauge field background. In this model the KK gauge group is
@xmath and there are massless 4D fields in non-trivial @xmath
-representations.

We compute now the 4D effective action for the zero modes by putting the
ansatz ( 1.1.4 ) in the Einstein-Hilbert term ( 1.1.2 ). The 5D Ricci
scalar can be expressed in terms of the scalar field @xmath , the field
strength @xmath of @xmath , and the 4D metric @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the effective action for the zero modes is ³ ³ 3 The kinetic
term for @xmath appears if one performs the Weyl transformation @xmath ,
which converts the gravitational term in the standard Einstein-Hilbert
form.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the fact that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath do not
depend on @xmath . We observe that the 4D Planck lenght ⁴ ⁴ 4 We define
@xmath in a way that the coefficient of @xmath in the 4D lagrangian is
@xmath . @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand the effective gauge constant @xmath associated to
@xmath is given by ⁵ ⁵ 5 We define @xmath in a way that the coefficient
of @xmath in the 4D lagrangian is @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the gauge constant is determined in terms of the 4D
gravitational coupling and the volume of the internal space. If we
require @xmath , which is a natural choice as the SM gauge constants are
of the order of 1, we get that the size of the internal space is
naturally of the order of the 4D Planck length.

It is worth mentioning that this original KK theory can be generalized
to include a smooth internal space of the form @xmath and develop an
harmonic expansion, analogous to ( 1.1.7 ), on such coset space. In this
way it is possible to show that a conventional Einstein-Yang-Mills model
(realizing local @xmath -symmetry) emerges at the leading approximation
[ 5 ] . Moreover it can be proved that this framework emerge as a 4D
effective theory of a higher dimensional Einstein-Yang-Mills system [ 6
] .

Besides these attractive properties the original KK theory suffers from
some phenomenological problems. It is not clear how to interpret the
radion @xmath , because it represents a massless scalar particle that is
not observed in nature. Moreover, it is not possible to get a 4D chiral
fermionic spectrum in this framework, which is of course needed if one
requires to reproduce the SM in the low energy limit.

The situation gets better if one includes bulk (D-dimensional) gauge
fields [ 7 ] and considers generalizations of the original KK theory. A
non-trivial example will be given in Chapter 3 , based on a 6D
Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar model, where the internal space will be taken to
be @xmath , and chiral fermions are obtained in the 4D effective theory.

Alternative solutions will be described in Sections 1.2 , 1.3 , and 1.4
where we will introduce the concept of 3-brane . As we shall see the
latter is a useful tool to address relevant problems of high energy
physics like the hierarchy problem and the cosmological constant problem
in higher dimensional models.

### 1.2 Localized Wave Functions

The original KK idea assumes a compact internal space with a very small
size to render the extra dimensions invisible. An interesting
alternative can arise when this hypothesis is relaxed, but ordinary
particles are confined inside a potential well, which is flat along the
ordinary 4 dimensions and sufficiently steep along the @xmath extra
dimensions. As we shall see in this section the origin of such a
potential can be purely dynamical, in the sense that it can emerge as a
solution of the equations of motion (EOM). Therefore in this scenario we
have spontaneous breaking of translation invariance. The ordinary matter
can propagate in the @xmath -dimensional space-time if it acquires high
enough energy (basically if its energy exceeds the depth of the well).

#### 1.2.1 The Domain Wall

The original idea of confining particles on a (1+3)-dimensional
submanifold ( 3-brane ) was proposed in [ 8 ] and independently in [ 9 ]
. Now we illustrate the main idea by introducing the simplest higher
dimensional model, which can give rise to matter field localization on a
3-brane ( brane world ). This is a 5D field theory with one real scalar
living on @xmath : the action is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , and @xmath are real parameters and we assume @xmath in
order to have a bounded from below 5D potential. The internal symmetry
of this theory is a @xmath group: @xmath

To derive the EOM from ( 1.2.15 ) through an action principle we require
that the boundary terms in the integration by parts vanish. This leads
to the conservation of current @xmath , as explained in [ 10 , 11 , 12 ]
:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Actually we impose that for every pair of fields @xmath and @xmath the
condition @xmath is satisfied but in ( 1.2.16 ) the prime is understood.
As usual we assume that the dependence on the 4D coordinates is such
that Condition ( 1.2.16 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which involves only the dependence of @xmath on the extra dimension. A
condition like ( 1.2.16 ) is usually used in brane world model to
project out non physical modes ⁶ ⁶ 6 We will use analogous conditions in
Chapter 5 . . Provided that ( 1.2.16 ) is satisfied, the EOM is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and we consider the following kink domain wall solution ⁷ ⁷ 7 For
extended discussions on this solution see for example [ 13 , 14 , 15 ] .
[ 8 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The VEV in ( 1.2.19 ) spontaneously breaks the internal symmetry @xmath
, and the translation invariance along the extra dimension.

To see how solution ( 1.2.19 ) produces a potential well along the extra
dimension we consider perturbations around such a background solution.
We define @xmath and the EOM at the linear level with respect to @xmath
reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The fluctuation @xmath must satisfy Condition ( 1.2.16 ) as well as
@xmath itself. This will give us relevant information to construct the
space of physical modes. We consider now a 4D plane wave solution of (
1.2.20 ), that is we assume

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath represents the 4D momentum of an ordinary particle with
squared mass @xmath . In this case the probability density along our 4D
world is completely flat but we allow a non-trivial probability density
@xmath of finding the particle in an interval @xmath . Inserting (
1.2.21 ) in Equation ( 1.2.20 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The latter equation is extensively studied in the literature [ 8 , 13 ,
14 , 15 ] . It is a 1D Schroedinger equation with a potential

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is exactly the potential well that we mentioned before. It is easy
to see that the Condition ( 1.2.17 ) ensures that the hamiltonian @xmath
is hermitian with respect to the inner product @xmath . To show that
this potential effectively localizes particles on the brane we present
the spectrum of the fluctuations. In the energy range @xmath the
spectrum is discrete and it consists of 2 states. There is a
normalizable wave function with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a normalization constant. This wave function must
represent the ground state for such a quantum mechanical problem because
it does not have intersections with the @xmath -axis. This automatically
ensures that there are not tachyonic fluctuations. Moreover there is
another normalizable wave function describing a bound state with mass
@xmath , as explained in [ 13 ] . This couple of normalizable states
describes particles being confined inside the wall. For @xmath the
spectrum is continous and represents perturbations that are not
confined.

We will turn to the kink domain wall in Section 2.3 where we will
introduce an additional scalar field whose lightest 4D mode will be
interpreted as an Higgs field. We will study such model to provide a
brane world example for the relevance of the heavy modes in the 4D low
energy effective theory for the light modes, which is one of the main
topics of the present thesis.

#### 1.2.2 Fermion Zero Modes

In the simple model of Subsection 1.2.1 one can introduce fermions and
study the corresponding localization problem, as for the @xmath
-fluctuations. If standard Yukawa couplings are present, a chiral low
energy 4D fermion spectrum emerges, in the sense that only fermion zero
modes with one chirality are localized on the wall.

To illustrate this point we introduce one 5D fermion with the following
action [ 8 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a real constant and @xmath , @xmath and our conventions
on @xmath and @xmath are given in Appendix A . The second term in (
1.2.25 ) is a simple example of Yukawa coupling and it can provide a
chiral localized zero mode. In order to show this, now we derive the EOM
for @xmath . Similarly to the fluctuations coming from @xmath , which we
have analysed in the previous section, in order to derive the EOM from (
1.2.25 ) by means of an action principle we have to impose ⁸ ⁸ 8
Actually we impose that for every pair of fields @xmath and @xmath the
condition @xmath is satisfied but in ( 1.2.26 ) the prime is understood.
the conservation of current @xmath [ 16 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Also in the fermion sector we assume that the dependence on the 4D
coordinates is such that ( 1.2.26 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus the EOM reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we decompose @xmath as follows: @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath ,
and therefore the EOM linearized around the kink background ( 1.2.19 )
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In general this is a set of coupled differential equations, but in the
case of zero modes ( @xmath ) they decouple. For instance @xmath
satisfies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which can be easily solved:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a 4D chiral fermion, which does not depend on @xmath .
By using the explicit expression of @xmath given in ( 1.2.19 ), it is
easy to see that ( 1.2.31 ) represents a bounded state, in the sense
that its wave function profile along the extra dimension is peaked on
@xmath and rapidly goes to zero as @xmath . On the other hand, the
fermion with opposite chirality is unbounded, as can be seen by
obtaining the corresponding wave function from ( 1.2.31 ) with the
substitution @xmath . The Condition ( 1.2.27 ) is automatically
satisfied by these zero modes, but one chirality has to be projected out
because it is not normalizable and therefore it has infinite kinetic
energy from the 4D point of view. Therefore we conclude that the zero
mode spectrum is effectively chiral as required by the SM.

These results, which we have obtained in a very simple model, can be
generalized to include an arbitrary number of space-time dimensions and
Yang-Mills and scalar backgrounds. In this more general framework, the
conditions under which localized chiral fermions emerge are given in [
17 ] .

#### 1.2.3 Gauge Field Localization

We conclude this section by examining gauge fields. Unlike the spinless
and the spin-1/2 case, localizing gauge field wave functions is not
simple, at least for massless non-Abelian fields. The reason is that we
can have phenomenological problems when we construct the effective 4D
gauge constants. Indeed, if we denote the zero mode wave function of a
gauge field by @xmath and the corresponding quantity for a fermion (or,
in general, for a charged field) by @xmath , usually the gauge constant
in the 4D effective theory turns out to be proportional to an overlap
integral of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand, in the previous subsection we have seen that the
fermion wave functions can be different for different types of particles
as they depend on various parameters, for instance the constant @xmath
in ( 1.2.25 ). This can create a problem, as in non-Abelian gauge
theories the gauge charges are quantized and fixed by group theory
arguments (this is referred to as charge universality ).

We can imagine some ways out. A first possibility is finding a theory
that produces the same wave function profile for all the zero modes
@xmath . However, this is not the general case because, as we will see,
in the explicit examples of Chapters 3 and 5 this does not happen.
Therefore, a physical mechanism that ensures such an equality is needed,
if one tries to solve the problem in this way.

A second possibility is obtaining a constant profile for the zero mode
gauge fields, namely @xmath independent of @xmath . Indeed, in this case
the overlap integral defining the gauge constants becomes @xmath , and
it is proportional to the normalization constant of the fermion kinetic
term in the 4D effective theory. Since we can normalize the fields in a
way that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we obtain charge universality. An explicit example is the framework
analyzed in Chapter 5 , where the gauge field profiles are dynamically
predicted to be constant.

Finally, in the literature there exists a more sophisticated mechanism
to obtain localized gauge fields [ 18 ] . There it has been proposed to
consider a gauge theory that is in confinement phase outside the brane,
whereas it is in the Abelian Coulomb phase on the brane. This is
achieved by means of a scalar field that acquires a kink VEV, such as
@xmath in ( 1.2.19 ). Massless ”quarks” and a U(1) gauge field are
present on the brane and they cannot escape far away from the brane,
since the lightest state of the confining theory of the bulk has a
non-vanishing mass of the order ⁹ ⁹ 9 The parameter @xmath is the
analogous of @xmath in Quantum Chromodynamics. @xmath . It is
interesting to note that this mechanism provides both gauge field and
fermion localization.

### 1.3 Large Extra Dimensions

So far we have discussed KK theories, compactified on internal space
with very small size, and brane world models with infinite extra
dimensions, where a physical localization mechanism is needed to render
the low energy physics effectively 4-dimensional. In this section we
study an intermediate set up, in which the internal space is compact,
like in original KK theories, but with large size . As we will show,
this scenario, originally proposed by Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos and Dvali
(ADD) [ 19 ] , leads to an interesting reformulation of the hierarchy
problem.

Contrary to what happen in original KK theories of Section 1.1 , where
the size of the internal space is naturally of the order of the Planck
length, in the Large Extra Dimensions (LED) scenario the effects of
extra dimensions are constrained by accessible experimental tests. In
particular the behaviour of gravitational interactions should change at
length scales below @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover several possible collider experiments can detect extra
dimensions if the KK mass gap (the mass gap between the zero modes and
the first KK excited states) is of the order of

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as expected.

#### 1.3.1 General Idea of ADD

To illustrate the main idea of ADD we consider an action containing the
standard D-dimensional Einstein-Hilbert term ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 See Appendix A for
conventions and notations.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and we make the following ansatz:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Namely we neglect 4D vectors and scalars coming from the D-dimensional
metric but we keep the 4D metric @xmath . The latter represents the
complete 4D dynamical metric, including the VEV and the fluctuations. If
one requires 4D Poincaré invariance one has also to impose @xmath , but
this is not necessary for our argument. In Eq. ( 1.3.37 ) we allow the
presence of a non-trivial warp factor @xmath to make the argument more
general. This will be useful in Chapter 5 when we will discuss 6D warped
brane worlds. This kind of space-time are called non-factorizable
geometries because they cannot be interpreted as products of manifolds
like ( 1.1.1 ), as in the standard KK compactifications.

An explicit calculation leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar computed with @xmath , and the dots
represent extra terms containing the warp factor and the metric
components @xmath . So we obtain a 4D effective action for the
gravitational field @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the determinant of @xmath and the 4D Planck length
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We observe that @xmath is a d-dimensional volume, which reduces to the
volume of the internal space in the unwarped case ( @xmath ). Indeed the
latter is defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the determinant of the metric @xmath of the internal
space. In terms of mass scales @xmath , and @xmath , Eq. ( 1.3.40 )
takes an illuminating form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If @xmath is large compared to the fundamental length @xmath , the 4D
Planck mass is much larger than the fundamental gravity scale @xmath .
One may push this line of reasoning to extreme and suppose that the
fundamental gravity scale is of the same order as the electroweak scale,
@xmath . Then the hierarchy between @xmath and the electroweak scale is
entirely due to the large value of @xmath . This is an interesting
reformulation of the hierarchy problem because now it becomes the
problem of explaining why @xmath is large. We observe that @xmath can be
large because the volume @xmath of the internal space is large or
because of a non-trivial contribution of the warp factor. In this
section we will assume that only the former contribution is active. We
will discuss the effect of the warp factor in Section 1.4 .

#### 1.3.2 Phenomenological Implications

In the ADD scenario new physics should emerge in the gravitational
sector when the length scale @xmath is reached. However, it is hard to
test gravity at very short distances because it is a much weaker
interaction than all the other forces. Over large distances gravity is
dominant, however, as one starts going to shorter distances,
electromagnetic forces are dominant and completely overwhelm the
gravitational forces. This is the reason why the Newton-law of
gravitational interactions has only been tested down to about a fraction
of a millimeter. Today the bound on the size of the extra dimensions is
@xmath , if only gravity propagates in the extra dimensions [ 20 ] . On
the other hand, assuming @xmath , we can calculate from ( 1.3.43 ) the
value of @xmath as a function of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we used @xmath . For one extra dimensions one obtains unacceptably
large value of @xmath . The case @xmath is particularly interesting
because it corresponds to @xmath . By increasing the fundamental mass
scale of less than one order of magnitude ( @xmath ) one gets a value of
@xmath close to the present bound ( @xmath ). Therefore for @xmath , one
can hope to detect effects of the extra dimensions but still have a
model, which is not ruled out by experiments. If @xmath the size of the
extra dimensions is less than @xmath , which is unlikely to be tested
directly via gravitational measurements any time soon. For @xmath (full
dimensionality of space-time, as suggested by superstring theory), one
has @xmath , which is still much larger than the electroweak scale,
@xmath . In order the extra dimensions to be so large one has to find a
physical mechanism to make the SM matter and gauge fields effectively
4-dimensional. The most popular way is to localize such fields on a
3-brane, but a possible alternative is to relax relation ( 1.3.35 ) and
increase @xmath considering compactifications on non-smooth space. We
will show that this is possible in Chapter 5 , which contains part of
the original work [ 21 ] , even if in this case the tuning of ADD
scenario ( @xmath ) becomes a tuning on the fundamental bulk parameters.

Another interesting phenomenological consequence of this scenario is
that extra dimensions should start to show up in collider experiments at
energies approaching the @xmath scale. If we assume ( 1.3.35 ) and that
the only interactions, which can propagate in the bulk, is the
gravitational interactions, the most distinctive feature of this
scenario is the possibility to emit gravitons into the bulk. This
process has strong dependence on the center of mass energy of particles
colliding on the brane and has large probability at energies comparable
to the fundamental gravity scale. Indeed even though the coupling of
every KK graviton is weak, the total emission rate of KK gravitons is
large at energies approaching @xmath due to large number of KK graviton
states. These particles will not be detected, so the typical collider
processes will involve missing energy. For example the cross section of
production of a KK graviton in the process

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which involves a transverse missing particle @xmath , is of the order of
@xmath , so the total cross section is of order @xmath , where @xmath is
the center of mass energy, and @xmath is the number of species of KK
gravitons with mass below @xmath . By using ( 1.3.35 ) we expect

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is indeed correct for the simple compactification on a @xmath
-dimensional torus. Therefore the total cross section becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

, which rapidly increases with @xmath , and becomes comparable with the
electromagnetic cross section at @xmath . Processes like ( 1.3.45 ) have
been analyzed in detailed in Ref. [ 22 ] . It has been found that both a
1 TeV e+e- collider and the CERN LHC will be able to reliably and
perturbatively probe the fundamental gravity scale up to several TeV,
with the precise value depending on the number @xmath of extra
dimensions.

It is interesting to note that relation ( 1.3.46 ) is relaxed if the KK
mass gap is not of the order @xmath , which is possible if one considers
non-smooth compactification. This can lead to a less stringent bound on
the KK modes production.

### 1.4 Randall-Sundrum Models

Until now we have considered general warped geometries without giving an
explicit example in a specific brane world scenario and without
discussing the role of the warp factor. In this section we shall
describe the most popular example of warped brane world, originally
proposed by Randall and Sundrum (RS) [ 23 , 24 ] . The original RS model
is a 5D gravitational model whose action is the sum of the standard
Einstein-Hilbert action, a 5D cosmological constant term, and a 3-brane
action :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the 5D cosmological constant, @xmath and @xmath are the
brane tensions (energy densities) of two branes placed at @xmath and
@xmath respectively, and @xmath and @xmath are the determinants of the
metrics @xmath and @xmath induced on the branes:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We assume that the branes are located at the boundaries of the extra
dimensions, that is @xmath . One can interpret one brane as our 4D world
and the other one as an additional 4D world.

We consider now the most general background metric compatible with 4D
Poincaré invariance:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The explicit expression for the warp factor can be found by putting this
metric ansatz in the EOM, which follows from ( 1.4.47 ). The explicit
calculation is given in the original work [ 23 ] , so here we only give
the final result. The existence of 4D flat solution requires
fine-tunings between @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Indeed these
constants are related in terms of a single scale @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the warp factor is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This fine-tuning is analogous to fine-tuning of the cosmological
constant to zero in conventional 4D gravity.

Given the background we can now compute the volume @xmath defined in (
1.3.41 ). The result is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this case we can have an hierarchy between @xmath and @xmath but only
for large value of @xmath , that is for a large internal space volume.
However, we observe that @xmath remains finite when @xmath goes to
infinity. This is an important property of the RS model, in which it is
possible to have the ordinary 4D gravity even if we take the non-compact
limit ( @xmath ) for the internal space. Moreover, although the
exponential has very little effect in determining the Planck scale, it
plays a crucial role in the determination of the observable masses.
Indeed since the induced brane metrics are related by @xmath , any mass
parameter @xmath on the @xmath brane will correspond to a mass @xmath
when measured on the @xmath brane [ 23 ] . If @xmath is of order @xmath
, this mechanism produces @xmath physical mass scales from fundamental
mass paramenters of the order of Planck mass. Because this geometric
factor is an exponential, we do not require very large hierarchies among
the fundamental parameters.

In the RS scenario one can localize ad hoc SM fields on a brane and
exploit the mechanism that we have discussed so far in order to
‘‘solve’’ the hierarchy problem. However, after the original RS work
models were developed in which SM fields originate from the bulk ¹¹ ¹¹
11 Although the Higgs field should be confined to the brane in order not
to lose the gauge hierarchy. [ 25 , 26 ] . These authors tried to
implement a localization mechanism similar to the one explained in
section 1.2 but it is difficult to obtain a phenomenologically viable
effective theory, because the various bulk fields are not always
localized on a brane. We shall perform a similar study of bulk fields
but in the contest of 6D warped brane worlds in Chapter 5 .

### 1.5 Addressing the Cosmological Constant Problem

In Sections 1.3 and 1.4 we have discussed higher dimensional models,
which give hope to solve the hierarchy problem or can reformulate it in
an interesting way. The purpose of this section is to perform a similar
study, but concerning the cosmological constant problem. In theories
with extra dimensions such a problem can be reformulated as a problem of
why the vacuum energy density has (almost) no effect on the observable
quantities predicted by the 4D effective theory, which is valid at the
energy range of present experiments. In particular this reformulation
sounds suggestive in brane worlds scenarios, as it implies that the
vacuum energy density may affect the bulk geometry, and that this may
occur in such a way that the metric induced on our brane is (almost)
flat. Roughly speaking, it seems plausible that, in the case of
non-factorizable geometry, the vacuum energy density can induce a
non-trivial warp factor, while the 4D Poincaré invariance remains
unbroken. This possibility may exist irrespectively of the brane world
picture [ 27 ] .

In RS models with one compact or non-compact extra dimension, the warped
solution, that we discussed in Section 1.4 , requires a fine-tuning
between the bulk cosmological constant and the brane tensions, which is
explicitly given in ( 1.4.50 ). From this point of view the cosmological
constant problem is not solved in these models, as the standard 4D
fine-tuning is replaced by a similar 5D one.

A different scenario with non-compact internal manifold and vanishing
cosmological constant in the bulk has been proposed in [ 28 , 29 ] . In
this works, besides a standard D-dimensional Einstein-Hilbert action, an
additional 4D Einstein-Hilbert term and a 4D cosmological constant
@xmath are introduced on a 3-brane, giving rise to the following
gravitational action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here we have two different Planck scales, @xmath in the bulk and @xmath
on the brane. It has also been argued [ 28 ] that the 4D
Einstein-Hilbert term is a natural ingredient, as quantum corrections
generate it anyway. In [ 28 ] the above model has been formulated in 5D,
but generalizations involving more than one extra dimension, which are
relevant for the cosmological constant problem, have been considered in
[ 29 ] .

In this scenario the graviton is a metastable state and the essential
feature of the model is the large distance modification of gravity. More
precicely, the graviton propagator manifests a modified behaviour at
length scales larger than @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath and @xmath . As a consequence, gravity does not necessarily
react to sources that are relevant at length scale of the order @xmath ,
where @xmath is the Hubble constant, as is the case for the cosmological
constant on the brane. As explained in [ 29 , 30 ] , this property could
lead to a solution of the cosmological constant problem.

Other frameworks, which could be relevant for the cosmological constant
problem, are 6D models with 2 compact extra dimensions and, more
generally, self tuning models. These frameworks will be briefly reviewed
in the next section and in Chapter 4 , where we will deal with
supersymmetric and large extra dimensions.

### 1.6 Codimension 2 Branes

As we discussed in Section 1.3 the case @xmath is particularly
interesting in the ADD scenario. It corresponds indeed to the smallest
value of @xmath compatible with tests of gravity. Moreover for @xmath
the ADD scenario predicts a value of @xmath close to the present bound
given by such experiments and therefore it is a falsifiable set up.
Furthermore models in 6 dimensions have attracted interest as possible
frameworks in which the cosmological constant could be faced, in both
the non supersymmetric [ 31 , 32 , 33 ] and the supersymmetric [ 34 ] -
[ 39 ] case. One of the motivations for that is the numerical equality
between @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the measured vacuum’s energy
density, in 6D ADD scenario.

In order to implement these ideas usually 3-brane sources are introduced
in the action, namely terms similar to the second and third term in the
RS action given in ( 1.4.47 ). However, branes whose transverse space is
2D (codimension 2 brane) are qualitative different from codimension 1
branes, described in Section 1.4 . One of the main features of 6D models
is the possibility to find 3-branes solutions of the EOM with a geometry
independent of the value of the brane tensions, at least outside the
branes. This property is not shared by the codimension 1 RS branes
because of the following reason: the 5D cosmological constant @xmath in
that case depends on the brane tensions because of constraint ( 1.4.50
), and, on the other hand, @xmath gives a non vanishing contribution to
the 5D Ricci scalar both outside and on the branes.

The aim of the present section is to describe codimension 2 branes in a
simple set up because they are usefull to understand the original
results of Chapter 5 , in which we will deal with 6D supersymmetric
models having this type of brane solutions.

We start with the following 6D action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.6.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that is the sum of the standard 6D Einstein-Hilbert action and a single
brane source. Moreover we consider the following simple ansatz for the
background metric

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.6.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that is we assume 4D Poincaré invariance, vanishing warp factor,
axisymmetry of the internal 2D space but we allow a non-trivial
curvature in order to take into account the backreaction of the geometry
due to the brane source. This curvature will be a functional of @xmath .
We assume that @xmath and @xmath range from @xmath to @xmath and from
@xmath to @xmath respectively. So we interpret @xmath as a radial
coordinate and @xmath as an angular coordinate.

The EOM associated to action ( 1.6.55 ) are the Einstein equations in
presence of a brane source:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.6.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath is the 2D Dirac @xmath -function and @xmath are
now the metric components in the coordinates @xmath and @xmath . By
using ansatz ( 1.6.56 ) the @xmath components of the Einstein equations
give

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.6.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the determinant of @xmath . We observe that the Ricci
scalar outside the brane vanishes and therefore is independent of the
brane tension, this is an example of the possible independence of
geometry and brane tensions in codimension 2 brane world. The @xmath
components are trivially satisfied as they read @xmath and the 2D metric
@xmath satisfies @xmath for some function @xmath . On the other hand the
Ricci scalar is given in terms of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.6.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the covariant Laplacian computed with the euclidean
metric @xmath . By putting ( 1.6.59 ) in ( 1.6.58 ) we get a second
order differential equation for @xmath , which is satisfied by ¹² ¹² 12
In order to prove that @xmath is a solution one can use the relation
@xmath . @xmath where @xmath is given in terms of the brane tension by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.6.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The parameter @xmath has an interesting geometrical meaning that can be
understood by introducing the coordinate @xmath . Indeed the 2D metric
in terms of this coordinate is @xmath . Therefore the effect of a non
vanishing value of @xmath is the shift @xmath , that is it produces a
deficit angle @xmath given by [ 40 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.6.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The resulting geometry presents a conical defect (or conical singularity
) at @xmath . Eq. ( 1.6.61 ) is very important because it establishes a
relation between a geometrical property of the internal space and a
physical property of the 3-brane. We will use this formula in Chapter 5
, where we will study the 6D supersymmetric and gravitational models
compactified on an internal space that will turn out to have conical
singularities.

## Part I: Heavy Mode Contribution from Extra Dimensions

In studying the low energy physics of the light modes of a
(4+d)-dimensional theory the attention is usually paid only to the
spectral aspects. After determining the quantum numbers of the light
modes the nature and the form of the interaction terms are often assumed
to be dictated by symmetry arguments. Such arguments fix the general
form of all the renormalilzable terms and if the effective theory is
supersymmetric certain relationship between the couplings can also be
established by supersymmetry. The masses are derived from the bilinear
part of the effective action and the role of the heavy modes in the
actual values of the masses and the couplings of the effective theory
for the light modes are seldom taken into account. It is, however, well
known from the study of the GUT’s in 4-dimensions that the heavy modes
have an important role to play even at low energies [ 41 ] . This
happens through their contributions to the couplings entering into the
effective Lagrangians describing the low energy physics of the light
modes. According to Wilsonian approach, in order to obtain an effective
theory applicable in large distances, the heavy modes should be
integrated out [ 42 ] . The processes of ”integrating out” has the
effect of modifying the couplings of the light modes or introducing
additional terms, which are suppressed by inverse powers of the heavy
masses, as proved ¹³ ¹³ 13 If the gauge symmetry is not assumed, the
decoupling theorem of [ 43 ] in general does not hold [ 44 , 45 , 46 ] .
in [ 43 ] .

The aim of Part I of the present thesis is to examine the role of the
heavy modes in the low energy description of a higher dimensional
theory. To this end we shall basically perform two complementary
calculations. The first one will start from a solution of a higher
dimensional theory with a 4D Poincaré invariance and develop an action
functional for the light modes of the effective 4D theory. This
effective action generally has a local symmetry, which should be broken
by Higgs mechanism. Our interest is in the spectrum of the broken
theory. The procedure is essentially what is adopted in the effective
description of higher dimensional theories including superstring and
M-theory compactifications. In this construction the heavy KK modes are
generally ignored simply by reasoning that their masses are of the order
of the compactification mass and this can be as heavy as the Planck
mass. Therefore they cannot affect the low energy physics of the light
modes.

In the second approach, which we shall call the @xmath , we shall find a
solution of the higher dimensional equations with the same symmetry
group as the one of the broken phase of the effective 4D theory for the
light modes. We shall then study the physics of the 4D light modes
around this solution. The result for the effective 4D theory will turn
out to be different from the first approach. Our aim is to show that the
difference is precisely due to the fact that in constructing the
effective theory along the lines of the first approach the contribution
of the heavy KK modes have been ignored. Indeed it will be argued - and
demonstrated by working out some explicit examples - that taking due
care of the role of the heavy modes a complete equivalence is
established between the two approaches.

Part I contains two chapters and they both present original results [ 4
] . In Chapter 2 we motivate the discussion in a simple context. In
Section 2.1 we shall work out a simple model of two coupled scalar
fields in 4-dimensions, which will be generalized to a multiplet of
scalar fields in arbitrary dimensions in Section 2.2 . The examples in
Sections 2.1 and 2.2 will clarify the relevance of the heavy modes in
the low energy description of the light modes. In Section 2.3 we shall
discuss a simple 5D domain wall model including two bulk scalars, one of
which acquires a kink VEV. In this simple higher dimensional model we
will include also interactions in our study of the broken effective
theory. In Chapter 3 we shall study a higher dimensional (in this case
six dimensional) theory of Einstein-Maxwell system [ 7 ] coupled to a
charged scalar and eventually also to charged fermions. We will define
explicitly this model in Section 3.1 . Such a model can arise in the
compactification of string or M-theory to lower dimensions. The system
has enough number of adjustable parameters to allow us to go to various
limits in order to establish the main point of the present part of the
thesis. The result will of course confirm the above mentioned
expectation that in order to obtain a correct 4-dimensional description
of the physics of the light modes the contribution of the heavy modes
should be duly taken into account ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Of course this does not prove
that the heavy mode contribution never vanishes: for instance [ 47 ]
proves the decoupling of the heavy modes in the @xmath compactification
of the 6D chiral supergravity [ 48 ] , which is basically the
supersymmetric version of our 6D theory. . The explicit calculations
will be given in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 and summarized in Section 3.4 .
This example is particularly interesting because the first kind of
solution will produce an effective 4D gauge theory with a @xmath
symmetry which will be broken to @xmath by a complex triplet of Higgs
fields. The geometrical approach, on the other hand, will take us
directly to the unbroken @xmath phase by deforming a round sphere into
an ellipsoid ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 This will correspond to the magnetic monopole
charge of 2. A monopole charge of unity will produce a Higgs doublet of
SU(2). . In the geometrical approach the W and the Z masses originate
from the deformation of the internal space. In this sense the standard
Higgs mechanism acquires a geometrical origin ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 It should be
mentioned that all of our discussion is ( semi-) classical. To include
quantum and renormalization effects is beyond the scope of the present
study. . We elaborate a little more on this point in Section 3.4 which
summarizes our results. Some technical aspects of various derivations
have been detailed in Appendix B .

## Chapter 2 Higher Dimensional Scalar Models.

The present chapter will clarify the role of the heavy modes in the low
energy dynamics without introducing any complications due to gauge and
gravitational interactions. We will provide a generalization to a more
sophisticated context in Chapter 3 .

### 2.1 A Simple 4D Theory

Let us consider a 4D theory, which contains two real scalar fields
@xmath and @xmath and with the lagrangian

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real parameters ¹
¹ 1 Of course we consider only the values of these parameters such that
the scalar potential is bounded from below. . Here we have the symmetry:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is a very particular example and of course we do not want to
present any general result in this section, we just want to provide a
framework in which the general equivalence that we spoke about in the
introduction emerges in a simple way and is not obscured by technical
difficulties.

For @xmath we have the following solution of the EOM:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which breaks @xmath but preserves @xmath . We can express the lagrangian
in terms of the fluctuation @xmath and @xmath around this background:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.1.3)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath , we expect that the heavy mode @xmath can be integrated out
and an effective theory for @xmath can be constructed for both the signs
of @xmath . However, it’s important to note that @xmath cannot be simply
neglected because it gives a contribution, because of the trilinear ² ²
2 Also the quartic coupling @xmath gives a contribution to the operator
@xmath , but this is negligible in the classical limit. coupling @xmath
in ( 2.1.3 ), to the operator @xmath in the effective theory, through
the diagram 2.1 . This is similar to what is usually done in GUT
theories [ 41 ] , where, for instance, four fermions effective
interactions emerge by integrating out the heavy gauge fields [ 49 ] .

At the classical level the effective lagrangian for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the dots represent higher dimensional operators. The term @xmath
is the contribution of the heavy mode. The result ( 2.1.5 ) was
originally derived in [ 45 ] , but here we want also to study the
effective theory with spontaneous symmetry breaking and we want to
compare it with the low energy limit of the fundamental theory.

For @xmath , the minimum of the effective theory potential is for @xmath
. Instead for @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the fluctuation @xmath over this background has the following mass
squared:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This results will be not modified by the higher dimensional operator at
the leading order ³ ³ 3 The mass @xmath is small in the sense @xmath .
in @xmath . The equations ( 2.1.6 ) and ( 2.1.7 ) represent the
effective theory prediction for the VEV and the spectrum in the phase
where @xmath is broken.

On the other hand, a solution of the fundamental EOM, namely the EOM
derived from the fundamental lagrangian @xmath , is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which is a small deformation of ( 2.1.2 ) at the leading non-trivial
order in @xmath and breaks the @xmath symmetry. Moreover the light mode
which corresponds to this solution has a mass squared @xmath .

Therefore the effective theory prediction for the light mode VEV and
spectrum is correct, at the order @xmath , in this simple framework, but
the heavy mode contribution is necessary in order the effective theory
prediction to be correct.

### 2.2 A More General Case

Now we want to extend the result of Section 2.1 and ref [ 45 ] to a more
general class of theories. We consider a set of real D-dimensional
scalars @xmath with a general potential @xmath : the lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath run over all the space-time dimensions, while @xmath and
@xmath are respectively the 4D and the internal coordinates indices. The
EOM are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We consider now a solution @xmath of ( 2.2.2 ) which preserves the 4D
Poincaré invariance and some internal symmetry group @xmath ; the
corresponding mass squared eigenvalue problem for the 4D states is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the fluctuation around @xmath . We assume that there are
@xmath normalizable solutions @xmath with small eigenvalues ( @xmath ),
other, in principle infinite, solutions ⁴ ⁴ 4 In principle @xmath can be
a discrete or a continuous variable. @xmath with large eigenvalues (
@xmath ) and nothing else. These hypothesis are needed in order to
define the concept of light KK modes.

We can expand the scalars @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the light and heavy KK modes.
We choose the @xmath and @xmath in order that they form an orthonormal
basis for the functions over the internal space:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We note that @xmath and @xmath could both belong to some non-trivial
representation of the internal symmetry group @xmath .

#### 2.2.1 The Effective Theory Method

We construct now some relevant terms in the effective theory for the
light KK modes @xmath . Here ”relevant terms” mean relevant terms in the
classical limit and in case we have a small point of minimum of the
order @xmath of the effective theory potential: we want to compare the
results of the effective theory for the light KK modes with the low
energy limit of the fundamental theory expanded around a vacuum which is
a small perturbation of @xmath . Further we calculate everything at
leading non-trivial order ⁵ ⁵ 5 The @xmath mass scale is small in the
sense @xmath is much smaller than the heavy masses. in @xmath . The
relevant terms can be computed by putting just the light KK modes in the
action and performing the integration over the extra dimensions and then
by taking into account the effect of heavy KK modes through the diagrams
like Fig. 2.1 . In order to calculate those diagrams, we give the
interactions between two light modes @xmath and one heavy mode @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used the notation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We get the following relevant terms in the effective theory potential
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the dots represent non relevant terms, @xmath are dimensionless
numbers and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the quantities @xmath represent the heavy modes contribution and
they are given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The object @xmath is the Green function for the mass squared operator at
the left hand side of ( 2.2.3 ) and it’s explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the eigenvalue associated to the eigenfunction @xmath .

In the rest of this section we consider the predictions of the effective
theory with spontaneous symmetry breaking. The potential ( 2.2.8 ) has
to be considered as a generalization of ( 2.1.5 ), which was originally
derived in [ 45 ] . A non vanishing VEV breaks in general @xmath to some
subgroup and it must satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Since we require that @xmath goes to zero as @xmath goes to zero we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is proportional to @xmath , @xmath is proportional to
@xmath and so on. At the order @xmath the equations ( 2.2.14 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

While, at the order @xmath , the equations ( 2.2.14 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the equations ( 2.2.17 ).

Finally the mass spectrum corresponding to a solution of ( 2.2.14 ) is
given by the eigenvalues of the hessian matrix of @xmath in that
solution:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we assume, for simplicity, @xmath , which corresponds to the absence
of cubic terms in @xmath , the leading order approximation of the
hessian is simply given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In Subsection 2.2.2 we show that this matrix, which represents the mass
spectrum for the light KK modes, and the equations ( 2.2.17 ) and (
2.2.18 ) for the light modes VEVs are exactly reproduced by a
D-dimensional analysis.

#### 2.2.2 D-dimensional analysis

Now we present a D-dimensional (or geometrical) approach to compute low
energy quantities: we want to find a solution of ( 2.2.2 ) which is a
small perturbation, of the order @xmath , of @xmath and then we want to
find the low energy mass spectrum of the fluctuations around this
solution. In general this solution will break @xmath to some subgroup
like a solution of ( 2.2.14 ) does in the effective theory method. The
explicit form of such solution in the simple case of Section 2.1 is
given by ( 2.1.8 ) and the low energy mass spectrum in that simple case
is represented by the squared mass @xmath ; now we want to generalize
these results.

Let us consider the expansion ( 2.2.4 ); we observe that the statement
that the solution is a small perturbation of @xmath means

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that is there are no big @xmath independent terms in @xmath and @xmath .
We consider now a Taylor expansion of the equations ( 2.2.2 ) around
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

At the order @xmath the equations ( 2.2.22 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which simply states

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover at the order @xmath the equations ( 2.2.22 ) imply

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which has two consequences: the first one is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which can be derived from ( 2.2.25 ) by projecting over @xmath and it
exactly reproduces ( 2.2.17 ) of the effective theory method; the second
consequence is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath still represents the Green function for the operator at the
left hand side of ( 2.2.3 ). Now we can write the @xmath part of the Eq.
( 2.2.22 ) as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If one projects this equation over @xmath and uses the equations (
2.2.26 ) and ( 2.2.27 ) one gets exactly the equations ( 2.2.18 ).
Therefore, at the order @xmath , all the solutions of ( 2.2.14 ) are
reproduced by the D-dimensional analysis and viceversa. Moreover we
observe that these light KK modes VEVs, predicted by the effective
theory, constitute approximate solutions of the fundamental
D-dimensional EOM at leading non-trivial order because of the Eq. (
2.2.24 ), which states that the heavy KK modes VEVs are higher order
quantity with respect to the light KK modes VEVs.

Now we consider the mass squared eigenvalue problem which corresponds to
a solution @xmath ; moreover we assume for simplicity @xmath , like in
the effective theory method. This eigenvalue problem is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath represents the fluctuations of the scalars around the
solution @xmath . We observe now that the equation ( 2.2.29 ) can be
considered a time-independent Schrodinger equation: @xmath is the
hamiltonian and @xmath the generic energy level. Moreover we can perform
a Taylor expansion of @xmath around @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The operators @xmath and @xmath can be easily expressed just in terms of
@xmath and @xmath by using ( 2.2.4 ), ( 2.2.21 ) and the constraints (
2.2.27 ) and ( 2.2.24 ) which come from the EOM. From the perturbation
theory of quantum mechanics we know that the leading value of the low
energy mass spectrum is given by the eigenvalues of the following mass
squared matrix:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If one express the matrices @xmath and @xmath in terms ⁶ ⁶ 6 The
dependence on @xmath disappears because we assume @xmath , as one can
easily check. of @xmath , one finds exactly the corresponding result (
2.2.20 ) predicted by the effective theory.

So we have two equivalent (at least at the leading non-trivial order in
@xmath ) approaches to study the breaking of @xmath : the spontaneous
symmetry breaking in the 4D effective theory and the D-dimensional
analysis. We stress that, like in the simple model of Section 2.1 , also
in this more general case the heavy KK mode contribution in the
effective theory can’t be neglected if one wants to reproduce the
D-dimensional result, even at the classical level. In general this is
true not only in scalar theories but also in theories which involve
gauge and gravitational interactions, as we illustrate in Chapter 3 .

### 2.3 A Domain Wall Example

Here we provide an explicit application of previous results in the case
of brane world models, where we have a non-trivial heavy KK mode
contribution to the 4D effective theory. Moreover we study the role of
heavy modes in the interactions of the 4D effective theory: we analyze
the cubic interaction of the Higgs field after SSB, which is reproduced
by the geometrical approach as well as masses and VEV.

#### 2.3.1 The Model

We consider a 5D model with two scalar fields @xmath and @xmath . The
lagrangian is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3.1)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real parameters ⁷
⁷ 7 We consider only the values of these parameters which correspond a
potential bounded from below. . This model reduces to the one of Section
1.2 for @xmath . The internal symmetry of this theory is @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The EOM are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Like in Section 1.2 we consider the domain wall solution for @xmath ,
whereas @xmath is assumed to vanish at the background level:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The VEV in ( 2.3.4 ) preserves the internal symmetry @xmath . The mass
squared eigenvalue problem which corresponds to solution ( 2.3.4 ), is

  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.3.5)
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the fluctuation of @xmath around @xmath . Equations (
2.3.5 ) and ( 2.3.6 ) are studied in the literature [ 13 , 8 , 14 , 15 ]
. They are Schroedinger equations with a potential ⁸ ⁸ 8 We require
@xmath in order to get a localized wave function from equation ( 2.3.6
). @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are constants. Like in Section 1.2
we can derive boundary conditions of the form ( 1.2.16 ) for both @xmath
and @xmath . Therefore we project out exponentially growing solutions of
( 2.3.5 ) and ( 2.3.6 ). There is a wave function @xmath for @xmath with
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a normalization constant such that @xmath Concerning
@xmath , we find an eigenfunction

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath ensures @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The mass which corresponds to @xmath is very small if we choose

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is a very small dimensionless parameter. Henceforth we assume
( 2.3.10 ) so the mass squared

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

associated to @xmath , is small. The wave functions @xmath and @xmath
are the ground states of the Schroedinger equations ( 2.3.5 ) and (
2.3.6 ) respectively, because they have no nodes. All the remaining
solutions of ( 2.3.5 ) and ( 2.3.6 ) have @xmath . We can perform the
following expansion

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the solutions of ( 2.3.5 ) and ( 2.3.6 )
with @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are respectively the light modes and
the heavy modes.

#### 2.3.2 The 4D Effective Theory for the Light Modes

The relevant terms in the effective theory for the light modes can be
computed with the general argument given in Section 2.2.1 . By using the
residual @xmath symmetry and the fact that @xmath are even functions of
@xmath while @xmath is odd we find that the effective theory potential
has the following form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the dots represent higher order operators. The semiclassical
approximation of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath including the heavy mode
contribution is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath represent the light mode contribution
and they are explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whereas @xmath @xmath and @xmath represent the heavy mode contribution:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3.19)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where the integrals over @xmath are from @xmath to @xmath , @xmath are
defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is the mass of @xmath . The functions in ( 2.3.20 ) are the
Green functions for the operators @xmath defined in equations ⁹ ⁹ 9 More
precisely @xmath is the Green function of @xmath with @xmath . ( 2.3.5 )
and ( 2.3.6 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The general solution of ( 2.3.21 ) is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
                 (2.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are generic functions of @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath and @xmath are two independent eigenfunctions of @xmath with
vanishing eigenvalue. In our case we can compute @xmath by requiring
@xmath , as function of @xmath , to have no exponentially growing part:
we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, from ( 2.3.20 ), we are forced to project @xmath in the
subspace orthogonal to @xmath , this fixes @xmath ; however, here we do
not need the explicit expression for @xmath .

##### Computation of the Effective Coupling Constants

By using the explicit form of @xmath and @xmath we can compute @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath by means of equations ( 2.3.18 ) and ( 2.3.19 ). The
expressions of such coupling constants simplify because @xmath is even
and @xmath is odd under @xmath ; in particular first and third line in (
2.3.22 ) do not give any contribution to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
because of those parities. Concerning @xmath , a non-trivial balancing
between the heavy mode contribution and the light modes one gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The explicit expression for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Euler gamma function, and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The ratio

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in ( 2.3.25 ) represents the heavy mode contribution to this coupling
constant. In general @xmath is not negligible: for instance, by choosing
@xmath that is @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is not small for @xmath , @xmath @xmath . Finally we note that
@xmath depends on @xmath , because of @xmath in @xmath . We perform a
Taylor expansion of this coupling around @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If we set for simplicity @xmath , we get @xmath again by means of a
non-trivial balance between light and heavy mode contribution.

##### Broken Effective Theory and the Role of Heavy Modes

Here we show that the heavy modes have a non-trivial role in the low
energy physics. The potential now looks like

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the dots represent higher order terms (powers of @xmath greater
than @xmath ) and @xmath .

A consistent vacuum at the leading order in @xmath is (for @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Vacuum ( 2.3.33 ) spontaneously breaks @xmath . The corresponding
leading order mass spectrum of the fluctuations around ( 2.3.33 ) is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We observe that the contribution of the heavy modes to @xmath is not
trivial because the quantity @xmath in ( 2.3.29 ) is not negligible.
This contribution is a modification of the cubic self-interaction of
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We observe that this is the only cubic interaction at the order @xmath .
Such an interaction is reproduced by the 5D analysis explained in
Subsection 2.2.2 , as one can expect, only if the heavy mode
contributions are taken into account, that is only if the quantity
@xmath in ( 2.3.28 ) is not neglected.

So in this section we have extended the results of Sections 2.1 and 2.2
, concerning only the spectral aspects of the broken effective theory,
by including the description of the heavy mode contribution to
interactions in the broken effective theory. Also at the interaction
level such contribution turns out to be needed to reproduce the
D-dimensional, in this case 5-dimensional, approach.

However, we observe that the models presented in this chapter do not
include gauge and gravitational interactions. Therefore in the next
chapter we will introduce a gauge and gravitational model and we will
discuss again the role of the heavy modes in the effective theory taking
into account the extra terms in the lagrangian that are implied by
gravity and gauge invariance.

## Chapter 3 6D Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar Model.

In Chapter 2 we have proved that the heavy mode contribution is
necessary to reproduce the correct low energy dynamics because, without
this contribution, the 4D effective theory approach cannot reproduce in
general the D-dimensional (or geometrical) approach to spontaneous
symmetry breaking. The aim of the present chapter is to prove a similar
statement in a more interesting context which can be extended to a
semi-realistic theory. Our model will be an Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar
model in 6D, which will be compactified over an internal space with the
@xmath topology. This is an ordinary KK theory in which the KK mass
scale is naturally of the order of the Planck mass. We will be able to
prove that the heavy mode contribution is not negligible even if they
have such a large mass.

### 3.1 Definition of the Model and 6D Equations of Motion

We consider a 6D field theory of gravity with a @xmath gauge invariance,
including a charged scalar field @xmath and eventually fermions. The
bosonic action is ¹ ¹ 1 Our conventions are fixed in Appendix A .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Ricci scalar, @xmath represents the 6D Planck scale,
@xmath is the field strength of the @xmath gauge field @xmath , defined
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the @xmath gauge coupling. Moreover @xmath is a scalar
potential and we choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are generical real constants, with the
constraint @xmath and @xmath represents the 6D cosmological constant.

From the action ( 3.1.1 ) we can derive the general bosonic EOM.
However, we focus on the following class of backgrounds, which are
invariant under the 4D Poincaré group:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the metric of a 2-dimensional compact internal manifold
@xmath ; so the 6D space-time manifold is @xmath . By using ( 3.1.5 ), (
3.1.6 ) and ( 3.1.7 ), we can write the bosonic EOM in the following
form:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the covariant Laplacian over the internal manifold. The
equations ( 3.1.8 ) must be satisfied by the bosonic VEV.

We introduce also fermions and gauge invariant coupling with the scalar
@xmath . In order to do that it is necessary to introduce at least a
pair of 6D Weyl spinors @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
eigenvectors of @xmath with eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath respectively ²
² 2 Our conventions for the 6D gamma matrices are given in Appendix A .
. We consider the following fermionic action:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a real Yukawa coupling constant. In ( 3.1.9 ) @xmath
represents the covariant derivative acting on spinor, which includes the
gauge and the spin connection. The @xmath charge @xmath and @xmath of
@xmath and @xmath have to satisfy the condition @xmath coming from the
gauge invariance of the Yukawa terms. In the following we consider the
choice @xmath and @xmath , corresponding to a simple harmonic expansion
for the compactification over @xmath . From ( 3.1.9 ) we get the
following EOM:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we define the following 4D Weyl spinors:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the 4D chirality matrix. In terms of @xmath and @xmath
the EOM, for a @xmath background space-time, are ³ ³ 3 We rearrange the
equations in a way that the left handed and right handed sector are
split.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath are the covariant derivative components in an orthonormal
basis. The equations ( 3.1.12 ) will be used in order to compute the
fermionic spectrum.

### 3.2 4D Electroweak Symmetry Breaking

#### 3.2.1 The @xmath Background Solution

An @xmath -invariant solution of ( 3.1.8 ) is [ 7 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

subject to the constraints

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the monopole number. The metric ( 3.2.1 ) is the sum of
the 4D Minkowski metric and the metric of the 2D sphere @xmath , with
radius @xmath . So we have @xmath and our internal space is maximally
symmetric. We use the spherical coordinates @xmath and @xmath , so
@xmath , @xmath . The 1-form ( 3.2.2 ) is a monopole configuration for
the @xmath gauge field. In ( 3.2.2 ) @xmath is expressed in the chart
@xmath , @xmath . Instead in the chart @xmath , @xmath , @xmath has the
form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The two 1-forms ( 3.2.2 ) and ( 3.2.5 ) must differ by a single valued
gauge transformation and so we have that @xmath is an integer. This rule
is called Dirac quantization condition. We note that the solution in (
3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2 ) and ( 3.2.3 ) has an @xmath symmetry. It’s useful to
introduce an orthonormal basis in the internal cotangent space [ 7 ] .
We choose the following 1-forms basis

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this basis the metric ( 3.2.1 ) has the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Under a rotation on the sphere we have [ 7 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath depends on the internal coordinates @xmath and @xmath , and
the group element of @xmath , associated to the rotation, but it does
not depend on the 4D coordinates ⁴ ⁴ 4 The transformation laws ( 3.2.8 )
and ( 3.2.9 ) can be extended to an @xmath -dependent rotation [ 7 ] .
@xmath . So the 1-form ( 3.2.2 ) has the following transformation
property

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can now introduce the iso-helicity by saying that the iso-helicity of
@xmath is @xmath . Further more, if we consider the background covariant
derivative of @xmath and we remember this object must have the same
iso-helicity of @xmath , we obtain that @xmath has iso-helicity @xmath .
Generally rotations act on tensors like an @xmath group, so we can group
the components of tensors in @xmath irreducible pieces [ 7 ] : the
iso-helicity of a field is nothing but its @xmath charge.

Generally if @xmath is a field with an integer or half-integer
iso-helicity @xmath , we can perform an harmonic expansion [ 7 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where, for a given @xmath , @xmath is a @xmath unitary matrix. For
example @xmath has an expansion like ( 3.2.11 ) with @xmath . The @xmath
were originally introduced in [ 50 ] and in the following we give our
conventions. We define the harmonics @xmath as proportional to the
matrix element

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath , @xmath , are the generators of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the totally antisymmetric Levi-Civita symbol with @xmath
. Moreover @xmath is the eigenvector of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath
and the eigenvector of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath . We introduce also
@xmath . The explicit harmonic expansions for @xmath and the
fluctuations @xmath and @xmath of the metric and the gauge field are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the subscripts @xmath and @xmath refer to the basis ( 3.2.6 ). For
@xmath our choice is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have introduced @xmath . In ( 3.2.19 ) the first, second and
third rows correspond to @xmath , the first, second and third columns to
@xmath . While our choice for @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a row index. We could continue and compute the harmonics
for every value of @xmath but we do not do that as we do not need their
explicit expression for @xmath .

It is useful to compute the effect of the background covariant
derivatives on the harmonics. We have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the background covariant derivative, @xmath is the
inverse of @xmath , which can be calculated from ( 3.2.6 ), and @xmath
represents the background spin connection: we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It can be proved the following effects of

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

over the harmonics:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the following we consider, just for simplicity, the case

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In fact for this value of the monopole charge we can find a very simple
solution of the fundamental 6D EOMs ( 3.1.8 ) which is invariant under a
@xmath subgroup of @xmath ; this solution is discussed in Section 3.3 .
Like in Section 2.2 our purpose is in fact to construct the 4D @xmath
-invariant effective theory, study the spontaneous symmetry breaking
@xmath and the Higgs mechanism in the effective theory and then compare
the results with the corresponding quantities predicted by the 6D
theory; therefore, in order to do that, one has to find a 6D
U(1)-invariant solution of the EOMs. We observe that for @xmath the
iso-helicity of @xmath is @xmath .

The low energy 4D spectrum coming from the background ( 3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2
) and ( 3.2.3 ) is given in Ref. [ 7 ] for the spin-1 and spin-2
sectors. The massless sector is the following: there are a graviton
(helicities @xmath , @xmath ), a @xmath gauge field (helicities @xmath ,
@xmath ) coming from @xmath and a Yang-Mills @xmath triplet (helicities
@xmath , @xmath ) coming from @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath are the fluctuations of the gauge field and the metric around
solution ( 3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2 ) and ( 3.2.3 ). Regarding the scalar
spectrum all the scalars from @xmath and @xmath have very large masses,
of the order @xmath , and we can get only an @xmath -triplet with mass
squared @xmath from @xmath in the low energy spectrum if we choose
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In fact @xmath is the eigenvalue of the Laplacian operator acting on the
harmonic with @xmath and @xmath , as one can check using the related
formula of [ 7 ] . The parameter @xmath is in fact the squared mass of
the triplet from @xmath , and it can be in principle either positive or
negative. If ( 3.2.25 ) holds all the remaining scalars have masses at
least of the order @xmath and they do not appear in the low energy
theory. So we assume that ( 3.2.25 ) holds. Finally in order to find the
low energy fermionic spectrum we have to calculate the associated
iso-helicities by using the explicit expression for the background
covariant derivative of @xmath along the internal space:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the corresponding expansions are given by ( 3.2.11 ). So the
equations ( 3.1.12 ) tell us that there are 4 zero-modes: the @xmath ,
@xmath mode in @xmath and the @xmath , @xmath in @xmath . So we have a
massless @xmath singlet from @xmath and a massless @xmath triplet from
@xmath .

#### 3.2.2 The 4D @xmath Effective Lagrangian and the Higgs Mechanism

Now we want to study the 4D effective theory: which is the 4D theory
obtained from the background ( 3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2 ) and ( 3.2.3 )
retaining only the low energy spectrum we discussed at the end of
Subsection 3.2.1 , that is the particles with masses much smaller than
@xmath , and integrating out all the heavy modes, namely those with mass
at least of the order @xmath . This is an @xmath -invariant theory,
which includes a charged scalar, that we call @xmath , in the @xmath
-dimensional representation of @xmath , and, if we want, two Weyl
spinors in the @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . The background ( 3.2.1 ), (
3.2.2 ) and ( 3.2.3 ) is the analogous of what we called @xmath in
Section 2.2 . In this section we give only some relevant terms ⁵ ⁵ 5
Here “relevant terms” has the same meaning as in the Subsection 2.2.1 .
appearing in the lagrangian of this theory. In particular we calculate
the scalar potential, we study the Higgs mechanism, which is active only
for @xmath , and we give in this case the masses of the spin-1, spin-0
and spin-1/2 particles.

Like in the general scalar theory of Section 2.2 , in the following we
perform all the calculations at the order @xmath . If we use the
information regarding the low energy spectrum which we discussed at the
end of Subsection 3.2.1 , we can construct some relevant terms of the 4D
effective theory through the following ansatz ⁶ ⁶ 6 The ansatz ( 3.2.29
) is a generalization of the zero-mode ansatz of [ 7 ] , which does not
include scalar fields.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , are the 6D @xmath -dependent orthonormal 1-form
basis, @xmath is the 4D @xmath -dependent vielbein, @xmath is the 4D
@xmath gauge field coming from @xmath , a linear combination ⁷ ⁷ 7 The
orthogonal linear combination has a large mass; we show this in Appendix
B.1.3 . of @xmath and @xmath is the Yang-Mills @xmath triplet [ 7 ]
coming from @xmath and @xmath ; finally @xmath and @xmath are the @xmath
fermion singlet and fermion triplet, respectively. Actually the ansatz (
3.2.29 ) is the background ( 3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2 ) and ( 3.2.3 ) plus some
fluctuations, which include all the light KK states.

Now we want to write some relevant terms of the effective lagrangian for
@xmath by using the light-mode ansatz ( 3.2.29 ) and by taking into
account the heavy mode contribution. Concerning the scalar potential in
the 4D effective theory, we already know that the bilinear part is
simply @xmath . Whereas the quartic terms are non-trivial and they have
two different contributions: the quartic term in the 6D potential @xmath
in ( 3.1.4 ) computed with @xmath in Eq. ( 3.2.29 ) and the heavy scalar
modes ( @xmath and @xmath ) contribution through diagrams like Fig. 2.1
, evaluated at transferred momentum equal to zero. The first
contribution is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This object is equal to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an invariant tensor in the @xmath representation of
@xmath . We obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are some constants. By explicit
calculations we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The final expression for the scalar potential @xmath in the 4D effective
theory, including the bilinear and the quartic interactions and the
light and heavy mode contributions, is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are dimensionless parameters,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the dots represent higher order non relevant terms, for example
terms with a product of 6 @xmath or 8 @xmath . These terms do not
contribute to the VEV of @xmath as we want this VEV to be of the order ⁸
⁸ 8 The order @xmath corresponds to the order @xmath because of Eq. (
3.2.26 ). @xmath . In ( 3.2.34 ) the contribution of the heavy scalars,
namely @xmath and @xmath , is represented by @xmath and @xmath , the
analogous of @xmath in the Eq. ( 2.2.10 ). Moreover we give also the
expression for the gauge covariant derivative of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is defined in Appendix B.1.3 and it represents the @xmath
Yang-Mills field, @xmath is a totally antisymmetric symbol with @xmath ,
and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

are the 4D @xmath and @xmath gauge couplings. Therefore the complete
lagrangian for @xmath is

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.2.38)
  -- -- -- ----------

Let us look for the points of minimum of the order @xmath of the
potential @xmath in ( 3.2.34 ). We have a minimum, in the case @xmath ,
for

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which corresponds to the global minimum

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

at the order @xmath . This fact states that, at leading order, the 4D
flatness condition in the background is compatible with the procedure of
the 4D effective theory. In fact @xmath can be interpreted as a 4D
cosmological constant and the flatness implies @xmath . Instead for
@xmath we do not have any order parameter because the global minimum
@xmath corresponds to @xmath .

If we take, for @xmath , the vacuum ( 3.2.39 ), @xmath breaks to @xmath
, where @xmath is the @xmath -subgroup of @xmath generated by its third
generator. The gauge field of @xmath and @xmath are respectively @xmath
and @xmath ; before Higgs mechanism these gauge fields are of course
massless as one can see by looking at their bilinear lagrangian given in
Appendix B.1.3 . From ( 3.2.38 ) and ( 3.2.36 ) we can calculate the
masses of these vector fields in the 4D effective theory after the Higgs
mechanism. We get a massless vector field @xmath , which corresponds to
the unbroken @xmath gauge symmetry. Instead @xmath and @xmath acquire
respectively the following squared masses

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the subscript @xmath indicates that we are dealing with vector
particles. Moreover, in the spin-0 sector, we have two physical scalar
fields: a real scalar and a complex one, which is charged under the
residual @xmath symmetry. Their squared masses are respectively

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Finally we can determine the fermionic spectrum by examining the
fermionic lagrangian in the effective theory:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The result is a neutral Dirac fermion, with squared mass

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and a pair of massless right-handed Weyl fermions. We observe that the
mass spectrum that we gave here is parametrized by the @xmath . Of
course these constants are not free parameters but they can be in
principle computed by evaluating explicitly the heavy modes
contribution. In the rest of the present chapter we do not compute the
@xmath but we prove that the 4D effective theory without heavy mode
contribution, that is @xmath , is not correct because it predicts a
wrong VEV of the light KK scalars and a wrong mass spectrum.

### 3.3 6D Electroweak Symmetry Breaking

Now we perform a 6D (or geometrical) analysis of spontaneous symmetry
breaking: this method corresponds to the contents of Section 2.2 for
scalar theories. Of course we perform all the calculations at the order
@xmath , as in the effective theory method. So our first purpose is
finding a solution of the 6D EOM which breaks the @xmath symmetry at the
6D level and which is a small perturbation of the order @xmath of the
sphere solution ( 3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2 ) and ( 3.2.3 ).

In order to find such a solution we consider an expansion of all
background tensors in powers of @xmath . For the ansatz ( 3.1.5 ), (
3.1.6 ) and ( 3.1.7 ) our tensors are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ; the
expansion of the latter is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have omitted the @xmath term because we want that @xmath goes to zero
as @xmath goes to zero. Now we are interested in the EOM for @xmath ,
namely the first equation of ( 3.1.8 ). Since that equation involves
also the Laplacian @xmath acting on charged scalar, we expand also this
operator in powers of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Laplacian corresponding to the @xmath -invariant
solution ( 3.2.1 ) and ( 3.2.2 ) and @xmath is an operator proportional
to @xmath . By putting ( 3.3.1 ) and ( 3.3.2 ) in the first equation of
( 3.1.8 ) we get one equation for every power of @xmath . The first one
is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which implies that @xmath must be proportional to the harmonic with
@xmath and @xmath . Further we impose @xmath , otherwise we do not have
an @xmath -invariant background. So we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover the equation proportional to @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand the operator @xmath must vanish because from ( 3.1.8 )
follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, up to O( @xmath ), reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since the only solution of ( 3.3.7 ) is the round @xmath , there is no
@xmath terms in @xmath . By putting this result in the last equation of
( 3.1.8 ) we get that also the gauge field @xmath cannot have @xmath
terms. So we have @xmath and ( 3.3.5 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which, taking into account also the @xmath -invariance, implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For simplicity we take @xmath because in any case @xmath must be
proportional to the same harmonic of @xmath . So @xmath up to O( @xmath
). The equation proportional to @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By projecting this equation over the harmonic @xmath , the first term
disappears and we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The most simple solution of this kind, up to higher order terms in
@xmath , that we find is similar to the background which appears in Ref.
[ 51 ] ⁹ ⁹ 9 This solution was discussed in Ref. [ 51 ] , but
incorrectly. :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . As required, for @xmath this background reduces to the
background of Subsection 3.2.1 . The absolute value of @xmath can be
computed by using Eq. ( 3.3.11 ), which, through the redefinition @xmath
reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The metric appearing in solution ( 3.3.12 ) is the metric of an
ellipsoid. From the geometrical point of view we have deformed our
internal space as shown in Fig. 3.1 .

For @xmath the equation ( 3.3.13 ) has a solution for

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined by ( 3.2.35 ), while, for @xmath ,
we have a solution for

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Whether @xmath or @xmath , the solution of ( 3.3.13 ) is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that here we have symmetry breaking for both signs of @xmath . This
is not so interesting because the solution with @xmath is unstable, as
it is discussed in Subsection 3.3.2 . We want to stress that the value
of @xmath predicted by the 4D effective theory is not equal to ( 3.3.16
) if we neglect the heavy mode contribution to the effective theory,
namely for @xmath : indeed in this case the effective theory predicts a
value of @xmath equal to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is equal to ( 3.3.16 ) only for @xmath . However, from ( 3.2.35 )
it’s clear that @xmath cannot be taken equal to zero. Therefore we have
already proved that the heavy modes contribution is needed at least for
the light mode VEV. We shall prove that this is the case also for the
mass spectrum.

As required the background ( 3.3.12 ) has the symmetry

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

So the 4D effective low energy theory, which follows from this
background, is @xmath -invariant and comparing these results with the
effective theory predictions makes sense.

We note that the symmetry breaking ( 3.3.18 ) is associated, in the 6D
theory, to a geometrical deformation of the internal space. Further we
observe that ( 3.3.12 ) tell us the heavy modes VEVs are higher order
corrections with respect to the light modes VEVs like in the scalar
theories of section 2.2 .

Now we calculate the low energy vector, scalar and fermion spectrum by
analyzing the 4D bilinear lagrangian for the fluctuations around the
solution ( 3.3.12 ).

#### 3.3.1 Spin-1 Spectrum

The spin-1 spectrum can be calculated in a way similar to the light mode
ansatz ( 3.2.29 ). However, it must be noted that the sectors with
different @xmath no longer decouple for @xmath , but the mixing terms
are of the order @xmath and they give negligible corrections of the
order @xmath to the vector boson masses. These facts are evident from
the general formula of [ 52 ] . So we can neglect the modes with @xmath
in the calculation of spin-1 spectrum. Therefore we can compute the
vector boson masses by putting the following ansatz in the action and
integrating over the extra dimensions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the orthonormal basis for the 2-dimensional metric in (
3.3.12 ): :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In ( 3.3.19 ) we consider the spin-1 fluctuations but we do not consider
the spin-0 fluctuations, because they are not necessary for the
calculation of vector boson masses. It’s important to note that in (
3.3.19 ) the VEV of @xmath is @xmath , it’s not @xmath as in ( 3.2.29 ).

From ( 3.3.19 ) it follows that some of the previous ( @xmath ) massless
states acquire masses for @xmath . Up to @xmath , the @xmath gauge boson
( @xmath ) has the mass squared

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the Yang-Mills triplet @xmath ( @xmath ) is separated in a
massless gauge boson, which is associated to @xmath gauge invariance,
and a couple of massive vector fields with the same mass squared

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By comparing ( 3.3.21 ) and ( 3.3.22 ) with ( 3.2.41 ) and ( 3.2.42 ),
we get that the heavy mode contribution is needed in the effective
theory. However, we observe that the ratio @xmath is correctly predicted
by the 4D effective theory for every @xmath .

Since the computation of vector bosons masses is complicated we present
it explicitly. In order to prove ( 3.3.21 ) and ( 3.3.22 ) it’s useful
to split the action in four terms:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In Appendix B.1 we prove that the contributions coming from @xmath and
@xmath vanish, so only @xmath contributes to the spin-1 masses up to
@xmath . The same low energy spin-1 masses in ( 3.3.21 ) and ( 3.3.22 )
can be obtained also by using the general formula of [ 52 ] , which
contains all the bilinear terms in the light cone gauge. The light cone
gauge advantage is that the sectors with different spin decouple.
However, the derivation that we presented here shows that the unique
contribution (at the leading order) to the spin-1 masses comes from
@xmath , like in the effective theory approach. This explains why the
ratio @xmath is correctly predicted by the 4D effective theory for every
values of @xmath .

#### 3.3.2 Spin-0 Spectrum

We choose the light cone gauge [ 52 , 53 , 54 ] in order to evaluate the
spin-0 spectrum. In this gauge we have just two independent values for
the indexes @xmath which label the 4D coordinates. The bilinears for the
fluctuations over the solution ( 3.3.12 ) can be simply computed with
the general formula of [ 52 ] . For our model the helicity-0 @xmath part
is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.29)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.30)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.31)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the background and the fluctuation of the 6D
scalar. In this vanishing-helicity sector, it turns out that we have not
only mixing terms of the order @xmath but also mixing terms of the order
@xmath , coming from @xmath and @xmath . So now we can’t neglect the
mixing between the sectors with different values of @xmath , as we did
in the helicity @xmath sector. If we integrate these bilinear terms over
the extra-dimensions we get an infinite dimensional squared mass matrix.
However, we are interested only in the light masses, therefore we can
use the perturbation theory of quantum mechanics in order to extract the
correction of the order @xmath to the masses of the 6 real scalars which
are massless for @xmath . We already used this method for the
computation of the mass spectrum in the scalar theories of Section 2.2 .
We explain now how to use it in this framework.

Formally we can write the bilinears @xmath of the scalar fields in this
way

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an array which includes all the scalar fluctuations; we
choose

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have just to solve a 2-dimensional eigenvalue problem for the squared
mass operator ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The matrix elements of @xmath can be computed by
comparing ( 3.3.35 ) with the explicit expression of @xmath . @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In particular we want to find the 6 values of @xmath which go to zero as
@xmath goes to zero. Since we are working at the order @xmath we
decompose @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath does not depend on @xmath , @xmath is proportional to
@xmath and @xmath is proportional to @xmath . From the perturbation
theory of quantum mechanics in the degenerate case we know that the 6
values of @xmath we are interested in are the eigenvalues of the
following @xmath matrix ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Like in Section 2.2 we use the Dirac
notation; for two states @xmath and @xmath and for an operator @xmath ,
@xmath represents @xmath , where the integral is performed with the
round @xmath metric. :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath represent the 6 orthonormal eigenfunctions of
@xmath with vanishing eigenvalue and they have the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover @xmath are all the remaining orthonormal eigenfunctions of
@xmath and @xmath the corresponding eigenvalues. We note that the matrix
elements @xmath are non vanishing for

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Further the operator @xmath modifies the integration measure just by a
factor proportional to the harmonics @xmath , therefore we need just a
finite subset of @xmath for the evaluation of @xmath , namely those
constructed through the harmonics with @xmath , which are given in
Appendix A . An explicit form for @xmath and @xmath , and the
preliminary computations of the 6 eigenvalues we are interested in, are
given in Appendix B.2 .

We give here just the final result: we have two unphysical scalar fields
(a real and a complex one) which form the helicity-0 component of the
massive vector fields; they have in fact the same squared masses given
in ( 3.3.21 ) and ( 3.3.22 ), as it’s required by Lorentz invariance,
which is not manifest in the light cone gauge. Then we have a physical
real scalar and a physical complex scalar, charged under the residual
U(1) symmetry, with squared masses given respectively by (for @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath , we get a negative value for @xmath , therefore the
corresponding solution is unstable. Note that the squared mass @xmath
has exactly the same expression as in the 4D effective theory, for every
@xmath . But for @xmath , which corresponds to neglecting the heavy mode
contribution, the effective theory prediction for @xmath in ( 3.2.44 )
is not equal to the correct value ( 3.3.42 ). We note that this is a
physical inequivalence because the ratio @xmath , which is in principle
a measurable quantity, is not correctly predicted by the 4D effective
theory without the heavy mode contribution. More precisely the effective
theory prediction for @xmath , in the case @xmath , is always greater
than the correct value.

#### 3.3.3 Spin-1/2 Spectrum

The spin-1/2 spectrum can be calculated by linearizing the EOM ( 3.1.12
): for @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.3.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath represents again the background of the 6D scalar, namely
the third line of ( 3.3.12 ), and the covariant derivatives are
evaluated with the background metric and background gauge field given by
the first and the second line of ( 3.3.12 ). These covariant derivatives
are in the @xmath basis defined by ( 3.3.20 ) and it includes the
modified spin connection when it acts on spinors:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath is given in equation ( B.1.13 ) and the value of
the charges @xmath and the iso-helicities ¹² ¹² 12 For @xmath we adopt
the same harmonic expansion as in the @xmath case; this gives the
correct result for the fermionic masses squared at the order @xmath . of
the fermions are given at the end of Subsection 3.2.1 . There we give
also the fermionic massless spectrum for @xmath : an @xmath singlet from
@xmath and an @xmath triplet from @xmath .

From ( 3.3.43 ) it’s clear that the left handed sector does not present
mixing terms of the order @xmath but only of the order @xmath .
Therefore the calculation of the squared mass @xmath of the light
fermion coming from @xmath is quite easy. The result is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Instead the evaluation of the right-handed spectrum is complicated by
the presence of mixing terms of the order @xmath , as in the scalar
sector. Therefore we use the perturbation theory of quantum mechanics
also in the fermion right-handed sector. Formally we can write the
eigenvalue equation for the mass squared operator @xmath acting in the
right-handed sector as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an array which includes both the right-handed fermions;
we choose

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can easily compute @xmath acting on @xmath by performing the
substitution @xmath in the last two equations of ( 3.3.43 ). Then we can
proceed as in the scalar spectrum, performing the decomposition ( 3.3.38
). However, in this case the matrix @xmath in ( 3.3.39 ) is a 3 @xmath 3
matrix as the number of zero modes for @xmath in the right-handed sector
is 3. Like in the scalar spectrum we need only those @xmath vectors made
of harmonics with @xmath , because the operator @xmath modifies the
integration measure just by a factor proportional to the harmonics
@xmath . In Appendix B.3 we give an expression for the @xmath vectors,
for the @xmath vectors and the @xmath eigenvalues for the relevant
values of @xmath : @xmath . Here we give the final result: the
right-handed low energy spectrum has a pair of massless right-handed
fermions as in the 4D effective theory, which have opposite charge under
the residual @xmath symmetry, and a massive right-handed fermion with
the same squared mass given in ( 3.3.46 ). This right-handed fermion
together with the massive left-handed fermion form a massive Dirac
spinor with mass @xmath .

Also in the fermionic sector we note that the heavy modes contribution
is needed in order that the effective theory reproduces the correct 6D
result; this sentence is evident if one compares the effective theory
prediction ( 3.2.47 ) with the correct result ( 3.3.46 ).

### 3.4 Conclusions and Outlook of Part I

The principal result of Chapter 2 and 3 is that the contribution of the
heavy KK modes to the effective 4D action is necessary in order to
reproduce the correct D-dimensional predictions concerning the light KK
modes. We have calculated such a contribution for a class of scalar
theories in Chapter 2 . However, this result holds in a more general
framework. In order to show this, in this chapter we have studied a 6D
gauge and gravitational theory which involves a complex scalar and,
possibly, fermions. In particular we have considered the
compactification over @xmath , for a particular value of the monopole
number ( @xmath ), and the construction of a 4D @xmath effective theory.
The latter contains a scalar triplet of @xmath which, through an Higgs
mechanism, gives masses to the vector, scalar and fermion fields. An
explicit expressions for these masses and for the VEV of the scalar
triplet was found at the leading order in the small mass ratio @xmath ,
where @xmath is the lightest heavy mass. On the other hand, for @xmath ,
we found a simple perturbative solution of the fundamental 6D EOMs with
the same symmetry of the 4D effective theory in the broken phase. This
solution presents a deformation of the internal space @xmath to an
ellipsoid, which has isometry group @xmath instead of @xmath . Moreover
we computed the corresponding vector, scalar and fermion spectrum with
quantum mechanics perturbation theory technique. We have demonstrated by
direct calculation that these quantities, computed in the 6D approach,
are equal to the corresponding predictions of the 4D effective theory
only if the contribution of the heavy KK modes are taken into account.
In Table 3.1 we give the spectrum predicted by the 4D effective theory
for @xmath , namely, without heavy KK mode contribution, and the low
energy spectrum predicted by the 6D theory for the stable ( @xmath )
solution, that we gave in the text.

We observe that ratios of masses which involve only vector and fermion
excitations are correctly predicted by the 4D effective theory even
without the heavy KK mode contribution. But the ratios of masses which
involve at least one scalar mode are not correctly predicted and the
error is measured by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are defined in
equations ( 3.2.35 ). We can roughly estimate the magnitude of this
disagreement: if we require @xmath and @xmath in ( 3.2.37 ) to be of the
order of @xmath and we consider also the relation between @xmath and the
4D Planck length @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we get that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all of the order of @xmath .
So roughly speaking the condition @xmath becomes @xmath , which is a
strong coupling regime. Therefore we can’t probably neglect the heavy KK
mode contribution and believe in the perturbation theory of quantum
field theory at the same time.

Finally we note that there is a value of @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ,
@xmath ) such that the effective theory VEV and vector, scalar and
fermion spectrum turn out to be correct, namely, they are equal to the
corresponding quantities given in Section 3.3 . This is a sign of the
equivalence between the geometrical approach, which involves the
deformed internal space geometry, to the spontaneous symmetry breaking
and the Higgs mechanism in the 4D effective theory. In particular the
heavy KK mode contribution can be interpreted in a geometrical way as
the internal space deformation of the 6D solution: in fact if we put
@xmath but we keep @xmath in ( 3.3.12 ), which corresponds to neglecting
the @xmath deformation, we get exactly the VEV and the spectrum
predicted by the 4D effective theory without heavy KK modes
contribution.

Possible applications can be its extension to the case which resembles
more the standard electro-weak theory. The latter could be for instance
the 6D gauge and gravitational theory presented in this chapter,
compactified over @xmath but with monopole number @xmath ; in this case
we have in fact an Higgs doublet in the 4D effective theory. Other
interesting applications could be models without fundamental scalars,
which, in some sense, geometrize the Higgs mechanism or the context of
supersymmetric version of 6D gauge and gravitational theories. Such
supersymmetric theories have been recently investigated in connection
with attempts to find a solution to the cosmological dark energy
problem, a summary of which can be found in [ 55 ] and in Section 3 of
Chapter 4 .

## Part II: 6D Supergravity

In the second part of this thesis we consider supersymmetric and
non-Abelian extensions of the 6D Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar model that we
discussed in Chapter 3 . The discussion of chapter 3 was motivated by a
theoretical question, concerning the role of heavy modes, with masses of
the order of the Planck scale, in the low energy dynamics. Here we want
to discuss 6D supergravity from both a theoretical and phenomenological
point of view. We know that models in six dimensions are relevant for
several reasons; for example the attempt to solve the hierarchy problem
(between the electroweak and the Planck scale) by means of the ADD
scenario is phenomenologically viable but also falsifiable in 6D,
because it is subjected to tests of gravity at submillimeter scales, as
we discussed in Section 1.3 . On the other hand also supersymmetry has
several motivations, in particular of the theoretical type. One of them
is the fact that superstring theories, the only attempt to unify
fundamental interactions including gravity, are supersymmetric; another
motivation for supersymmetry is the possibility to solve the hierarchy
problem in a supersymmetric framework. Of course this does not mean that
one has to choose among LED and supersymmetric theories to address the
hierarchy problem: the LED scenario can play a role in addition to
supersymmetry, rather than in competition with it. The aim of Part II is
to study the implications of 6D supersymmetric models including
gravitational interactions and therefore we will deal necessarily with
supergravity.

This part contains two chapters. In Chapter 4 we will review the general
features of 6D supergravities, focusing on the minimal gauged
supergravity. In particular we shall discuss the vacua of such models,
which spontaneously compactify from 6D to 4D and share many properties
with realistic string compactifications; moreover we will illustrate the
so called supersymmetric large extra dimensions scenario in which one
can hope to solve the cosmological constant problem through a self
tuning mechanism. However, the embedding of 6D supergravity in the ADD
scenario needs the appearance of 3-branes where the low energy degrees
of freedom physically localize. So we will review also singular 3-brane
solutions of such models which has to be interpreted as backgrounds
around which physical degrees of freedom fluctuate. Indeed in Chapter 5
, which represents our original contribution [ 21 ] to this scenario, we
shall study perturbations around such 3-brane solutions, in particular
focusing on axisymmetric solutions . These solutions will turn out to
have conical defects, which we have discussed in Section 1.6 . Our main
interest will be the gauge field and fermion sectors which can contain
SM fields and the effect of the warping and the deficit angles on the KK
towers. Moreover, in Appendix C.1 we shall also perform a stability
analysis for the only one known maximally symmetric solution, in the
presently known anomaly-free models. Finally, in the rest of Appendix C
, we will discuss some technical aspects concerning the gauge field and
fermion sector.

## Chapter 4 General Features

In this review chapter we focus on the minimal supersymmetric version of
6D supergravities, in which we have the minimum number of supercharges
in six dimensions. But we consider the possibility of gauging a subgroup
of the R-symmetry group which rotates the supercharges; this type of
models ( [ 48 ] , [ 56 ] - [ 69 ] ) are called gauged supergravities and
they have attracted much interest over the years for several reasons. A
reason motivating such models is that the flat 6D space-time is not a
solution of the corresponding equations of motion (EOM) and the most
symmetric solution is @xmath , which has been shown recently to be the
unique maximally symmetric solution of such models [ 61 ] . This
phenomenon of spontaneous compactification is a good property which is
not shared by 10D and 11D supergravities, as the low energy limit of the
superstring theories or the M-theory ; indeed the most symmetric ground
state solutions in all of the higher dimensional supergravities are the
flat 10D manifolds and the pp waves. Moreover 6D gauged supergravity
compactifications share some properties with superstring realistic
compactifications [ 60 ] , in particular they can give rise to chiral
fermions in 4D. Futhermore, like in string theory, the requirement of
anomaly freedom is a strong guiding principle to construct consistent
models. Indeed the minimal version of such gauged supergravity, the
Salam-Sezgin model [ 48 ] , suffers from the breakdown of local
symmetries due to the presence of gravitational, gauge and mixed
anomalies, which render this model inconsistent at the quantum level [
70 ] ; but it can be transformed in an anomaly free model by choosing
the gauge group and the supermultiplet in a suitable way [ 57 , 65 , 66
, 68 ] . Recently such 6D supergravities have been proposed as possible
frameworks in which one can hope to solve the cosmological constant
problem. A reason is that, if one chooses large extra dimensions, in 6D
the corresponding KK mass scale (to the fourth power) is of the order of
the observed vacuum energy density. This numerical coincidence gives
hope to get the correct cosmological constant including both classical
and quantum contributions, through a mechanism of self tuning of the
cosmological constant. Such scenario is called supersymmetric large
extra dimensions (SLED) scenario and it has been studied in recent works
¹ ¹ 1 For a review on this topic see [ 55 ] . [ 34 ] - [ 38 ] . However,
a complete proof of this mechanism has not been found and it is not
clear what is the complete effect of the breakdown of supersymmetry in
the bulk, which is needed in order to implement such an idea. Moreover,
in order the extra dimensions to be so large one should find a mechanism
which localizes the low energy degrees of freedom on a 3-brane , placed
on some singularities of the internal space [ 61 , 62 , 64 , 67 ] .

The aim of this chapter is to review such topics in order to prepare the
background for the contents of Chapter 5 , which includes the original
work on this framework. The composition of the chapter is as follows. In
Section 4.1 we discuss supergravity in diverse dimensions and in Section
4.2 we focus on the minimal 6D gauged supergravity by discussing the
supermultiplets and the actions for such models and then by describing
the presently known anomaly free versions. In Appendix C.1 we perform
the stability analysis for an @xmath compactification of these models.
In Section 4.3 we describe the SLED scenario in more detail, explaining
in particular the self tuning mechanism for the cosmological constant.
Finally in Section 4.4 we review the brane solutions of 6D gauged
supergravity models.

### 4.1 Supergravity in Diverse Dimensions

Here we want to discuss briefly general properties of supergravities in
diverse dimensions, in order to introduce notations and terminology. For
a more complete introduction to such a topic see for instance Ref. [ 71
] - [ 73 ] .

The starting point to construct a supersymmetric model, in particular a
supergravity model, is the choice of a superalgebra or super-Poincaré
algebra . The latter includes by definition the generators of the
Poincaré group and a set of supercharges, which generates supersymmetry.
In order to be consistent such generators have to be spinors, that is
objects transforming under the spinorial representation of the Lorentz
group @xmath . The generators in such a representation are given by
@xmath , where the matrices @xmath obey the Clifford algebra:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In this way we define a Dirac spinor , which has real ² ² 2 In this
thesis we refer always to the real spinor dimension. dimension @xmath ,
where @xmath means the integer part of @xmath , and exists in all
space-time dimensions. However, when @xmath is even the Dirac spinor is
a reducible representation because one can define a chirality matrix,
which is given by the product of all the matrices @xmath and commutes
with all the generators @xmath . The eigenvectors of the chirality
matrix are called Weyl spinors. Moreover for some particular value of
@xmath we can impose a reality condition on spinors and define Majorana
spinors . In Table 4.1 we summarize the existence of Weyl, Majorana and
Majorana-Weyl spinors in diverse space-time dimensions.

Besides generators of the Poincaré group and supercharges, the
superalgebra can include also a set of gauge bosonic generators.

The requirement that the action functional is invariant under local
supersymmetry implies the presence of gravitational interactions, due to
the generators of translations in the superalgebra. So local
supersymmetry and supergravity are equivalent names for such theories.
Therefore supergravity has to contain a metric tensor @xmath which turns
to be necessarily associated to a @xmath called gravitino, which is
labeled by both spinor and vector indices. In Table 4.2 we give the on
shell degrees of freedom of the metric and the gravitino as function of
@xmath .

Both for local and global supersymmetry the total number of supercharges
must be a multiple N of the components of the irreducible spinorial
representation of the Lorentz group. Since there are no consistent
quantum field theories including fields whose spin is greater than 2 and
no non-gravitational field theories including fields with spin greater
than one, one can get a constraint on N. In particular there are no
consistent 4D field theories with N @xmath 8 and no consistent 4D field
theories without gravity with N @xmath 4. Since the dimension of the
irreducible spinorial representation depends on @xmath the maximum value
of N, which gives rise to a consistent theory, depends on @xmath as
well. For instance 10D supergravity has at most N=2 and 11D supegravity
has necessarily N=1.

### 4.2 The 6D Case

Now we focus on 6D supergravity which is one of the main topic of this
thesis. Contrary to the 4D case, supercharges with positive chirality
and with negative chirality do not give rise to equivalent models.
Therefore we introduce the notation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the number of supercharges with positive (negative)
chirality. If @xmath the corresponding supergravity is called chiral.
There exist several possibilities: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Although in this thesis we are interested in the minimal
version @xmath of such models, in the following we shall describe
briefly all the possibilities for the sake of completeness.

We start with the chiral @xmath supergravity , which has a number of
supercharges equal to @xmath supersymmetry in 4D. Indeed the R-symmetry
group turns out to be @xmath and henceforth it will be denoted by @xmath
. The supergravity multiplet consists of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath takes value in the fundamental of @xmath , @xmath has a
positive chirality, that is ³ ³ 3 In Appendix A we give our conventions
on the gamma matrices in the 6D case.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath represents a self-dual field strength. However, it is well
known that field theories with self-dual field strength do not admit a
manifestly Lorentz invariant action formulation, in dimensions 2 mod 4 [
74 ] . This problem can be avoided if one combines the multiplet ( 4.2.3
) with a tensor multiplet :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an antiself-dual field strength, the spinor @xmath is
called tensorino and it satisfies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is a real scalar field, which is called dilaton. Now one can
form a generic field strength @xmath and give a manifestly Lorentz
invariant action formulation. We shall refer to @xmath as a Kalb-Ramond
field.

Moreover there exist also Yang-Mills multiplets, corresponding to a
gauge group @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a Lie algebra index, @xmath are the gauge fields and
@xmath the gauginos, which satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally we can introduce also hypermultiplets:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , called hyperinos, satisfy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath , @xmath are called hyperscalars. The latter parametrize a
manifold which is non-compact and quaternionic: a quaternionic manifold
is a Riemannian manifols with holonomy group ⁴ ⁴ 4 On a Riemannian
manifold, tangent vectors can be moved along a path by parallel
transport, which preserves vector addition and scalar multiplication. So
a closed loop at a base point p, gives rise to a invertible linear map
of the tangent space of the manifold in @xmath . It is possible to
compose closed loops by following one after the other, and to invert
them by going backwards. Hence, the set of linear transformations
arising from parallel transport along closed loops is a group, called
the holonomy group. contained in @xmath . In Table 4.3 we give the
quaternionic symmetric spaces parametrized by hyperscalars for this type
of supergravity.

The gauge group @xmath can be taken to be a direct product of an
arbitrary gauge group, which does not act on hypermultiplets, times a
group @xmath , defined in Table 4.3 , or subgroup of @xmath , which do
act on hypermultiplets. We observe that hypermultiplets are always
neutral with respect to @xmath , which can be either gauged or ungauged.
In Section 4.2.1 we will discuss more the @xmath model gauging part of
the isometry group of the hyperscalar manifold and giving the explicit
expression for the action functional in this model.

We continue our analysis of 6D supergravities considering the non chiral
@xmath model . This is an @xmath gauged supergravity consisting of

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

coupled to a vector multiplet

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Minimal versions of these models has no stable maximally symmetric
ground state, that is Minkowski, de Sitter or anti de Sitter space.
However, it is possible to generalize this framework, by introducing a
mass parameter for the 2-form tensor @xmath , in a way that there exist
maximally symmetric solutions.

Another possible version is the chiral @xmath supergravity . The
supergravity multiplet consist of

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath label @xmath of @xmath and the 2-form tensor field is in
the @xmath of @xmath . This supergravity admits couplings to a tensor
multiplet which contains

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can introduce an arbitrary number @xmath of tensor multiplets and
the scalars parametrize @xmath and the @xmath 2-form fields trasforms as
@xmath of @xmath .

Moreover a non chiral @xmath and two chiral @xmath supergravities exist.
The chiral versions have exotic field contents which does not include a
graviton.

#### 4.2.1 The @xmath Gauged Supergravity

Now we want to discuss in more detail the action formulation of the
@xmath model, gauging the isometry group of the hyperscalar manifold.
This derivation has been done in [ 56 ] but here we give the explicit
expression for the action as it is relevant for the original
developments of Chapter 5 .

As a first step we choose one quaternionic manifold targed by the
hyperscalars. The most common choice is @xmath , appearing in the first
row of Table 4.3 . This is also the choice of Ref. [ 56 ] . We remind
that hypermultiplets transform non-trivially under the isometry group
@xmath of such manifold. Indeed the hypermultiplets turn out to be in
the representation @xmath of @xmath . Here we consider the gauging of
the complete @xmath but, after giving the action in this case, we will
explain what changes if we gauge only a subgroup of such group. Many
geometric properties of such a manifold can be specified by introducing
a representative @xmath of the coset. This is a map from the coset to
the group @xmath and therefore depend on @xmath . The Maurer Cartan
1-form decomposes as [ 5 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath , are the anti-hermitian
generators of @xmath and @xmath respectively, while @xmath are the
anti-hermitian coset generators. The objects @xmath and @xmath
transforms as @xmath and @xmath connection, respectively, while @xmath
transforms homogeneously under the induced local tangent space
transformations. Thus @xmath and @xmath can be used in the definition of
the @xmath covariant derivatives and @xmath can be used as a frame on
the coset space and it is covariantly constant with respect to the
composite @xmath connections and the Christoffel connection defined on
@xmath in the usual way. As a result, the @xmath connections can be
expressed in terms of the frames @xmath . The gauging of @xmath can be
implemented by using these objects. For example, the covariant
derivative of the hyperinos can be written as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Lorentz connection defined in Appendix A . Moreover
the covariant derivative of hyperscalars is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The elements discussed so far are sufficient to derive an action
functional (up to quartic fermionic terms) for @xmath gauged
supergravity:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2.19)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the gauge constants and the field strengths
of @xmath and @xmath respectively, the 3-form @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a generic gauge constant, moreover

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the @xmath -functions are defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the second line of ( 4.2.19 ) a trace over the gauge group generators
is understood. An important feature of this action is it has a positive
definite potential.

As we have already mentioned, the action in ( 4.2.19 ) corresponds to
the gauging of the complete @xmath group. If we want to gauge just a
subgroup, for example @xmath , only the gauge field strengths, the
gauginos and the @xmath -functions of such a subgroup will appear in the
action. Moreover one can also introduce additional vector multiplets
containing the gauge fields of an additional group factor which is not a
subgroup of @xmath . The hypermultilpets are neutral with respect to the
additional gauge interactions. In this case one has to add the
corresponding Yang-Mills fields and gauginos in the action as in the
explicit example treated in [ 57 ] , in particular the additional
gauginos will appear only in line 4 and 8 of ( 4.2.19 ).

The action and the field content that we have discussed so far can be
generalized to include all the quartic fermionic terms [ 58 ] and a
generic number @xmath of tensor multiplets [ 59 ] , [ 75 ] , [ 76 ] .

The elements that we discussed in this section are quite general but in
the next subsection we shall discuss some particular examples.

#### 4.2.2 Salam-Sezgin Model and Anomaly-Free Versions

Now we turn to describe the simplest example of 6D @xmath gauged
supergravity: the so called Salam-Sezgin model [ 48 ] . In the bosonic
sector of this model we have only the metric, the Kalb-Ramond field, the
dilaton and the gauge field associated to a subgroup @xmath of @xmath .
This can be considered as a supersymmetrization of the 6D
Einstein-Maxwell model of Chapter 3 as the complete gauge group is
@xmath . Moreover in the fermionic sector we have the @xmath gaugino in
the vector multiplet, the gravitino in the supergravity multiplet and
the tensorino in the tensor multiplet. The complete action for this
system can be obtained by putting equal to zero in ( 4.2.19 ) all the
fields that we have not mentioned. In particular there are no
hyperscalars in the bosonic sector. Therefore the bosonic part @xmath of
the action is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

and the corresponding EOM are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We look now for maximally symmetric solutions of this model which
preserve a 4D Poincaré invariance. To this end we observe that 4D
Poincaré invariance implies @xmath at the background level. By using
this constraint, the EOM ( 4.2.24 ) reduce to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since we are looking for a maximally symmetric solution we suppose
@xmath constant and inserting this ansatz in ( 4.2.25 ) we get, after
some manipulations,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

that is the Ricci scalar is a non vanishing constant. Therefore the 6D
Minkowski space is not a solution of the Einstein equation appearing in
( 4.2.25 ). Since @xmath is the only orientable 2D manifold with
positive constant curvature an obvious solution of ( 4.2.26 ) is @xmath
. Even if a priori we cannot exclude the presence of a warp factor , in
Ref. [ 61 ] it was proved that this is actually the unique maximally
symmetric smooth solution for the metric. In particular the 6D de Sitter
and Anti de Sitter spaces are not solutions of the EOM. Requiring the
other fields to have the same symmetry as the metric one gets the
complete Salam-Sezgin background :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This is a solution of ( 4.2.25 ) if

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We observe that first and second line of ( 4.2.27 ) correspond exactly
to equations ( 3.2.1 ) and ( 3.2.2 ) of Chapter 3 , that is the monopole
configuration over @xmath . Dirac quantization condition still holds,
that is @xmath has to be an integer. However, supersymmetry of the
present model and the presence of the dilaton convert constraints (
3.2.4 ) into ( 4.2.28 ). An interesting consequence is that now the
monopole number @xmath must satisfy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which can be proved squaring first constraint in ( 4.2.28 ) and then
using second constraint in ( 4.2.28 ). A detailed analysis of the local
supersymmetry transformations shows that background ( 4.2.27 ) preserves
1/2 of the 6D @xmath supersymmetries of this model [ 48 ] , that is a 4D
@xmath supersymmetry.

Since the Salam-Sezgin model is the simplest realization of the 6D
@xmath gauged supergravity, it was used as a toy model to study the
properties of this class of models and of higher dimensional
supergravities. For instance the authors of [ 60 ] constructed the 4D
@xmath supergravity, which describes the low energy dynamic of the
Salam-Sezgin model expanded around the background ( 4.2.27 ), in order
to provide a simple setting sharing the main properties of realistic
string compactifications. Moreover in [ 61 ] additional solutions of
this model, which present conical and non conical singularities, were
found ⁵ ⁵ 5 We shall describe these solutions in Section 4.4 . .

On the other hand, like most 6D supergravities, the Salam-Sezgin model
suffers from the breakdown of local symmetries due to the presence of
gravitational, gauged and mixed anomalies. Therefore such a model must
be enlarged to include additional supermultiplets. It is interesting
that the requirement of anomaly freedom is a strong guiding principle to
select consistent models, like in 10D supergravities. So this is another
property shared by the 6D @xmath gauged models and higher dimensional
supergravities.

Until recently the only one known anomaly free model of this type was
the @xmath model, where @xmath is a subgroup ⁶ ⁶ 6 In this case @xmath .
of the @xmath that we discussed in Subsection 4.2.1 , @xmath is an
additional group factor and @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath . As we
discussed in Subsection 4.2.1 the hypermultiplets are singlets with
respect to @xmath and @xmath but, in order to cancel the anomalies by
means of the Green-Schwarz mechanism , they are in representation 912 of
@xmath . Recently more example of anomaly-free models were found. For
instance in [ 65 ] a @xmath model was proposed, with @xmath and the
hypermultiplets in the representation @xmath of @xmath . Moreover in [
66 ] the authors proposed @xmath with hypermultiplets in the
representation @xmath of @xmath . Finally in Ref. [ 68 ] a huge number
of simple anomaly free models was presented with @xmath given by
products of @xmath and/or @xmath and particular hyperinos
representations.

Therefore non-Abelian extensions of the Salam-Sezgin model, including
hypermultiplets, are very interesting because they are needed for the
consistency at the quantum level. The gauge group for these models will
be @xmath , where @xmath is a subgroup of @xmath and @xmath is composed
by a subgroup of @xmath and in case by an additional gauge group ⁷ ⁷ 7
For instance @xmath in the @xmath model. . In the following we shall
describe the @xmath compactification of such non-Abelian models [ 57 ] ,
[ 65 ] , with a monopole embedded in the Cartan subalgebra of @xmath .
This set up is the only compatible with maximal symmetry.

Like the Salam-Sezgin model the bosonic theory includes the metric, the
Kalb-Ramond field and the dilaton but here we have also the gauge fields
of the complete gauge group @xmath and the hyperscalars @xmath , in some
representation of the subgroup of @xmath . The complete bosonic action
for these fields is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2.30)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

The symbols have been defined in Subsection 4.2.1 . In [ 63 ] the
explicit expression for the @xmath -functions in the last line of (
4.2.30 ) for @xmath have been given, but the result is applicable to any
other model of this type. A remarkable result is that the absolute
minimum of the scalar potential is at @xmath [ 58 , 63 ] . This property
suggest us to set @xmath at the background level in order to get a
stable solution and henceforth we will assume that. Moreover in the
following we will focus on the case @xmath . This is true for all the
anomaly-free models with a gauge group that contains the gauge group of
the SM. In this case the bosonic EOM are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We want to discuss the following maximally symmetric solution

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a generator of a @xmath subgroup of a simple factor of
@xmath , satisfying @xmath , and @xmath is a real number which takes
discrete values because of the Dirac quantization condition. In the
following we will denote by @xmath the abelian group generated by @xmath
. The configuration ( 4.2.32 ) is the trivial generalization of ( 4.2.27
) to a non-Abelian model. The background gauge field in ( 4.2.32 ) is a
monopole configuration and, from group theory point of view, it breaks
@xmath to some subgroup @xmath , which is generated by the generators of
@xmath which commute with @xmath . Moreover the equations ( 4.2.31 )
implies [ 57 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the gauge constant corresponding to the background gauge
field. The constraints ( 4.2.33 ) represent the generalization of (
4.2.28 ) and they imply the following equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If @xmath we have @xmath , that is Eq. ( 4.2.29 ), but this is not
needed if we embed @xmath in @xmath . An important aspect is that the
only monopole embedding which preserves part of the 6D @xmath
supersymmetries is @xmath along the Lie algebra of @xmath and in this
case we have @xmath . No other embedding ( @xmath ) preserve any
residual supersymmetry.

Given the symmetries of the problem, we can expect that the low energy
effective gauge group is @xmath , where @xmath is the subgroup of @xmath
that commutes with @xmath in which the monopole lies, and is orthogonal
to ⁸ ⁸ 8 Due to the Chern-Simons coupling in supergravity, the @xmath
gauge field in the direction of the monopole eats the axion arising from
the Kalb-Ramond field and acquires a mass [ 57 , 60 ] . @xmath ;
moreover @xmath is the KK gauge group coming from the isometry of the
internal space.

An explicit example is @xmath along the Lie algebra of @xmath in the
@xmath model [ 57 ] . From the purely group theory point of view such an
embedding breaks @xmath down to @xmath and leaves @xmath unbroken.
However, the gauge group of the 4D effective theory contains an
additional SU(2) factor, coming from the isometry of @xmath . This is a
well known mechanism in KK theories and we shall denote this extra group
by @xmath . Moreover, due to the Chern-Simons coupling in supergravity,
the @xmath gauge field eats the axion arising from the Kalb-Ramond field
and acquires a mass [ 57 , 60 ] . So the complete gauge group of the 4D
effective theory is @xmath . Since the only fermions that interact with
the background gauge field ⁹ ⁹ 9 There exist no normalizable fermionic
zero modes on @xmath satisfying a standard Dirac equation in the absence
of coupling to the background monopole field. are the gauginos of @xmath
, the latter sector contains the fermionic zero modes. The 4D massless
chiral fermions comprise @xmath families of @xmath , in the
representation 16 and no antifamilies. They belong to the @xmath
-dimensional irreducible representation of @xmath . These fermions are
neutral with respect to @xmath but they carry a @xmath charge, half the
families are positive and the other half are negative. Such @xmath
-families can be interpreted as leptons and quarks of the SM embedded in
a grand unification scenario. Unfortunately the classical stability
requires @xmath and therefore only 2 families [ 57 , 65 , 66 ] . The
bosonic sector of the low energy 4D effective theory contains the
graviton and the gauge fields corresponding to @xmath . The gauge fields
interacting with leptons and quarks are only the gauge fields of @xmath
and of @xmath if @xmath . There is not a complete discussion of the
stability issue in the literature. In Appendix C.1 we will give a first
step toward this direction following the lines of [ 57 , 65 ] . In
addition to [ 57 , 65 ] we will include all the present known anomaly
free models. The result is that a stable sphere compactification and the
embedding of the SM gauge group is possible only in the @xmath case.

### 4.3 Supersymmetric Large Extra Dimensions

So far we have analysed 6D supergravities without any assumptions on the
size of the extra dimensions. A physical applications of this framework
can be made in the context of LED. As we have mentioned at the beginning
of the present chapter, SLED give hope to solve the cosmological
constant problem. The aim of this section is to explain this idea in
more detail [ 55 ] and point out its shortcomings.

In order to discuss the cosmological constant problem, let us consider a
generic parameter @xmath which describes a physical quantity and is
found to be small when measured in an experiment which is performed at
an energy scale @xmath . We would like to understand this in terms of a
microscopic theory which is defined at energy @xmath and predicts the
value of @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath represents the contribution to @xmath due to the parameters
in the microscopic theory, and @xmath represents the contributions to
@xmath which are obtained as we integrate out all of the physics in the
energy range @xmath . The smallness of @xmath can be understood if both
@xmath and @xmath are small. Although we may not be able to understand
why @xmath is small until we have a correct microscopic theory (up to
some energy scale), we should be able to understand why ordinary physics
at energies @xmath do not make @xmath unacceptably large. If we find
@xmath to be many orders of magnitude larger than the measured value
@xmath then we suspect that we do not understand the physics at energies
@xmath as well as we thought. This is actually the case for the
cosmological constant: cosmological observations indicate that the
vacuum’s energy density is at present @xmath but the theoretical
prediction for @xmath is many orders of magnitude greater as a particle
of mass @xmath contributes an amount of @xmath when it is integrated out
and pratically all of the elementary particles we know have @xmath .

A solution of the cosmological constant problem could involve a
modification of gravity at energy scale ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Other interesting works
[ 28 , 29 , 30 ] propose a possible solution of the cosmological
constant problem, by considering modification of gravity at very large
distances, as we have summarized in Section 1.5 . @xmath , but, if this
is the case, must not ruin the precise agreement with all the many
non-gravitational experiments which have been performed so far. A
scenario which could have both these properties is the LED scenario.
Indeed LED allows that only gravity propagate in large extra dimensions,
while all the non gravitational interactions should be confined on a
3-brane within the extra-dimensional space. Since we have a precise
relation between the 4D Planck scale, the fundamental scale @xmath of
the higher dimensional theory and the volume of the internal space we
can have a constraint on the latter by requiring @xmath to be of the
order of @xmath . This constraint rules out just one large extra
dimension and the simplest choice is therefore a 6D model. In this case
the typical physical size @xmath of the internal space is of the order
of the observed value @xmath of the vacuum energy density. Therefore we
expect that gravity (and also its prediction for @xmath ) is much
different from ordinary 4D Einstein’s theory at submillimeter length
scale, which corresponds to energies close to @xmath . The idea of SLED
is to supersymmetrize a LED model in order to have control on the
prediction for @xmath : indeed we know that a supersymmetric theory,
without explicit and spontaneous symmetry breaking, predicts a vanishing
vacuum’s energy. One can hope to get the observed value of the vacuum’s
energy performing a small supersymmetry breaking in such a framework.

In a higher dimensional theory with size @xmath of extra dimensions the
superymmetry breaking scale is expected to be of the order of @xmath ,
and therefore small for large extra dimensions. Of course in order for
this to be phenomenologically viable one has to find a mechanism which
separates the supersymmetry breaking in the bulk and on the brane. The
complete (theoretical) value of @xmath in this context can be computed
by performing the following three steps. First one integrates out at the
full quantum level all the brane degrees of freedom to obtain an
effective theory defined on the brane with tension @xmath . After that
one can consider such tension as source for the higher dimensional
geometry by inserting in Einstein equation delta-function sources
proportional to @xmath . In a 6D supergravity the sum of the quantum
brane contribution and the classical bulk contribution to @xmath cancel
exactly and one is left with only the bulk quantum contribution. In some
circumstances this quantum contribution is of order @xmath , where
@xmath , where @xmath is the 6D Planck mass and @xmath is the 4D Planck
mass [ 77 ] . The small size of the 4D vacuum energy is in this way
attributed to the very small size with which supersymmetry breaks in the
bulk relative to the scale with which it breaks on the brane.

Although this is an interesting idea, there are some points that are not
clear and need more investigations, for instance the complete effect of
supersymmetry breaking in the bulk and of the compactness of the
internal space, which is not shared by the models [ 28 , 29 , 30 ] that
we have briefly summarized at the end of Section 1.5 . Moreover, in
explicit realizations of the SLED scenario, for example in the original
paper [ 34 ] , a background monopole is introduced on the bulk to
support a compact internal manifold. Consequently a Dirac quantization
condition in general emerges and it is not completely clear if this
additional constraint can ruin the SLED argument. Finally, a detailed
study of such a scenario requires the complete analysis of
perturabations, which are actually needed in order to compute
sistematically all the contributions to the vacuum’s energy density.

However, in order to implement this idea, one is interested in explicit
brane solutions of the 6D supergravity EOM, which break supersymmetry.
Such solutions are presented in Section 4.4 .

### 4.4 Brane Solutions

So far we have analysed smooth solutions of minimal gauged supergravity,
which turn out to be also the maximal symmetric one. In this section we
want to study what happens if one relaxes the maximal symmetry
assumption for the complete 6D space-time. As we will see this
necessarily leads to singularities. One interesting application is
interpreting them as 3-branes which support SM fields. Indeed in order
to realize a LED or a SLED scenario brane solutions are interesting
because standard KK compactification are known to be phenomenological
incompatible with LED.

However, we shall assume the following properties of the background
solutions:

-    4D Poincaré invariance.

-    Axisymmetry of the internal 2D space.

-    The hyperscalars are not active.

Assumptions (i), (ii) and (iii) will simplify our calculations, but
(iii) is also motivated by the fact that the potential has a global
minimum in @xmath , and therefore such set up will support stability.
The 4D Poincaré invariance implies that the Kalb-Ramond field strength
vanishes, and this, together with (iii), leads to the bosonic EOM (
4.2.31 ). For later purposes, we remark that those equations are
invariant under the constant classical scaling symmetry

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Furthermore, the sole effect of the transformation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is the rescaling

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We have to remember these symmetries when we will count the number of
independent parameters for a given solution. Now we analyse the
implications of (i) and (ii) on the background tensors. The 6D metric
has to be of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a radial coordinate , with range @xmath , and @xmath an
angular coordinate , whose range is assumed to be @xmath , moreover
@xmath and @xmath does not depend on @xmath and on the 4D coordinates
@xmath . Another equivalent radial coordinate is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whose range is @xmath , and in this frame the metric reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The coordinate @xmath will be useful when we will discuss fluctuations
in Chapter 5 . Indeed @xmath will turn out to be the independent
variable of 1D Schroedinger-like equation governing the fluctuations.
The metric ( 4.4.39 ) represents a warped geometry because of the warp
factor @xmath . Moreover the dilaton and the gauge field depend only on
@xmath and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the 2D anti-symmetric Levi-Civita symbol (with @xmath ).

#### 4.4.1 General Axisymmetric Solutions

In Ref. [ 61 ] Gibbons, Guven and Pope (GGP) found the most general
solution satisfying (i), (ii), and (iii). We do not prove that the GGP
solution is actually a solution because this would involve a very long
and standard calculation but we give now the explicit expression:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath again denotes a generator of a @xmath subgroup of
a simple factor of @xmath , satisfying @xmath , moreover @xmath are
constants, and the parameters @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Without loss of generality one can take @xmath and Eq. ( 4.4.44 )
implies @xmath . Moreover in ( 4.4.43 ) @xmath represents the gauge
field strength which is not zero in the background and @xmath the
corresponding gauge constant. At face value we have a total of 5
integration constants @xmath . However, one combination of these five
constants correspond to the scaling ( 4.4.36 ). A second combination
similarly corresponds to the second rescaling ( 4.4.37 ), whose sole
effect is ( 4.4.38 ), leaving a total of 3 nontrivial parameters. The
metric in ( 4.4.43 ) has at most 2 singularities because singularities
can occur where the metric components vanish or diverge. Inspection of (
4.4.43 ) shows that this only occurs when @xmath and @xmath . Such
singularities are not all of the purely conical type. The metric
singularities which are not purely conical ( @xmath ) come in two
categories [ 64 ] . Some can be interpreted as describing the fields of
two localized 3-brane like objects, while others are better interpreted
as the bulk fields which are sourced by a combination of a 3-brane and
4-brane, rather than being due to two 3-branes. An extended discussion
on the singularities of the non purely conical type is given in [ 64 ] .
In the next subsection we shall describe the purely conical case.

The class of solutions that we presented here are not the most general
appearing in the literature. Relaxing the condition of 4D Poincaré
symmetry to that of only 4D maximal symmetry should allow more general
solutions to be found [ 78 ] . More general solutions also exist
breaking axial symmetry [ 67 ] , or having nontrivial VEVs for the
hyperscalars [ 69 ] . Furthermore, dyonic string solutions have been
constructed in [ 63 ] .

#### 4.4.2 Conical Singularities

Here we focus on the subset of the general solutions ( 4.4.43 ) having
purely conical singularities ( @xmath ), which can be interpreted as
being sourced by two 3-branes. We shall call this background conical-GGP
solution.

The explicit conical-GGP solution is then ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The coordinate @xmath
is related to the coordinate @xmath in [ 61 ] by @xmath . [ 61 , 64 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a real positive number, @xmath is a real number, and
moreover

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath , @xmath . The range of @xmath is from @xmath to @xmath and
the deficit angles are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Notice then that a non-trivial warping enforces the presence of a
3-brane source. On the other hand, the parameter @xmath is not fixed by
the EOM and it represents a modulus.

The expression for the gauge field background in equation ( 4.4.45 ) is
well-defined in the limit @xmath , but not as @xmath . We should
therefore use a different patch to describe the @xmath brane, and this
must be related to the patch including the @xmath brane by a
single-valued gauge transformation ¹² ¹² 12 We have already treated this
topological constraint for the sphere compactification of the
Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar system in Subsection 3.2.1 of Chapter 3 . . This
leads to a Dirac quantization condition, which for a field interacting
with @xmath through a charge @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.4.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an integer. The charge @xmath can be computed once we
have selected the background gauge group, since it is an eigenvalue of
the generator @xmath . Finally, an explicit calculation shows that the
internal manifold corresponding to solution ( 4.4.45 ) has an @xmath
topology (its Euler number equals 2). Therefore the internal manifold is
compact. Thus we expect a discrete spectrum of the fluctuations around
such a background. This is confirmed by the calculation of Chapter 5 ,
where we will focus on bulk sectors that could give rise to SM-like
gauge fields and charged matter.

## Chapter 5 Fluctuations around Brane Solutions

In Chapter 4 we have described minimal 6D gauged supergravity and its
solutions which have received much interest recently for several
reasons. From the top down, the theory shares many features in common
with 10D supergravity, whilst remaining relatively simple, and so it can
be used as a toy model for 10D string theory compactifications. From the
bottom up, it provides a context in which to extend the well-trodden
path of 5D brane world models to codimension two. Moreover, as we have
discussed in Section 4.3 , in 6D models, SLED have shown some promise in
addressing the two fine-tuning problems of fundamental physics: the
Gauge Hierarchy and the Cosmological Constant Problems.

In terms of the phenomenological study of brane worlds, one should ask
what are the qualitative differences between 5D and 6D models. For
example, in 5D RS models, that we have summarized in Section 1.4 , the
warping of 4D spacetime slices is exponentially dependent on the proper
radius of the extra dimension, whereas in the six dimensional models of
Chapter 4 it is only power law dependent, at least if we consider the
brane solutions given in Section 4.4 . Moreover, the singularities
sourced by the branes are distinct, the codimension one case being a
jump and the codimension two case being conical.

5D RS models with a large (or infinite) extra dimension and the SM
confined to the brane were developed to explain the hierarchy in the
Planck and Electroweak scales. Although the mass gap in the KK spectrum
goes to zero as usual in the infinite volume limit, 4D physics is
retrieved thanks to the warp factor’s localization of the zero mode
graviton - and exponential suppression of higher modes - close to the
brane with positive tension. Subsequently it was found that the step
singularities in the geometry could also localize bulk fermions [ 25 ] ,
in much the same way as previously achieved with scalar fields and kink
topological defects, that we have introduced in Subsection 1.2.1 .
Models were then developed in which SM fields all ¹ ¹ 1 Although the
Higgs field should be confined to the brane in order not to lose the
gauge hierarchy. originate from the bulk as localized degrees of freedom
[ 26 ] .

A study of warped brane worlds in 6D supergravity has been given in
Section 4.4 , where the focus was on the background solutions. A general
solution with 4D Poincaré and 2D axial symmetry was given, and it was
shown in Subsection 4.4.2 that warping can lead to conical singularities
in the internal manifold, which can be naturally interpreted as 3-branes
sources. It is certainly interesting to go beyond these background
solutions, and study the dynamics of their fluctuations. The final
objective would be to obtain the effective theory describing 4D physics,
and an understanding of when this effective theory is valid.

Although in these constructions the SM is usually put in by hand,
envisioned on a 3-brane source, the bulk theory is potentially rich
enough to contain the SM gauge and matter fields. As hinted above,
should the SM arise as KK zero modes of bulk fields, there are two ways
to hide the heavy modes and recover 4D physics. They may have a large
mass gap, and thus be unattainable at the energy scales thus-far
encountered in our observed universe. Or they may be light but very
weakly coupled to the massless modes, for example if the massless modes
are peaked near to the brane, and the massive modes are not. In any
case, whether or not one expects the bulk to give rise to the SM, one
should study its degrees of freedom and determine under which conditions
they are observable or out of sight. This could also prove useful for a
deeper understanding of the self-tuning mechanism of SLED, and its
quantum corrections.

A complete study of the linear perturbations is a very complicated
problem, involving questions of gauge-fixings and a highly coupled
system of dynamical equations. Some partial results have been obtained
for the scalar perturbations in [ 79 ] . In this chapter we consider
sectors within which SM gauge and charged matter fields might be found.
By some fortune, these also happen to be two of the least complicated
ones. Much of our discussion is general, and could easily be applied or
extended to other 6D models with axial symmetry. We follow the usual KK
procedure, and reduce the equations of motion to an equivalent
non-relativistic quantum mechanics problem, which we are able to solve
exactly. We consider carefully the boundary conditions that the physical
modes must satisfy, and from these derive the wave function profiles and
complete discrete mass spectra.

Our exact solutions enable us to analyze in detail the effects of the
power-law warping and conical defects that arise in 6D brane worlds. We
find that the warping cannot give rise to zero modes peaked at the
brane, without also leading to peaked profiles for the entire KK tower.
On the other hand, the conical defects do break another standard lore of
the classical KK theory. Remarkably, even if the volume of the internal
manifold goes to infinity, the mass gap does not necessarily go to zero.
This decoupling between the mass gap and volume means that in principle
SM fields, in addition to gravity, could ‘feel’ the extent of large
extra dimensions, whilst still being accurately described by a 4D
effective field theory.

This chapter is organized as follows. We begin in Section 5.1 by giving
our set up and additional properties of axisymmetric solutions, that we
have introduced in Section 4.4 . Then, in Section 5.2 we analyze the
gauge field fluctuations, deriving the wave functions and masses of the
KK spectrum. A similar analysis is presented in Section 5.3 for the
fermions. Section 5.4 discusses the physical implications of the results
found, and in particular whether they can be naturally applied to the
LED scenario. Finally we end in Section 5.5 with some conclusions and
future directions.

In the appendices we give some results that are useful for the detailed
calculations. Appendix C.2 explains how the conical defects manifest
themselves in the metric ansatz. In Appendix C.3 we show in detail how
the boundary conditions are applied to obtain a discrete mass spectrum,
and we give the complete fermionic mass spectrum thus derived in
Appendix C.4 .

### 5.1 The Set Up

We consider 6D @xmath gauged supergravity, and its warped braneworld
solutions, whose fluctuations we will then study. This theory has been
defined in Section 4.2 , in particular the field content is given in (
4.2.3 )-( 4.2.10 ). As we discussed in Subsection 4.2.2 , in general the
theory has anomalies but for certain gauge groups and hypermultiplet
representations these anomalies can be cancelled via a Green-Schwarz
mechanism. We will consider a general matter content, with gauge group
of the form @xmath . For example, we could take the anomaly free group
@xmath , under which the fermions are charged as follows: @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

We remind that the bosonic action and the EOM take the form ( 4.2.30 ),
and ( 4.2.31 ) respectively. In this chapter we will consider the
general class of warped solutions with 4D Poincaré symmetry, and axial
symmetry in the transverse dimensions that we described in Section 4.4 .
We can summarize those solutions as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath In the following we shall also use the radial
coordinate @xmath defined in ( 4.4.40 ), and in this frame the metric
has the form given in ( 4.4.41 ).

Given the above ansatz, the general solution to the equations of motion
( 4.2.31 ) is given in Subsection 4.4.1 . Although much of our formalism
for the perturbation analysis can be applied to the general ansatz (
5.1.1 ), we will focus on a subset of this general solution, namely that
which contains singularities no worse than conical. Thus, in addition to
the ansatz ( 5.1.1 ), we impose the following asymptotic behaviour for
the metric:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that is we assume conical singularities with deficit angle @xmath at
@xmath and @xmath at @xmath , at which points the Ricci scalar contains
delta-functions (see Appendix C.2 ). These singularities can be
interpreted as 3-brane sources with tensions @xmath and @xmath as we
proved in Section 1.6 . The explicit expression for these solutions is
given in Subsection 4.4.2 and we called them conical-GGP solutions.

We end this section by considering the various parameters in the model,
and the phenomenological constraints which can arise when we give it a
brane world interpretation. There are three free parameters in the 6D
theory, which can be taken to be the gauge coupling @xmath , and two out
of the following three parameters: the 6D Planck scale, @xmath , the
gauge coupling @xmath and the length-scale @xmath . In the solution
there are two free parameters, @xmath (or @xmath ) and @xmath . However,
one combination of all these parameters is constrained by the
quantization condition ( 4.4.49 ).

The relation between the 6D Planck scale @xmath and our observed 4D
Planck scale @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the volume @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is a particular case of ( 1.3.40 ), and ( 1.3.41 ). For solution (
4.4.45 ) we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Notice that this volume does not depend on @xmath , and so we can keep
it fixed whilst varying the warp factor, namely @xmath in ( 4.4.45 ).
Moreover from ( 5.1.3 ) a phenomenological constraint follows between
the bulk couplings and the brane tensions, which can be written:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This implies that @xmath is very small, of the order of the Planck
length.

Now let us embed the ADD scenario into the present model, in order to
try to explain the large hierarchy between the Electroweak scale and the
Planck scale via the size of the extra dimensions. Thus identifying the
6D fundamental scale with the Electroweak scale @xmath and constraining
the observed 4D Planck scale @xmath ; the above relation translates to ²
² 2 We remind that the following conversion relation holds: @xmath . :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, the LED corresponds to tuning the bulk gauge coupling and brane
tensions. However, we can also observe that ( 5.1.7 ) fixes just one
parameter among @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and we still have two
independent parameters even if we require large extra dimensions. Later
we will see that this novel feature proves to have interesting
consequences for the mass spectrum of fluctuations.

### 5.2 Gauge Fields

Having established the brane world solution and its properties, we are
now ready to examine the fluctuations about this background, which will
represent the physical fields in our model. In this section our focus
will be on the gauge field fluctuations.

Normalizable gauge field zero modes in axially symmetric codimension two
branes are known to exist [ 80 , 81 , 52 ] . However, in these known
examples there is no mass gap between the zero and non-zero modes which
renders an effective 4D description somewhat problematic, especially in
non-Abelian case [ 82 ] . In contrast to this for the axisymmetric
solutions studied in this chapter the presence of a mass gap will be
automatic due to the compactness of the transverse space. In this
section we shall give the full spectrum of zero and non-zero modes.

As we discussed in Subsection 4.2.2 in a more general context, given the
symmetries of the problem, we can expect that the gauge fields in the
low energy effective theory belong to @xmath , where @xmath is the
unbroken subgroup of @xmath that commutes with the @xmath in which the
monopole lies ³ ³ 3 The gauge group @xmath does not contain @xmath
because, as we discussed in Subsection 4.2.2 , the latter is broken in
the 4D effective theory. . The @xmath arises from the vector
fluctuations of the metric, due to the axial symmetry of the internal
manifold, and is promoted to @xmath in the sphere limit of the
background.

The non-Abelian sector of @xmath may be rich enough to contain the SM
gauge group. For example, consider the anomaly free model of [ 57 ] ,
with gauge group @xmath , and the monopole background in @xmath . As we
pointed out in Subsection 4.2.2 , the surviving gauge group, @xmath ,
then contains the Grand Unified Group @xmath , and the model also
includes charged matter in the fundamental of @xmath . Therefore our
present interest will be in the fields belonging to various
representations of @xmath . Specifically, we will consider gauge field
fluctuations orthogonal to the monopole background. For the case @xmath
, the gauge field sectors that are covered by our analysis are given in
Table 5.1 .

#### 5.2.1 Kaluza-Klein Modes

Using the background solution in the 6D action ( 4.2.30 ), we can
identify the bilinear action for the fluctuations. This step requires
some care, because to study the physical spectrum we must first remove
the gauge freedoms in the action due to 6D diffeomorphisms and gauge
transformations. The problem has been studied in a general context in [
52 ] , where the authors choose a light-cone gauge fixing.

In the light-cone gauge, the action for the gauge field fluctuations,
orthogonal to the monopole background, at the bilinear level reads [ 52
]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the gauge field fluctuation in the light cone gauge
(j=1,2) and all the indices in ( 5.2.1 ) are raised and lowered with the
@xmath -dependent metric @xmath given in ( 5.1.1 ). Indeed, here and
below @xmath represents the background metric. We have multiplied the
formula of [ 52 ] by an overall @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath in the
background, due to the presence of the dilaton in our theory ⁴ ⁴ 4 That
the dilaton invokes only this simple change with respect to Ref. [ 52 ]
can be seen as follows. First, notice that since we are considering
fluctuations orthogonal to @xmath background, there are no mixings with
other sectors, and the bilinear action is simply @xmath . We emphasise
that @xmath and @xmath now signify the background fields. Also, @xmath
indicates the bilinear part in the fluctuations. Next, make the change
of coordinates, @xmath , and rewrite the background metric in ( 5.1.1 )
as @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath . In this way, the bilinear action,
@xmath , reduces to exactly the same form as that of Ref. [ 52 ] , and
we can proceed as they do to transform into light-cone coordinates, fix
the light-cone gauge, and eliminate redundant degrees of freedom using
their equations of motion. . Notice that since we are looking at the
sector orthogonal to the monopole background, the Chern-Simons term does
not contribute, and the action takes a simple form.

In general, the covariant derivative @xmath includes the gauge field
background

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where again the charge @xmath can be computed using group theory once
the gauge group @xmath is chosen. The value @xmath corresponds to the
gauge fields in the 4D low energy effective theory. However, since we
can do so without much expense, we keep a generic value of @xmath .
Those fluctuations with @xmath corresponds to vector fields in a
non-trivial representation of the 4D effective theory gauge group. The
Dirac quantization condition ( 4.4.49 ) then gives @xmath , where @xmath
is an integer.

Next we perform a KK expansion of the 6D fields. Since our internal
space is topologically @xmath , we require gauge fields to be periodic
functions of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an integer.

If we put ( 5.2.3 ) in ( 5.2.1 ) we obtain kinetic terms for the 4D
effective fields proportional to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore physical fluctuations, having a finite kinetic energy, must
satisfy the following normalizability condition (NC):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The quantity @xmath represents the probability density of finding a
gauge field in @xmath .

In fact, this is not the only condition that the physical fields must
satisfy. If we want to derive the EOM from ( 5.2.1 ) through an action
principle we have to impose ⁵ ⁵ 5 Actually we impose that for every pair
of fields @xmath and @xmath the condition @xmath is satisfied but in (
5.2.7 ) the prime is understood. the following boundary condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the gauge covariant derivative. Equation ( 5.2.7 )
represents conservation of current @xmath and it is the generalization
of Eq. ( 1.2.16 ) that we studied in the simple domain wall model.
Moreover, since the fields are periodic functions of @xmath , ( 5.2.7 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The EOM can then be derived as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By inserting ( 5.2.3 ) in ( 5.2.9 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the eigenvalues of @xmath .

At this stage, we can already identify the massless fluctuation that is
expected from symmetry arguments. For @xmath , when @xmath , a constant
@xmath is a solution of ( 5.2.10 ) with @xmath . This solution
corresponds to 4D effective theory gauge fields. It has a finite kinetic
energy, and trivially satisfies ( 5.2.8 ). The fact that such gauge
fields have a constant transverse profile guarantees charge universality
of fermions in the 4D effective theory (see below and Subsection 1.2.3
).

To find the massive mode solutions, we can express ( 5.2.10 ) in terms
of @xmath and @xmath and obtain a Schroedinger equation:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the “potential” is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We want to find the complete set of solutions to ( 5.2.11 ) satisfying
the NC ( 5.2.5 ) and the boundary conditions ( 5.2.8 ), which can be
written in terms of @xmath and @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In order for ( 5.2.13 ) to be satisfied, both the limits @xmath and
@xmath must be finite. Condition ( 5.2.13 ) ensures that the Hamiltonian
in the Schroedinger equation ( 5.2.11 ) is hermitian, and so has real
eigenvalues and an orthonormal set of eigenfunctions. Therefore, we
shall call it the hermiticity condition (HC).

So far our analysis has been valid for all axially symmetric solutions
of the form ( 5.1.1 ). We will now use these results to determine the
fluctuation spectrum about the conical-GGP solution ( 4.4.45 ). We
observe that @xmath then contains a delta-function contribution, arising
from the second-order derivative of the conical metric function @xmath
(see Appendix C.2 and Eq. ( C.2.6 )). However, we can drop it because
@xmath also contains stronger singularities at @xmath and @xmath :
respectively @xmath and @xmath . These singularities are also a
consequence of the behavior of @xmath given in ( 5.1.2 ) and they imply
that the behaviour of the wave functions close to @xmath and @xmath
cannot depend on the mass. In particular, this immediately implies that
if the wave functions of zero modes are peaked near to one of the
branes, then the same will be true also for the infinite tower of
non-zero modes. In other words, we cannot hope to dynamically generate a
brane world scenario, in which zero modes are peaked on the brane, and
massive modes are not, leading to weak coupling between the two sectors
⁶ ⁶ 6 In fact, a similar singular behaviour for the potential in general
arises for the general axisymmetric solutions given in Subsection 4.4.1
and studied in [ 64 ] , where the hypothesis ( 5.1.2 ) is relaxed. . If
we are to interpret the zero mode gauge fields as those of the SM,
therefore, for the massive modes to have escaped detection they must
have a large mass gap.

Meanwhile, we note that in contrast to the non-relativistic quantum
mechanics problem, here we cannot deduce qualitative results about the
mass spectrum from the shape of the potential. This is because the
boundary conditions to be applied in the context of dimensional
reduction are in general different to those in problems of quantum
mechanics. In particular, the HC ( 5.2.13 ) is a non-linear condition,
contrary to the less general linear boundary conditions usually
encountered in quantum mechanics to ensure hermiticity of the
Hamiltonian. We will be able to impose the more general case thanks to
the universal asymptotic behaviour of the KK tower.

Returning then to our explicit calculation of the KK spectrum, we can
write @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover in this case the expression ( 5.2.13 ) for the HC becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we introduce @xmath and @xmath in the following way [ 83 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Eq. ( 5.2.11 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Eq. ( 5.2.18 ) is the hypergeometric equation and its solutions are
known. For @xmath the general solution is a linear combination of the
following functions:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is Gauss’s hypergeometric function. So for @xmath the
general integral of the Schroedinger equation is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath are integration constants. For @xmath we have @xmath but we
can construct a linearly independent solution using the Wronskian method
and the general solution reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we must impose the NC ( 5.2.5 ) and HC ( 5.2.16 ), to select the
physical modes. In Appendix C.3 we give explicit calculations; the final
result is that the NC and HC give the following discrete spectrum. The
wave functions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and the squared masses are as follows:

-   For @xmath

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (5.2.27)
      -- -------- -- ----------

-   For @xmath and @xmath

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (5.2.28)
      -- -------- -- ----------

-   For @xmath and @xmath

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (5.2.29)
      -- -------- -- ----------

-   For @xmath

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (5.2.30)
      -- -------- -- ----------

The masses given in ( 5.2.27 ) and ( 5.2.28 ) correspond to the wave
function ( 5.2.25 ) whereas the masses given in ( 5.2.29 ) and ( 5.2.30
) correspond to the wave function ( 5.2.26 ). We observe that there are
no tachyons and that the only zero mode is for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ( @xmath ), corresponding to gauge fields in the 4D low energy
effective theory.

As a check, we can consider the @xmath limit ( @xmath ), whose mass
spectrum is well-known. Our spectrum ( 5.2.27 )-( 5.2.30 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the radius of @xmath and ⁷ ⁷ 7 The number @xmath is
defined in different ways in equations ( 5.2.27 )-( 5.2.30 ). For
instance we have @xmath for ( 5.2.27 ). @xmath , @xmath . This is
exactly the result that one finds by using the spherical harmonic
expansion [ 7 ] from the beginning.

At this stage we can point towards a novel property of the final mass
spectrum. Observe that in the large @xmath (small @xmath ) limit the
volume @xmath given in Eq. ( 5.1.5 ) becomes large but the mass gap
between two consecutive KK states does not reduce to zero as in standard
KK theories ⁸ ⁸ 8 This is also true for the proper volume of the 2D
internal manifold. . This a consequence of the shape of our background
manifold and in particular of the conical defects. Notice that the large
@xmath limit corresponds to a negative tension brane at @xmath , but not
necessarily at @xmath .

In Section 5.3 we will show that the same effect appears also in the
fermionic sector, and we will turn to a discussion of its implications
in Section 5.4 .

#### 5.2.2 4D Effective Gauge Coupling

Let us end the discussion on gauge fields by briefly presenting the 4D
effective gauge coupling. This can be obtained by dimensionally reducing
the 6D gauge kinetic term. We consider the zero mode fluctuations in
@xmath , about the background ( 5.1.1 ), so that the 4D effective gauge
kinetic term is:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 (5.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Recalling that @xmath and normalizing it to one, we can read:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

### 5.3 Fermions

We will now consider fermionic perturbations, and in particular our
interest will be in the sector charged under the 4D effective gauge
group, @xmath , discussed above. These fields arise from the hyperinos
and the @xmath gauginos, for which we also restrict ourselves to those
orthogonal to the @xmath . Thus we are considering matter charged under
the non-Abelian gauge symmetries of the 4D effective theory. For
instance, for the anomaly free model @xmath , with the monopole embedded
in the @xmath , the gauginos in the @xmath of @xmath contain a @xmath +
@xmath fundamental representation of the grand unified gauge group
@xmath , and our analysis will be applicable to them. In Tabel 5.1 , we
give the complete list of fermion fields that are included in our study,
for the said example.

We proceed in much the same way as for the gauge field sector of the
previous section, transforming the dynamical equations and necessary
boundary conditions into a Schroedinger-like problem, to obtain the
physical modes and discrete mass spectrum.

The bilinear action for the fluctuations of interest takes a
particularly simple form, comprising as it does of the standard Dirac
action:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where ⁹ ⁹ 9 Our conventions for @xmath and @xmath are given in Appendix
A .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath is the charge of @xmath under @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are the background metric, spin connection and gauge field
corresponding to an axisymmetric solution ( 5.1.1 ). Analogously to the
gauge field analysis, in order to derive the Dirac equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

from ( 5.3.1 ) by using an action principle, we require conservation of
fermionic current:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Eq. ( 5.3.4 ) implies that the Dirac operator @xmath is hermitian, and
we shall again refer to it as the HC. This constraint is analogous to
Eq. ( 1.2.26 ), which concerns fermion fluctuation around the simple
kink background. Our aim is to find the complete fermionic spectrum,
that is a complete set of normalizable solutions of ( 5.3.3 ) satisfying
( 5.3.4 ).

Some care is now needed when discussing the background felt by the
fermionic sector in ( 5.3.2 ). As already mentioned, in order to have a
correctly defined gauge connection, it is necessary to use two patches
related by a single-valued gauge transformation. The same is true for
the spin connection, which must be defined in such a way as to imply the
conical defects in the geometry. Henceforth we focus on the patch
including the @xmath brane, chosen to be @xmath . For this patch a good
choice for the vielbein is

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.3.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

where, like in Chapter 3 , @xmath is a 4D flat index, @xmath a 2D flat
index and @xmath . The corresponding spin connection is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . It can be checked that this gauge choice correctly
reproduces Stokes’ theorem for a small domain including the conical
defect ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 See Appendix C.2 for some steps in this calculation. .

We are now ready to study the Dirac equation ( 5.3.3 ) for 6D
fluctuations, and write it in terms of 4D effective fields. Since @xmath
is a 6D Weyl spinor we can represent it by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a 4D Dirac spinor: @xmath , @xmath @xmath . By using the
ansatz ( 5.1.1 ), the vielbein ( 5.3.5 ), the spin connection ( 5.3.6 )
and our conventions for @xmath in Appendix A , the Dirac equation (
5.3.3 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Performing the Fourier mode decomposition:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an integer, and inserting into ( 5.3.8 ) and ( 5.3.9 )
we find:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.11)
           (5.3.12)
  -- -- -- ----------

For the boundary conditions, analogously to the gauge fields, the NC can
be found to be:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and a similar condition for left-handed spinors. Meanwhile, the HC (
5.3.4 ) can be written:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Having set up the dynamical equations and the relevant boundary
conditions, we shall now use this information to study the complete
fermionic spectrum in Subsections 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 . In particular, we
will focus on the questions of wave function localization, and the mass
gap problem, crucial to the development of a phenomenological brane
world model.

#### 5.3.1 Zero Modes

We begin by finding the zero mode solutions, for which the problem
simplifies considerably. Indeed, for the zero modes @xmath , and the
equations for right- and left-handed modes ( 5.3.11 ) and ( 5.3.12 )
decouple:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

By using the expression for @xmath in equation ( 5.3.6 ), the solution
of ( 5.3.16 ) is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whereas the solution of ( 5.3.17 ) can be obtained by replacing @xmath
in ( 5.3.18 ). The solution ( 5.3.18 ) for @xmath was found in [ 84 ] .
Here we give the expression for every @xmath because we want to include
charged fermions. We note that the zero mode solution ( 5.3.18 )
automatically satisfies the HC given in ( 5.3.15 ). From ( 5.3.18 ), (
5.3.14 ) and ( 4.4.40 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For the conical-GGP background, ( 4.4.45 ), the explicit expression for
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we used ( 4.4.49 ). The NC is satisfied when

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From here we retrieve the result that for the sphere, which has @xmath ,
there exist normalizable zero modes only for @xmath ( @xmath ), that is
for a non-vanishing monopole background [ 7 ] . Moreover, as found in [
84 ] , we see that the conical defects also make massless modes
possible, provided that there is at least one negative deficit angle,
even if @xmath . However, ( 5.3.21 ) implies that for positive tension
branes, @xmath , the adjoint of @xmath , which has @xmath , is projected
out. If @xmath contains the SM gauge group, this is appealing since the
fermions of the SM are not in adjoint representations. In any case, the
number of families depends on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Let us now consider the wave function profiles, ( 5.3.20 ). Observe that
@xmath is peaked on the @xmath brane (that is, @xmath as @xmath , and
@xmath as @xmath ) when

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By comparing ( 5.3.21 ) and ( 5.3.22 ) we understand that we have
normalizable and peaked @xmath only for @xmath (that is for negative
tension brane). If @xmath we can have normalizable zero modes for @xmath
(positive tension brane) but the corresponding @xmath are not peaked on
the @xmath brane (indeed, @xmath as @xmath ). On the other hand from (
5.3.20 ) we see that @xmath is peaked on the @xmath brane when

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By comparing ( 5.3.21 ) and ( 5.3.23 ) we understand that we have
normalizable and peaked @xmath only for @xmath (that is for negative
tension brane).

We can also analyze the chirality structure. Since the left handed wave
functions can be obtained from ( 5.3.20 ) by replacing @xmath , in order
for them to be peaked on the @xmath brane we need

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whereas in order for the left handed wave functions to be peaked on the
@xmath brane we need

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

So, if we were to require that @xmath be peaked on a brane, we always
have a chiral massless spectrum because the chirality index counts the
difference of modes in @xmath and @xmath with given @xmath , @xmath [ 84
] . We should point out, however, that in fact peaked zero modes, @xmath
, may not be necessary in order to have an acceptable phenomenology. The
answer to this question can be found only after constructing the
complete spectrum, and studying the couplings between different 4D
effective fields.

#### 5.3.2 Massive Modes

We now move on to a study of the complete KK tower for the fermions. We
begin by establishing the corresponding Schroedinger problem. The two
coupled first order ODEs, equations ( 5.3.11 ) and ( 5.3.12 ), can be
equivalently expressed as a single second order ODE and a constraint
equation, as follows ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Eq.( 5.3.26 ) can also be obtained by
squaring the 6D Dirac operator, and using that @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.26)
     @xmath      (5.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the eigenvalues of @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.29)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Once @xmath is known we can compute @xmath by using ( 5.3.27 ), so we
can focus on @xmath and study the second order ODE ( 5.3.26 ). If we
express this equation in terms of @xmath and @xmath we obtain the
Schroedinger equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the “potential” @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.31)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We observe that transformation ( 5.3.14 ) exactly removes the
delta-functions which appear in ( 5.3.29 ) through @xmath (see Appendix
C.2 ). However, just as for the gauge fields, a singular behaviour is
observed in the potential, so that the asymptotic behaviour of the wave
functions does not depend on their mass.

Our problem is now reduced to solving equation ( 5.3.30 ) with the
conditions NC ( 5.3.13 ) and HC ( 5.3.15 ). By using ( 5.3.27 ) for
@xmath and definitions ( 4.4.40 ) and ( 5.3.14 ) we can rewrite ( 5.3.15
) as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can now proceed in exactly the same way as for the gauge field
sector. For the conical-GGP solution ( 4.4.45 ) the explicit expression
for @xmath has the form ( 5.2.14 ), but now with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, in this case the explicit expression for the HC is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As in the gauge fields sector we introduce @xmath and @xmath in the
following way

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that equation ( 5.2.14 ) becomes a hypergeometric equation ( 5.2.18
), with parameters:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can construct two independent solutions @xmath and @xmath of the
Schroedinger equation ( 5.2.14 ) as in Section 5.2 , and impose the NC (
5.3.13 ) and the HC ( 5.3.36 ) to obtain the physical modes. The
resulting wave functions are:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the integration constants, @xmath , are fixed in Appendix C.4 . We
plot a few of the wave function profiles in Figure 5.1 .

The complete discrete mass spectrum is also given in Appendix C.4 .
There it can be seen that the same finiteness of the mass gap in the
large @xmath (hence large volume) limit, found in the gauge field
spectrum, can be observed here. Moreover, for @xmath , the mass gap
between the zero modes and the massive states now goes as:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, for the fermions, a finite mass gap in the large volume limit
can also be obtained by taking @xmath and turning on @xmath , thus
allowing @xmath to remain finite. This contrasting behaviour to the
standard KK picture is a consequence of the conical defects ( @xmath and
@xmath ) in our internal manifold. Below we shall consider its
implications for phenomenology.

#### 5.3.3 4D Effective Fermion Charges

Let us first end this section on fermion fluctuations by obtaining their
4D effective gauge couplings. This can be calculated by going beyond
their bilinear Lagrangian, and considering the interaction term:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the results for the KK decomposition found in the preceding
sections:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and recalling that the gauge field zero mode is @xmath , a fermion mode
@xmath has the following coupling to the 4D effective gauge group :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.42)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Since the gauge field zero mode has a constant wave profile, the
effective charges for the fermion modes are universal. This is a general
result, and independent of any possible localization properties of the
fermion modes: massless and massive fermion modes will always have the
same coupling to the massless gauge fields. Again, we find that a large
mass gap is required in the fermion spectrum in order to hide the KK
tower. We now consider this issue in more detail.

### 5.4 Large Volume Compactifications with a Large Mass Gap

In the previous two sections, we have calculated the complete KK
spectrum for the warped brane world compactification of 6D supergravity,
for two interesting sectors of the gauge and matter fluctuations. We are
now ready to consider the possible implications of our results.

6D brane world models have long been of interest in the context of LED,
since these may help with the gauge hierarchy problem. In the
conventional ADD picture, Standard Model particles must be confined to a
4D brane world, in order to explain why the large extra dimensions have
escaped detection. It would certainly be of interest to develop a
dynamical description of this localization, within the context of low
energy effective field theory.

This could be achieved, for instance, if the zero mode wave profiles
were peaked near to a brane, and the heavy modes suppressed there [ 82 ]
. However, we have found that zero mode fermions can be peaked near to
negative tension branes, only at the price of localizing the whole KK
tower (see Figure 5.1 ). Therefore, strong couplings are expected
between light and heavy modes. If the zero mode bulk fermions are to be
interpreted as matter in the SM, then apparently the only way to explain
why we do not observe all the KK modes is by insisting that their mass
gap is larger than the @xmath scale probed to date.

Usually, this would bring us back to the classical KK scenario, with the
extra dimensions required to be very small (at least @xmath scale), and
the generation of the gauge hierarchy lost. However, in our framework we
have seen that a large mass gap can occur even if the volume @xmath ,
defined as the ratio @xmath , becomes large. In the fermionic sector
this set up can be achieved with the conical defect associated with the
warping ( @xmath and @xmath ), by taking the parameter @xmath to be
small. Another way is turning on the other defect ( @xmath ) and then
taking the large @xmath limit, that is small @xmath limit, corresponding
to a negative tension brane. The volume @xmath in ( 5.1.5 ) becomes
large but, for both the fermions and gauge fields, the mass gap does not
reduce to zero. We observe that the latter mechanism works also for
@xmath , that is @xmath , which corresponds to the unwarped “rugby ball”
solution with branes of equal tension at each of the two poles [ 32 , 34
] .

The general idea of relaxing the phenomenological constraints on the
size of the extra dimensions by deforming the shape of the internal
space was proposed in [ 85 ] . There, it was shown that the presence of
shape moduli can imply that there is no experimental limit on the size
of the largest extra dimension. However, requiring a large KK mass gap
still constrained the overall volume of the extra dimensions. Here we
give an explicit model which allows arbitrary large values for both
@xmath and @xmath , at least for the fermions and vectors. This could
have an interesting application in the ADD scenario because we can have
both @xmath and small effects from the massive modes by setting a large
enough value of @xmath .

In terms of hiding Large Extra Dimensions from our four dimensional
universe, another possible approach is to interpret all the bulk fields
that we have found (massless modes and massive ones) as a hidden sector,
only gravitationally coupled to the SM. At this level, the SM must then
be introduced by hand, confined on the delta-function brane. It seems
that this is the approach to take if embedding the SLED scenario in our
calculations, proposed in [ 55 ] , to resolve the Cosmological Constant
Problem. This proposal relates the hierarchy in the Electroweak scale
with that of the Cosmological Constant. The Electroweak scale is set by
the size of the extra dimensions, @xmath , and the Cosmological Constant
is given by the KK mass gap, here fixed by the same scale ¹² ¹² 12
However, the breakdown of SUSY in the bulk, as in the solutions studied
here, may lead to a larger prediction for the Cosmological Constant, see
[ 55 ] . @xmath . Both may have their observed values when the 6D
fundamental scale is @xmath , and @xmath . For the mass gap to be this
small, SM particles must be localized to the brane.

Let us end by considering the tunings involved, when constructing a
model with large volume (say, @xmath ) and large mass gap (say, @xmath
). Consider first a large mass gap for the fermions. If we set @xmath
and @xmath , then the Dirac quantization ( 4.4.49 ) implies:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we then assume @xmath (which is natural from group theory) and @xmath
(which is required for a small number of families), the large volume -
large mass gap condition requires a large hierarchy in the bulk gauge
couplings:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Alternatively, we could set @xmath and @xmath , allowing a large mass
gap for both fermions and gauge fields. In this case, requiring a large
mass gap, @xmath , as well as large volume, @xmath , requires @xmath .
Then, again, the Dirac quantization condition ( 4.4.49 ) reveals a large
hierarchy in the bulk gauge couplings:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In both scenarios we cannot embed the background monopole in @xmath .

There are of course other combinations, for example with both @xmath and
@xmath , in which these hierarchies may be relaxed. However, we should
say that these tunings do not appear to be very natural or promising.
For example, choosing the large dimensionless number @xmath corresponds
to heavy negative tension branes, and deficit angles orders of magnitude
less than zero. On the other hand, independently of trying to embed the
Large Extra Dimension scenario into the present model, we have found an
explicit example in which the KK mass gap does not go to zero as the
volume goes to infinity, contrary to standard lore.

### 5.5 Conclusions and Outlook of Part II

In this part of the thesis we have analyzed an interesting subsector of
gauge field and fermion fluctuations, in the warped brane world
solutions of 6D minimal gauged supergravities. In particular, we have
focused on bulk components which could give rise to SM or Grand Unified
gauge and charged matter fields.

We performed a Fourier decomposition of 6D fields, and transformed the
resulting field equations into a Schroedinger-like problem. We were then
able to find the exact solutions for the KK modes, in terms of
hypergeometric functions. We considered in detail the boundary
conditions that the physical modes must satisfy. In addition to the
normalizability constraint, consistency also required a hermiticity
condition, which can be interpreted as demanding current conservation.
We were able to implement this in its general, quadratic form. Together,
these conditions selected the physical modes, and gave rise to a
discrete mass spectrum, which we presented in full. The discreteness of
the spectrum is of course to be expected given the compact topology of
the internal manifold, whose Euler number is two.

Our study can be applied to several sectors of the 6D supergravities. In
Table 5.1 we summarise the 6D fields that are covered by our analysis,
for the illustrative example of the anomaly free model @xmath .
Moreover, the corresponding spectra for the non-supersymmetric model of
[ 86 ] (at least for the unwarped 4D Poincaré invariant case) and [ 32 ]
, generalized to Einstein-Yang-Mills with fermions, can be
straightforwardly extracted from those given above simply by setting the
warp factor to one, that is @xmath .

The exact results presented in this chapter enabled us to study the
effects of the conical defects, sourced by codimension two branes, on
the KK wave profiles and mass gaps. As usual, the gauge fields have a
zero mode with constant wave profile. For the fermions, we found that
some zero modes can be peaked on a negative tension brane, but in this
case the whole KK tower is peaked there too. Therefore, in order to
interpret the bulk zero modes as 4D effective fields of the SM, the mass
gap must be large.

Intriguingly, this does not necessarily drive us to the conventional KK
picture, with small compact dimensions. It does not, because the conical
defects allow a novel behaviour in the mass gap, which can be decoupled
from the volume of the compactification, defined by @xmath . This
continues to be observed in the unwarped limit, where the rugby ball
model of [ 32 , 34 ] is retrieved. Contrary to standard lore, a finite
mass gap can be obtained, even if the volume goes to infinity.

For example, a large volume could be arranged in order to generate the
Electroweak hierarchy, whilst maintaining a large mass gap between the
zero modes and the KK tower. This picture does not seem to provide a
realisation of the SLED scenario, where the volume and mass gap should
be related. However, in this way, SM fields could arise from bulk
fields, and along with gravity propagate through the large extra
dimensions, perfectly consistently with observation. Moreover, for
better or worse, this picture seems to render the LED scenario less
falsifiable than previously thought, since we do not have to expect that
the bulk KK modes are accessible at @xmath scales. However, arranging
for both a large volume and large mass gap seems to require a large
degree of fine-tuning in bulk couplings. Furthermore, for a more
complete idea, we would have to consider the KK spectrum for the
remaining bulk sectors, and in particular the gravitational fluctuations
to know the effect of LED on post-Newtonian tests ¹³ ¹³ 13 Massless
gravitational fluctuations in the non-supersymmetric rugby ball model
were considered in [ 87 ] and, for thick branes, in [ 88 ] . Moreover,
some results for the Kaluza-Klein spectra in non-supersymmetric warped
brane models (with rugby ball limit) have been found in [ 89 ] and, for
thick branes, in [ 90 ] . .

Indeed, our analysis of 4D effective gauge fields and charged fermions
is only a first step towards a complete analysis of fluctuations about
the warped brane world background in 6D supergravity. A final objective
would be to derive the full 4D effective field theory describing light
fluctuations, and an understanding of when 6D physics comes into play.
The sectors that we have studied here are the simplest ones, in terms of
the mixings, but it should be possible to continue the project to other
fields by extending our work.

Of the remaining sectors to be analyzed, the scalar perturbations have
special importance, since they can contain Higgs fields and can have
implications for the stability of the background solution. Indeed, in
the round sphere limit of the model that we have studied, tachyons in
general emerge from the internal components of the 6D gauge field
orthogonal to the gauge field background [ 91 ] , as discussed in
Appendix C.1 . A first step in the study of the scalar fluctuations has
been presented in [ 79 ] , and it would certainly be interesting if
general results can be found ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 The analysis of [ 79 ] is
restricted to the case in which the gauge group is simply @xmath . . The
difficulty may be in the mixings of different scalar fluctuations, which
lead to a complicated system of coupled ODEs.

In another direction, much of our analysis was general, and could also
be used to study other theories and other backgrounds with 4D
Poincaré-2D axial symmetry.

Finally, it would be interesting to investigate whether there exist
other mechanisms, which lead to the same decoupling between the mass gap
and internal volume that we have found here. Indeed, in our set up we
have been able to show that the decoupling arises due to the conical
defects, but it may be possible to find other sources in different
frameworks. In this way, our explicit example may be a realisation of a
more general mechanism.

## Concluding Remarks

The 4D effective theory associated to a higher dimensional model must be
derived carefully in order to obtain the correct physical predictions.
In this thesis we have studied two important issues concerning the 4D
interpretation of models with extra dimensions. The first one pertains
to the role of heavy KK modes in the low energy dynamics. The second one
is related to the dependence of the KK towers on possible conical
defects of the internal manifold. In both cases we have analyzed
examples which are interesting from the physical point of view. Indeed,
in Chapter 3 we have studied a 6D non supersymmetric gauge and
gravitational theory which leads to a 4D chiral effective theory similar
to the electroweak part of the SM. Moreover, in Chapters 4 and 5 we have
treated a 6D supergravity expanded around a non supersymmetric and
singular solution, which could give rise to the SM or to a grand unified
theory in the low energy limit. The latter calculation is also a first
step towards the analysis of SLED as a scenario in which one can hope to
solve the cosmological constant problem. Indeed, one can compute
carefully all the contributions to the vacuum energy density only after
constructing the complete 4D spectrum.

The main original results and outlook of Parts I and II have been
extensively discussed in Sections 3.4 and 5.5 , and so here we consider
further possible outlooks which are shared by Parts I and II.

We observe that an interesting outlook could be the study of the scalar
sector of 6D gauged supergravities expanded around an axisymmetric
solution, for instance the conical-GGP solutions that we have presented
in Subsection 4.4.2 and analyzed in Chapter 5 . On the one hand this
will give us information on the stability of these solutions and on
sectors that contain candidates for the Higgs field. On the other hand
the contribution of the heavy KK modes to the scalar couplings may be
non vanishing, as in the 6D Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar model, manifesting
the underlying 6D physics. Moreover it would be interesting to know the
form of the heavy mode contribution in the presence of warping and
singularities in the internal manifold, which are both properties of the
conical-GGP solutions.

Another possible outlook is the analysis of the spin-2 fluctuations of
the 6D gauged supergravities of Part II. Indeed this sector is
responsible for the mediation of the gravitational interaction and
therefore it is relevant for cosmological applications. A first
interesting study can be the calculation of the heavy mode contribution
to this sector, which can give rise to modification of gravity at small
length scales. It would also be interesting to know if the warping and
the singularities, which allows the decoupling between the volume of the
internal space and the mass gap as discussed in Section 5.4 , can have
physically relevant effects in the spin-2 sector as well.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank my supervisor Prof. Seif Randjbar-Daemi for
countless and illuminating discussions and for his helpful advice
throughout this work.

Moreover I am very grateful to Prof. Mikhail Shaposhnikov for very
stimulating discussions and valuable suggestions.

I would also like to thank my collaborator Susha Parameswaran for her
friendly help and availability.

Finally I am grateful to Katarzyna Zuleta for valuable correspondence
and to Martin O’Loughlin, Giulio Bonelli, Tony Gherghetta, Antonios
Papazoglou, Emanuele Macrì, Carlo Maccaferri, Alessandro Michelangeli,
Elisabetta Majerotto, Luca Ferretti, Federico Minneci, Francesco Benini,
Stefano Cremonesi, Roberto Valandro, Giuseppe Milanesi, Alessio Provenza
and Giuliano Panico for several discussions about physics and
mathematics.

## Appendix A Conventions and Notations

We choose the signature @xmath for the metric @xmath . The Riemann
tensor is defined as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath are the Levi-Civita connection. Whereas the Ricci
tensor and the Ricci scalar

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.0.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath run over all space-time dimensions.

Our choice for the 6D constant gamma matrices @xmath , @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.0.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath are the 4D constant gamma matrices and @xmath the 4D
chirality matrix:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.0.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We define also the 6D chirality matrix @xmath by

  -- -- -- ---------
           (A.0.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

Moreover the spin connection is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.0.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the vielbein. In the text @xmath denotes the background
spin connection and @xmath the complete dynamical spin connection.

To study compactifications we split the D-dimensional space-time
coordinates @xmath , @xmath in two sets: 4D coordinates @xmath , @xmath
, and internal coordinates @xmath , @xmath . A background metric with 4D
Poincaré invariance reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.0.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is called warp factor and @xmath is the metric of the
internal space.

We use the following further symbols.

@xmath : D-dimensional Minkowski space-time.

@xmath : number of extra dimensions ( @xmath ).

@xmath : internal d-dimensional space.

@xmath : @xmath -dimensional Planck scale, the Einstein-Hilbert term in
the lagrangian being @xmath .

@xmath : 4D Planck scale.

@xmath : proper volume of @xmath .

@xmath : the ratio @xmath ; for unwarped geometries it equals @xmath .

@xmath .

@xmath : complex conjugate of a matrix @xmath .

@xmath : hermitian conjugate of an operator @xmath .

@xmath : vacuum expectation value of @xmath .

@xmath : covariant derivative, including gravitational and gauge
connections.

@xmath : radius of @xmath .

@xmath : n-dimensional Dirac @xmath -function ( @xmath ).

We also use the following abbreviations.

SM: Standard Model of Particle Physics.

GR: General Relativity.

KK: Kaluza-Klein.

VEV: Vacuum Expectation Value.

SSB: Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking.

EOM: Equation of Motion.

ADD: Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos and Dvali.

LED: Large Extra Dimensions.

RS: Randall-Sundrum

SLED: Supersymmetric Large Extra Dimensions.

## Appendix B Spectrum from 6D Einstein-Maxwell-Scalar Model

### b.1 Spin-1 Mass Terms from @xmath and @xmath

#### b.1.1 @xmath Contribution

In this subsection we write the contribution of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

to the bilinear terms of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . By direct
computation we get kinetic terms for @xmath and @xmath and some mass
terms for @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the 4D curved indices @xmath and @xmath are contracted with the 4D
metric @xmath , the dots are constant terms and interaction terms,
moreover

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The results ( B.1.4 ) are valid for all background @xmath and @xmath .
We use the @xmath background in the Subsection B.1.3 , the @xmath
background in the subsection B.1.4 .

#### b.1.2 @xmath Contribution

In this subsection we write the contribution of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

to the bilinear terms of @xmath . The complete contribution of @xmath to
the 4D action is given in [ 5 ] in the case of non deformed background
solutions. Here we need explicit expressions, at least for the
bilinears, which are also valid for deformed solutions. We get a kinetic
term and a mass term of @xmath : up to a total derivative we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the dots include constant and interaction terms; moreover

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.1.8)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath is the 2-dimensional spin connection for @xmath . The
results ( B.1.8 ) are also valid for every background @xmath and @xmath
. We use the @xmath background in the Subsection B.1.3 , the @xmath
background in the Subsection B.1.4 .

#### b.1.3 The Case of @xmath background

We use now the @xmath background, that is @xmath . This computation is
performed in [ 7 ] . We have the following bilinear terms for @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

we can write ( B.1.9 ) as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

So @xmath is a massless field, in fact it’s the @xmath Yang-Mills field
[ 7 ] , while @xmath is a massive field which can be neglected in the
low energy limit.

#### b.1.4 The Case of @xmath Background

Let us consider now the solution ( 3.3.12 ). First we note that @xmath
and @xmath do not give mass terms for @xmath ; so the only source for
the mass of @xmath is @xmath .

We want to prove now that also the @xmath Yang-Mills fields masses do
not receive contributions from @xmath and @xmath . First we give the
bilinears for @xmath and @xmath , which come from @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to prove ( B.1.4 ) it’s useful to use the following formula for
the background spin connection:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath .

Now we define @xmath and @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the angle @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the quantities @xmath are not still fixed. It’s simple to check that
the kinetic terms for @xmath and @xmath are in the standard form for
every @xmath up to @xmath . The definition ( B.1.14 ) reduce to ( B.1.10
) for @xmath .

If we choose

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we have no mass terms for @xmath coming from @xmath .

So the only source for the spin-1 low energy spectrum is @xmath and the
result is given in equations ( 3.3.21 ) and ( 3.3.22 ).

### b.2 Explicit Calculation of Spin-0 Spectrum

As we pointed out in the text, in order to find the spin-0 spectrum the
expression of the @xmath , @xmath , vectors is needed; these are defined
by @xmath , which is equivalent to @xmath , where @xmath is the
Laplacian over the charged scalar @xmath , calculated with the round
@xmath metric. Our choice for the orthonormal vectors ¹ ¹ 1 We express a
generic vector as in ( 3.3.36 ). @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Another ingredient for the calculation of the spin-0 spectrum is an
explicit expression of the vectors @xmath and of the eigenvalues @xmath
; the latter are given in [ 92 , 93 ] , however, we need here also a
correspondence between eigenvalues and eigenvectors. As we explained in
the text, only the @xmath like ( 3.3.41 ) and made of @xmath harmonics
are needed. The @xmath vectors must satisfy the following eigenvalue
equations ² ² 2 We derive ( LABEL:eigen ) evaluating ( 3.3.30 ), (
3.3.31 ) and ( 3.3.34 ) in the basis ( 3.2.6 ) and performing the
redefinition @xmath and @xmath , which normalizes the kinetic terms in
the standard way. :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the background objects ( @xmath , @xmath ,…) correspond to the
background ( 3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2 ) and ( 3.2.3 ). We can transform the
differential problem ( LABEL:eigen ) into an algebraic one by using the
expansion ( 3.2.11 ). We get an eigenvalue problem for every value of
@xmath and we give now an explicit expression for the @xmath vectors for
the relevant value of @xmath , namely @xmath . For @xmath we get just
one eigenvector @xmath with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath we get three different eigenvalues: @xmath . The eigenvectors
which correspond to @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Instead the eigenvectors which correspond to @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover the eigenvectors which correspond to @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, for @xmath the values of @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The eigenvectors with @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath we have the eigenvectors

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath we have the eigenvectors

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -- -- ----------
           (B.2.17)
  -- -- -- ----------

Finally for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -- -- ----------
           (B.2.19)
  -- -- -- ----------

We can now calculate the @xmath matrix @xmath given in ( 3.3.39 ). In
order to do that we need just the matrix elements @xmath and @xmath ,
which can be computed by evaluating ³ ³ 3 For the background solution (
3.2.1 ), ( 3.2.2 ) and ( 3.2.3 ) we have @xmath . @xmath and @xmath ,
which appears in ( 3.3.29 ) and ( 3.3.32 ), in the @xmath basis given in
( 3.2.6 ). After the redefinitions @xmath and @xmath , which normalize
the kinetic terms in the standard way, we get (for @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.2.20)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

By using these expressions and the values of @xmath and @xmath given
before, we find the following expression for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (B.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.2.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

By diagonalizing @xmath , we found exactly the spectrum that we
discussed in the Subsection 3.3.2 : the squared masses of the vector
particles are reproduced ⁴ ⁴ 4 In order to see that we use the
background constraints ( 3.2.4 ). , as required by the light cone gauge;
moreover we get the two masses squared given in ( 3.3.42 ).

### b.3 Explicit Calculation of Spin-1/2 Spectrum

Here we concentrate on the right-handed sector, which is the non trivial
one because it presents @xmath mixing terms.

The eigenvalue equations for the unperturbed ( @xmath ) mass squared
operator @xmath , acting on the right-handed sector, are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The differential equation ( B.3.1 ) can be transformed in an algebraic
one through the harmonic expansion, remembering the iso-helicities of
@xmath and @xmath : @xmath . Therefore an explicit expression for the
vectors @xmath , which satisfies by definition @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We give also an expression for the vectors @xmath and the corresponding
non vanishing eigenvalues @xmath . For @xmath , we have just one
eigenvalue @xmath and the corresponding eigenvectors are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath we have an eigenvalue @xmath , which corresponds to the
eigenvectors

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and an eigenvalue @xmath , which corresponds to the eigenvectors

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By inserting these eigenvectors and eigenvalues in the expression (
3.3.39 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which corresponds to the spectrum we discussed at the end of section
3.3.3 .

## Appendix C Spectrum from 6D Gauged Minimal Supergravity

### c.1 Stability Analysis for Sphere Compactification

Here we consider the present known anomaly free 6D gauged minimal
supergravities that we discussed in Subsection 4.2.2 . The bosonic
action for this class of supergravities is given in ( 4.2.30 ) and we
restrict to the case in which @xmath . We expect that this set up
supports stability as we discussed in Subsection 4.2.2 . In this section
we study when the monopole @xmath compactification, given in ( 4.2.32 ),
is stable, in the sense that there are no tachyons. The only cases in
which we can have stability are the old @xmath model and a new @xmath
model with a particular hyperinos representation (up to the trivial case
in which the monopole is embedded in a @xmath factor of the gauge
group). So a stable compactification of this type and the embedding of
the SM gauge group is possible only in the @xmath case.

#### c.1.1 The Light Cone Gauge

A first step toward the stability analysis is deriving the lagrangian
for the small fluctuations around the background. Here we give
explicitly such lagrangian for the smooth sphere compactification and
its form in the light cone gauge ¹ ¹ 1 For an introduction to the light
cone gauge in higher dimensional field theories see [ 52 , 53 , 54 ] . .
We do not include hyperscalars in our analysis as they do not mix with
the rest and they cannot contain tachyons: this a consequence of the
fact that the 6D potential has a global minimum in @xmath [ 58 , 63 ]
and the Laplacian on the internal space gives a positive contribution to
the squared hyperscalar masses.

We denote by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the metric, gauge field and
dilaton fluctuations ² ² 2 The fluctuations are properly normalized in a
way that their kinetic terms are canonical. around the background. The
expression of @xmath at the linear level in the fluctuations is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the 2-form fluctuation @xmath , whose components are @xmath , is
defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is the field strength of @xmath defined in ( 4.2.32 ). The
bilinear bosonic action for the fluctuations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath around the background ( 4.2.32 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.1.3)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the indices are raised and lowered by the background metric @xmath
, moreover @xmath and we have introduced the following notations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the structure constants ³ ³ 3 We take the generators
@xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath . of @xmath .

To study the physical spectrum in a proper way we have to remove the
gauge freedom of @xmath under 6D diffeomorphisms and gauge
transformations. This can be achieved by fixing the light cone gauge,
which is defined by @xmath , where the @xmath components of a vector
@xmath are @xmath . The light cone gauge advantage is the sectors with
different helicities decouple and one can easily find the physical
degrees of freedom. In the light cone gauge the action ( C.1.3 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.1.6)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath label the transverse 4D coordinates ( @xmath ), @xmath
label a local orthonormal basis in the internal space and @xmath . Apart
from the hyperscalars, the complete bosonic 4D spectrum coming from the
compactification ( 4.2.32 ) can be computed through ( C.1.6 ) by using
the harmonic expansion over @xmath [ 7 ] , that we discussed in
Subsection 3.2.1 . The main result is the presence of a massless
graviton, 4D gauge fields of the group @xmath , which is defined in
Subsection 4.2.2 , 4D gauge fields of the internal manifold isometries
and some scalar fields. Our aim is to study the latter sector which is
of course the possible source of tachyons.

#### c.1.2 Stability Analysis

To study the stability of background ( 4.2.32 ) we focus on the
helicity-0 terms of the action @xmath in the light cone gauge:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.1.7)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The action ( C.1.7 ) contains all the helicity-0 fields, including the
helicity-0 components of spin-1 and spin-2 objects. In particular (
C.1.7 ) includes all the physical scalar fields which a priori could be
tachyonic.

We observe that the field @xmath do not contain tachyons because its
spectrum is simply @xmath , @xmath . The scalars @xmath , coming from
the 6D gauge field fluctuations, can be decomposed in the following
three pieces

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is along the generators of @xmath , @xmath is along the
monopole and @xmath is along the generators which do not commute with
@xmath . The simplest sector is @xmath since it does not mix with other
fields as it is clear from ( C.1.7 ). The bilinear action for these
fields is simply @xmath and the squared masses are @xmath , with @xmath
; therefore here we do not have tachyons. The sector including @xmath is
much more complicated as this field mixes with other degrees of freedom:
the complete sector is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the sense that the fields given in ( C.1.9 ) mix each other but do
not mix with additional helicity-0 fields, as it can be easily deduced
from ( C.1.7 ). So in general we have a mixing between the dilaton, the
scalars coming from the 6D gauge field along the monopole and from the
2-form @xmath and the graviscalars . The complete spectrum of this
sector is given in Table C.1 . We observe that there are no tachyons but
we have a massless scalar field which corresponds to the first row of
Table C.1 .

To study the stability properties of solution ( 4.2.32 ) the most
interesting sector is @xmath because in general it can contain tachyons
[ 65 ] . Let us summarize the result of [ 65 ] as it will be useful for
our analysis. From formula ( C.1.7 ) one can easily understand that
@xmath does not mix with the rest and its bilinear action is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We denote by @xmath the generators of @xmath which do not commute with
@xmath and we choose @xmath to be a basis of eigenvectors of the adjoint
representation of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath s represent the charges of @xmath under ⁴ ⁴ 4 We remind that
@xmath is the Abelian group in the direction of the monopole. @xmath .
By using again the @xmath harmonic expansion one finds the following KK
tower

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , with @xmath . Therefore we have tachyons whenever @xmath
. We observe that, for a given model, the product @xmath has to be an
integer for each representation because of the Dirac quantization
condition. This implies that we have tachyons whenever @xmath assumes
more than one value.

Now we want to apply these results to all the present anomaly free
models of this type [ 57 , 65 , 66 , 68 ] . We summarize their structure
as follows.

  I  

     The first anomaly free model was given in [ 57 ] and it has @xmath
    and @xmath , where @xmath is the hyperinos representation.

  II  

     Another example is given in [ 65 ] where @xmath and @xmath .

  III  

     In Ref. [ 66 ] we have @xmath and @xmath .

  IV  

     Finally in Ref. [ 68 ] a huge number of anomaly free models was
    found with @xmath given by products of @xmath and/or @xmath and
    particular hyperinos representations.

We observe that models I,II and III have an enough large @xmath to
include the standard model gauge group, whereas the models IV have not.
However, the results of [ 68 ] prove that @xmath do not have to include
exceptional groups from the pure mathematical point of view.

The stability analisis for models I and II was already done in [ 57 , 65
, 66 ] so we briefly summarize the result. If we consider model I, the
only stable embedding of @xmath in a non-Abelian algebra ⁵ ⁵ 5 The
embedding of @xmath in an abelian algebra, that is @xmath , is obviously
stable because all the @xmath vanish. is @xmath . Whereas, in model II,
we have no non-Abelian stable embeddings.

The stability analysis for the remaining models III and IV was never
performed. So here we study these cases in detail. Let us consider first
model III. In this case the non-abelian embeddings can be @xmath or
@xmath . In the case @xmath we have instability because the system of
roots of @xmath , which is nothing but all the possible value of q by
definition of roots, is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Each column of system ( C.1.13 ) corresponds to a choice of @xmath in
the Cartan subalgebra of @xmath , which is indeed 4-dimensional. Each
row of ( C.1.13 ) correspond to a value of @xmath . We note that for
every embedding of @xmath in the Cartan subalgebra of @xmath we have at
least the values @xmath and @xmath , which is enough to conclude that
the embedding @xmath is unstable.

We consider now @xmath and we prove that this embedding is unstable as
well. The Lie algebra ⁶ ⁶ 6 For a more complete discussion on the Lie
algebra of @xmath see for example [ 94 ] . of @xmath is generated by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the @xmath identity matrix, @xmath the Pauli matrices,
@xmath a generic antisymmetric @xmath matrix, and @xmath are generic
symmetric @xmath matrices. We observe that @xmath and @xmath generate an
@xmath subalgebra and we can take, without loss of generality, the
Cartan subalgebra of @xmath equal to the Cartan subalgebra of @xmath .
Of course we have several possibilities to embed @xmath in such Cartan
subalgebra. We consider first @xmath . In this case we observe that the
representation @xmath , which appears in the hyperinos representations,
is the fundamental of @xmath and we have the following tensor product

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the adjoin representation of @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath are irriducible representations coming from the antisymmetric
part of @xmath . On the other hand we have the following branching rules
with respect to @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath in ( C.1.16 ) represent the values of @xmath for
the representation @xmath in a particular normalization ⁷ ⁷ 7 Of course
the normalization of the generators is conventional and it cannot change
the final result. and @xmath in ( C.1.17 ) is some representation of
@xmath which can be reducible or irreducible. By putting ( C.1.16 ) and
( C.1.17 ) in ( C.1.15 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.1.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

necessarily @xmath contains some representation with charge @xmath and
therefore this embedding is unstable. The case in which @xmath can be
studied in a similar way and this embedding turns out to be unstable as
well.

Finally we consider the models IV and we focus on the case in which
@xmath contains a non-Abelian @xmath subgroup. All the hyperinos
representations of models IV belong to a @xmath -dimensional
representations of @xmath . By using a similar argument we find a stable
@xmath embedding only if we have no even @xmath -dimensional
representation; this is a consequence of the fact that even
representations correspond to half-integer spin, whereas the adjoint
representation of @xmath has spin 1. In Ref. [ 68 ] one model which
satisfies this property is given and it has @xmath and the following
hyperinos representations: 7 representations @xmath , 2 representations
@xmath and 31 representations @xmath .

### c.2 Delta-Function Singularities

In this appendix we briefly review how the Ricci scalar acquires a
delta-function contribution in the presence of a deficit angle, and
examine what this implies for our choice of metric function @xmath in (
5.1.1 ). We are going to use some results presented in Section 1.6 .

Let us consider the ansatz ( 5.1.1 , 5.1.2 ), and illustrate the case
for the deficit angle @xmath at @xmath . Near @xmath the metric @xmath
of the 2D internal space can be written as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By using the change of coordinate @xmath , this metric becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

From ( C.2.2 ) and ( 1.6.59 ) one can show

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the 2D vector @xmath is defined by @xmath , @xmath is the 2D Dirac
delta-function and the dots are the smooth contributions ⁸ ⁸ 8 Eq. (
C.2.3 ) describes the asymptotic behaviour in the vicinity of the brane
[ 33 ] . It seems that for positive @xmath the Ricci scalar vanishes at
the origin. However, the first term on the right hand side of (B.3)
should be interpreted in a distributional sense. The effect of the Ricci
scalar as a distribution on a scalar test function @xmath is then @xmath
. . On the other hand, near to @xmath the Ricci scalar, @xmath , can be
expressed in terms of derivatives of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , and from ( C.2.3 ) and ( C.2.4 ) it follows that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

That is, the metric function @xmath contains a delta-function
contribution in its second order derivative with respect to @xmath . In
coordinate system ( 4.4.40 ), ( C.2.5 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The delta-function in the curvature also gives rise to a delta-function
in the derivative of the spin connection ( 5.3.6 ). The Riemann tensor
is defined in terms of the spin connection as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Near to the brane @xmath , relation ( C.2.7 ) gives @xmath , and from
the expression for the spin-connection ( 5.3.6 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

thus leading to the delta-function behaviour from ( C.2.5 ).

These results must be recalled when obtaining the Schroedinger-like
equations that govern the fluctuations.

### c.3 Imposing Boundary Conditions

Here we study the implications of the NC and the HC for gauge field
fluctuations. To impose the boundary conditions the following properties
will be useful:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.3.1)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is the Euler gamma function. The relation ( C.3.2 ) is valid
if @xmath is not an integer [ 95 ] and @xmath and @xmath in ( 5.2.21 )
are both well defined when @xmath is not an integer. In general @xmath
and @xmath are not integers for generic @xmath and @xmath ; so we can
consider @xmath and @xmath as regulators to use ( 5.2.21 ) and ( C.3.2 )
and at the end we can take the limits in which @xmath and @xmath go to
an integer, which will turn out to be well defined.

We first consider the behaviour of @xmath for @xmath , that is @xmath
because of the definition @xmath . For @xmath we use the expression for
@xmath given in ( 5.2.22 ) and property ( C.3.1 ) gives us

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we used @xmath . So the NC ( 5.2.5 ) implies @xmath when @xmath
and @xmath when @xmath . On the other hand the HC ( 5.2.16 ) implies ⁹ ⁹
9 In fact, for the gauge field sector, each term in the HC ( 5.2.16 ) is
separately zero if one requires their finiteness. Therefore ( C.3.5 )
and its counter-part for @xmath are sufficient to ensure ( 5.2.16 ). On
the other hand, for the fermions, there are some cases in which they are
each finite and non-zero, and so ( 5.2.16 ) requires that they cancel.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and by using the behaviour ( C.3.4 ) this limit becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so the HC implies @xmath when @xmath and @xmath when @xmath . The case
@xmath corresponds to @xmath and so we have to use the expression of
@xmath given in ( 5.2.24 ). We have then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for which ( C.3.5 ) implies @xmath . Therefore we obtain ( 5.2.25 ) and
( 5.2.26 ).

The discreteness of the spectrum emerges when we impose the NC and HC
for @xmath . For instance for @xmath , up to an overall constant, the
behaviour of @xmath is given by properties ( C.3.1 ) and ( C.3.2 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are defined in ( C.3.3 ) and we used @xmath . Behaviour (
C.3.8 ) is similar to ( C.3.4 ) but @xmath is replaced by @xmath . So,
following the same steps as above, the NC and the HC imply that @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Let us study the case @xmath and
@xmath , that is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We then have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since the Euler gamma function never vanishes we require that @xmath or
@xmath and this is possible only when @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath .
By using the definitions ( 5.2.19 ) both conditions lead to the
following squared masses

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which are positive because of ( C.3.9 ) and @xmath . When @xmath and ¹⁰
¹⁰ 10 The @xmath case is recovered by taking the limit @xmath . @xmath ,
that is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and this implies @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath . The corresponding
squared masses are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which are positive or vanishing. We can study the case @xmath in a
similar way. The complete result for the gauge fields sector is given in
equations ( 5.2.27 )-( 5.2.30 ). We observe that ( 5.2.16 ) is now
automatically satisfied by every pair of wave functions @xmath and
@xmath , for a given quantum number @xmath , since the asymptotic
behaviour of the wave function cannot depend on the quantum number
@xmath : this is a consequence of the @xmath and @xmath singularities of
the potential @xmath in ( 5.2.14 ).

### c.4 Complete Fermionic Mass Spectrum

In this appendix we give the complete fermionic spectrum which is also
labeled by an integer quantum number @xmath . Although much longer, the
calculation proceeds in exactly the same way as for the gauge field
sector, outlined in the previous appendix ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 There is one
additional subtlety. Here, for the values of @xmath which allow a zero
mode, we must impose a mixed HC between the massless mode and massive
modes, in addition to the diagonal HC. In general the HC involving
distinct wave functions @xmath and @xmath does not lead to additional
constraints, because the asymptotic behaviour of the modes is
independent of @xmath . However, the massless modes are more strongly
constrained than the massive ones, obeying as they do a decoupled Dirac
equation in addition to the Schroedinger equation. .

 @xmath 

     : in this case @xmath and we get the following squared masses.

    -    For @xmath

          -- -------- -- ---------
             @xmath      (C.4.1)
          -- -------- -- ---------

    -    For @xmath

          -- -------- -- ---------
             @xmath      (C.4.2)
          -- -------- -- ---------

        or

          -- -------- -- ---------
             @xmath      (C.4.3)
          -- -------- -- ---------

    -    For @xmath

          -- -------- -- ---------
             @xmath      (C.4.4)
          -- -------- -- ---------

 @xmath 

     : in this case @xmath and we get the following squared masses.

    -    For @xmath

          -- -------- -- ---------
             @xmath      (C.4.5)
          -- -------- -- ---------

    -    For @xmath

          -- -------- -- ---------
             @xmath      (C.4.6)
          -- -------- -- ---------

    -    For @xmath

          -- -------- -- ---------
             @xmath      (C.4.7)
          -- -------- -- ---------

 @xmath 

     : this case is possible only when @xmath .

    -    For @xmath we have @xmath and

          -- -------- -- ---------
             @xmath      (C.4.8)
          -- -------- -- ---------

    -    For @xmath we have two possibilities. We have @xmath and

          -- -------- -- ---------
             @xmath      (C.4.9)
          -- -------- -- ---------

        or @xmath and

          -- -------- -- ----------
             @xmath      (C.4.10)
          -- -------- -- ----------

    -   @xmath : this case is possible only when @xmath and we get
        @xmath and

          -- -------- -- ----------
             @xmath      (C.4.11)
          -- -------- -- ----------

Again, we can perform a check of our results by considering the @xmath
limit ( @xmath , @xmath ). In this case, the mass spectrum ( C.4.1 )-(
C.4.11 ) reduces correctly to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (C.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the radius of @xmath and ¹² ¹² 12 The number @xmath is
defined in different ways in equations ( C.4.1 )-( C.4.11 ). For
instance we have @xmath for ( C.4.1 ) and @xmath for ( C.4.4 ). @xmath
and @xmath .